Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 18 September 1998 .
Order of business
The next item is the order of business .
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
( The order of business was adopted without amendment )
Mrs van Bladel has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , my point of order relates to Rule 42 ( 5 ) .
On 3 August , I put a priority written question to the Commission on the threat of war in Angola .
Officially , one has to allow three weeks for a reply .
Now 70 members of the opposition have been suspended and last Friday there was an armed attack on the leader of the opposition , Chivu Kuvuku , who survived this attack as he survived the earlier one in 1992 . Now that members of parliament are under attack in Luanda , I think it is time this House made its voice heard in protest .
I read in the Portuguese press that the Mayor of Lisbon is doing everything possible to protect the lives of these opposition leaders .
On behalf of us as Members of Parliament , Mr President , I would urge you to register a protest with the government and above all to ask the Commission for a reply to my question .
Thank you for giving me the floor .
I have made a note of your priority question .
We will look into the matter and try to answer it as soon as possible .
Waiver of Mr Le Pen 's immunity
The next item is the report ( A4-0317 / 98 ) by Mr Wibe , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on the request for the waiver of Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen 's immunity .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy has the floor .
Forgive me , Mr President , but Mr Wibe 's report makes no mention of the result of the vote held in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
Even though a roll-call vote was requested , I believe unanimously , by the committee members present .
I would like to ask why there is no mention of this in the report .
Why does this roll-call vote which , by definition , shows how each individual has voted , not feature in Mr Wibe 's report ?
I shall give the floor to the chairman of the committee in a moment .
I would remind you that , on issues of immunity , the decisions of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , Verification of Credentials and Immunities are taken in camera , so there is no question of anything being revealed until the report is published .
Mr Fayot has the floor .
Mr President , a roll-call vote was indeed requested on Mr Wibe 's report , and the vote was held in camera .
This request was backed by the requisite number of committee members as specified in the Rules of Procedure .
So a roll-call vote was held , the result of which is shown in the report , that is to say the exact number of honourable Members voting for , against or abstaining .
I do not see that it is necessary to give the names of those who took part in this roll-call vote .
What matters is publishing the result , and I do not see anything in the Rules of Procedure which says we are obliged to include in the report the names of those who voted .
That is how I see it , and I think we can move on now to the debate on Mr Wibe 's report .
Yes indeed .
I would also say to Mr Fabre-Aubrespy that the result of the roll-call vote is given in the minutes of the Rules Committee meeting .
Any member of the committee can consult these minutes and find out the result .
Mr President , this report was drawn up after the Munich Public Prosecutor 's Office requested the waiver of the immunity of Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen .
The request related to a statement allegedly made by Mr Le Pen at a press conference in December 1997 .
Parliament has two sets of provisions to consider when deciding on whether to waive a Member 's immunity .
Firstly , its Rules of Procedure , which lay down the formal steps we should follow .
Secondly , the 1965 Protocol on the Privileges and Immunitites of the European Communities , which covers the substantive issue , i.e. the scope of immunity .
The committee put a great deal of work into ensuring proper application of procedures .
We checked that the Munich Public Prosecutor ' Office did indeed enjoy competence under German law to make the application and that its request had been correctly handled by the Ministry of Justice .
Mr Le Pen was allowed to put his case before the committee and the matter was then discussed and voted upon .
I can assure Members of this House that the correct formalities were observed .
As to the substance of the case , the key point is that it is not for us to take a position on Mr Le Pen 's guilt or innocence .
Whether or not he said what he is alleged to have said , using the actual words claimed , is irrelevant to our decision .
Neither does it matter that the provision in German law under which he is charged has no counterpart in other countries ; nor whether such legislation is unreasonable . We are not concerned with the harshness or otherwise of the sentence that could be handed down .
All that we are being asked to do is to say whether our immunity provisions offer protection in respect of the count on which the charge is made .
There is one exception only to this general rule , Mr President : if one of our Members is patently the subject of political persecution .
Had Mr Le Pen been in Argentina and not where it is alleged he was at the time claimed , then we could justifiably speak of persecution - and we would not pursue the application .
Yet it is quite clear that we have reasonable grounds to suspect that Mr Le Pen did in fact make the statement attributed to him .
There is one special circumstance , however .
Mr Le Pen is alleged to have uttered the incriminating words in Germany , whereas he is a French citizen .
Article 10 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Communities does indeed say that , during the sessions of the European Parliament , Members shall enjoy immunity in the territory of other Member States .
Yet this clearly cannot be intended to mean that Members of this House shall benefit from blanket immunity if they commit criminal offences in another EU country .
Consider the extreme-case scenario of one of our colleagues being charged with murder in another Member State .
Of course we would waive immunity under those circumstances .
The real essence of our immunity provisions is expressed by Article 9 of the Protocol , which reads : ' Members of the European Parliament shall not be subject to any form of inquiry , detention or legal proceedings in respect of opinions expressed or votes cast by them ... ' - and now comes the decisive part - ' ... in the performance of their duties ' .
Immunity is not a special privilege granted to us MEPs as individuals ; it exists to protect the work we do in the exercise of our parliamentary mandate .
Mr President , the final question is whether Mr Le Pen was in fact performing his duties as a Member of this House when he made this alleged statement at a press conference .
My view , and that of the committee as a whole , is that the press conference was in effect a commercial book launch .
Therefore it had nothing to do with Mr Le Pen 's mandate as a Member of the European Parliament .
And for that straightforward reason , we should vote here today to waive his immunity .
Mr President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists recommends adopting the report and waiving Mr Le Pen 's immunity .
He called the gas chambers a detail of history .
That is a crime under German law .
If Parliament lifts his immunity he will be charged .
He will be summoned before the court and if he does not obey this summons he will be arrested if he ever enters the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany again .
Under German law it is a crime to deny Auschwitz or to minimise it .
The purpose of German law is to protect the truth , including the truth about the most terrible epoch of our history !
We must look this horror in the eye .
That is the only way to make sure it never happens again .
That is why German criminal law makes this a punishable crime .
The truth alone can free us , and when we fight against people like Mr Le Pen we are fighting for our own future .
It is not true that this criminal law restricts freedom of expression .
This historical truth is a legally established right that must be protected and it is a universal law .
Nor is it true that it restricts freedom of research .
Over recent years - and I do not want to comment further on this - we have witnessed a long-standing dispute between historians .
This law does not curtail freedom of research either .
What we are most concerned with is protecting young people against the falsifiers of history and the political rabble-rousers .
I am very glad that the far right failed to get in at the recent Bundestag elections in the Federal Republic of Germany .
That is a sign of the maturity of our democracy and it makes me proud of our country !
( Applause )
Mr President , I should like to begin by repeating a distinction made by Mr Wibe which is quite crucial .
There are two questions .
Firstly , is Mr Le Pen guilty under German law of the crime of which he is accused ?
Secondly , should his immunity be lifted in such a way that he can face a German court .
The Rules of Procedure rightly make clear that it is not up to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities to come to a view on the first question .
I myself think that Mr Le Pen has a number of factual and legal arguments which no doubt he will wish to deploy before the German court .
On the other hand , I do not see here any fumus persecutionis .
I am persuaded that any German citizen - or come to that any French or Venezuelan citizen - would have been called upon to answer before the German courts in the same way as Mr Le Pen .
The second question , which is the one we have to decide here , is whether we should prevent Mr Le Pen being able , and indeed being forced under German law , to give an account of what he said and what he did before a German court .
Here it is important to bear in mind the reasoning behind the existence of the immunity .
I agree with Mr Wibe that this case falls within the cases where the European Parliament has a margin of discretion .
It is not obligatory to maintain Mr Le Pen 's immunity .
We must look at the facts and situation that presents itself to us .
Here we have to bear in mind as a crucial component in our reasoning that a democratic society has decided that there will be a law that makes the public denial or minimization of the holocaust a crime .
That is something we might have different opinions as to the desirability of .
I would remark in passing that there is no country in the world where freedom of expression is absolute .
Questions of confidentiality , slander or libel are always relevant .
But , democratically , Germany , learning from its history , has decided that there should be a law about the denial of the holocaust .
If we are to say that the fact that someone is a Member of the European Parliament exempts him from this particular law in Germany , to which everyone else in Germany will be subject , we would be doing the European Parliament no service at all .
It is for that reason and not because of any sympathy or lack of sympathy towards Mr Le Pen that we in the EPP accept the Wibe report in its technical and legal analysis and we will be voting for it tomorrow .
Mr President , on behalf of the Liberal Group I endorse Mr Wibe 's report for a number of reasons .
Firstly , why should we be surprised that the Federal Republic of Germany should want to take action on things which French justice has already condemned ?
It is not as if Mr Le Pen has said anything new .
His mantra-like insistence on the word ' detail ' , his persistent use of it à propos of the Holocaust , reflect an obvious desire to provoke , even though that desire is glossed over with half-hearted expressions of token regret .
Secondly , we regard it as particularly healthy for Germany to have this law which makes it a crime to deny and play down the importance of the Holocaust .
We are very keen that German justice should deal with all manifestations of this kind , and specifically the scandalous statements made recently by the doctor who survived Auschwitz .
Lastly , I should say that we were particularly angered to see Mr Le Pen being defended in the Rules Committee by a Member close to him who repeated , insistently , the revisionist insinuations around which today 's debate revolves .
The debate within the Committee on the Rules of Procedure shows that this is no accidental turn of phrase but a campaign which has been pursued over many years already in an attempt , by quibbling over words and figures , to minimise what is still the most appalling crime of the twentieth century .
It is for this reason , over and above the fact that Mr Wibe 's legal analysis is excellent , that the Liberals are in favour of waiving Mr Le Pen 's immunity - and they are not alone in this - given that such a step is not a prejudgment but will allow the case to be heard , and heard in the right place .
Mr President , the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities decided by a large majority to waive Mr Le Pen 's immunity , as I think we in Parliament are also about to do .
It neither judged him nor condemned him .
In reaching its decision it concluded after prolonged debate , in the presence of Mr Le Pen and colleagues of his who were there to support him , that the legitimate procedure had been complied with in every respect and that no breach of the basic rule establishing parliamentary immunity had taken place , so that the Member was free to carry out his duties while at the same time the institution of Parliament was not being undermined .
It merely gave the green light to enable disciplinary proceedings to take place , and that is when it will be ascertained whether or not he is guilty of the injustice for which he is being denounced .
Mr President , the action of which he is accused is rather similar to money laundering .
It is an attempt to whitewash Nazi-like crimes , and not just the holocaust of the Jews but holocausts all over Europe ; in my own country , many places , many villages have suffered that holocaust .
Great care must therefore be devoted to ensuring that these crimes are not whitewashed and that there is no repetition of appalling deeds such as those which took place under the rule of Nazism .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my group has always advocated great caution in regard to waiving the immunity of Members because of the need to protect this Parliament 's freedom of expression and powers of control .
The reason I will be voting for the waiver of Mr Le Pen 's immunity tomorrow is not because his statements may not be compatible with the exercise of his office .
I am sorry the committee had to resort to that kind of formal decision which , in any case , seems very far-fetched .
The reason I will vote in favour of lifting his immunity is because I would find it intolerable and shameful if this European Parliament protected a Member from being prosecuted for minimising the Holocaust , mocking the surviving victims and insulting the dead , and because I do not believe that this Parliament has any right to allow one of its Members to mock and insult the millions of people who died as a result of this ultimate crime .
If the phrase ' nip it in the bud ! ' is not to become mere empty words , we cannot grant this kind of Member immunity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first and foremost to point out that the majority of my colleagues in the Group of the European Radical Alliance will be voting tomorrow in favour of lifting Jean-Marie Le Pen 's immunity .
Personally , however , I am not convinced that this is the best way of opposing Jean-Marie Le Pen 's views , and I am therefore expressing the minority view of my group .
It should not come as a surprise that the leader of a party founded on intolerance should seek confrontation over the freedom of expression enshrined in our democratic system .
He practises intolerance , and he wishes us to respond with equal intolerance , so that he can go to court in Germany and carry on hitting the headlines for weeks if not months with those remarks , those appalling words which he uttered repeatedly last year .
This , however , is dangerous ground .
Years ago , the Committee on the Rules of Procedure refrained from voting in a similar case concerning the waiver of Mr Le Pen 's immunity , for the very reason that it thought such a vote might not only be manipulated by him but would also infringe that very principle of freedom of expression which Mr Le Pen - through his intolerant views - would have us remove , resulting in a head-on clash between two opposing forms of intolerance .
So all eyes will be on tomorrow 's vote .
This - I repeat - is the minority position of my group , but I did wish to voice it .
I give the floor to Mr Le Pen for three minutes .
Five minutes , Mr President !
No , Mr Le Pen , you have three minutes .
You could just shoot me without a hearing .
You have the floor , Mr Le Pen .
Ladies and gentlemen , in considering this request for the waiving of my parliamentary immunity , which the German public prosecutor 's office in Munich has initiated and which the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities is asking you by a majority to grant , you should ask yourselves just one question , irrespective of all other partisan considerations : was our colleague Le Pen entitled to express an opinion on the gas chambers , and not on the Holocaust as you said ?
As a citizen he , like any other citizen , is guaranteed this freedom of thought and expression by our democratic constitutions .
Implicit in that is the refusal to impose truths born of dogma , the refusal to accept just one way of thinking and the rejection of ready-made ideas .
In the case of a Member of Parliament this applies even more forcefully , and for this reason you should overwhelmingly reject this request for a waiver because immunity is there not to protect the person of the Member of Parliament but to protect freedom , his freedom to think , his freedom to have his own views .
Parliaments are only legitimate if their members are free , and this political freedom is indivisible .
It is not my parliamentary immunity which I am defending , but the immunity of my function , and thus of yours too .
But if you want to push this and prejudge , you must ask yourselves one simple question .
In what way can this statement ' the gas chambers were a detail in the history of the Second World War ' , which I made at a press conference in reply to a journalist 's question , constitute a crime of denial ?
The phrase in question does not deny anything .
I did not deny the existence of the gas chambers , nor did I play down their significance .
And the word ' detail ' , in French at least , carries no such connotation .
A detail can be anodyne , but it can also be essential .
In the event the text was falsified by the Munich public prosecutor who added the word ' anodyne ' and the word ' mere ' .
That prosecutor lied !
No one can deny that a whole is made up of details .
To illustrate that formula I said ' In a thousand-page history of World War Two there are on average two pages on the deportation of the Jews and a few lines on the gas chambers ' .
That is a detail .
There is nothing dismissive in a statement of that kind .
I added that if my words had been construed in ways which caused distress to people of sincere beliefs , then I was sorry , because I respect the dead and the sufferings of the living .
There is no mention of the subject , even in the war memoirs of Churchill , De Gaulle and Eisenhower .
Millions were killed in the great battles of the war .
And civilians were killed in the aerial bombardments too .
These events are details of World War Two .
Like so many millions of Europeans , I too am a victim of that war .
It ruined my family and my father died , blown up by a German mine .
The first real ordeal of my life was when , at the age of fourteen , I had to go with my mother to identify his body on the beach where he fell , with no eyes , no nose , his mouth full of sand and his shapeless corpse knotted in a tarpaulin .
So I find it personally shocking and hurtful , 55 years after the war , to be summoned before a German court which falsified my words in order to make them part of its charges against me .
This mendacious procedure is a scandal .
Mr President , I would ask you to quote from the judgment of the Court of Human Rights .
I would add ...
Mr Le Pen , I gave you three minutes .
You have now spoken for four minutes and thirty-five seconds .
( Protests from Mr Le Pen ) The Group of Non-attached Members could have given you whatever time it wished .
It chose instead to give its time to Mr Gollnisch .
That was their decision .
Mr Gollnisch will have ...
( Interruption from Mr Le Pen : ' What about the judgment by the Court of Human Rights ! ' )
We are not dealing with the judgment by the Court of Human Rights here today .
You were able to state your case freely before the committee responsible .
I gave you three minutes which were not ...
( Protests from Mr Le Pen ) Please listen to what I am saying .
I was asked to give you some speaking time so that you could state your case in the House .
With the agreement of your group , I gave you three minutes .
It has happened , in other similar cases , that Members have been given time by their group .
The non-attached Members chose instead to give their time , all six minutes of it , to Mr Gollnisch .
That is their decision .
I gave you three minutes .
When Mr Gollnisch comes to speak , I shall give him the six minutes which he could have given you before , but which he cannot give you now .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it goes against the grain for a democrat to request the waiving of a Member of Parliament 's immunity , particularly when the request is motivated by things that have been said , by a speech .
Because freedom of expression is one of the fundamental principles of democracy and restriction of that freedom really must be the exception to the rule .
The European Parliament has twice upheld the immunity of our friend Mr Le Pen , despite the antipathy he arouses here , in anyone who is a democrat .
This is particularly disagreeable since one might have hoped , nearly 60 years after the Shoah , that no popularly elected representative could possibly question the barbarity of the acts committed at that time .
But friend Le Pen cannot help himself .
Anti-Semitism is his passion , denial of the Holocaust his joy .
To his inhuman way of thinking the death of a Jewish child , gassed for being born a Jew , is comparable to the death of a soldier in battle .
And he cannot even see that the arithmetic is against him .
This House was obliged to waive his immunity first on 11 December 1989 , for his reference to ' Durafour crématoire ' - a nasty pun in French - and for a second time on 12 March 1990 , for his attacks on world Jewry .
The French courts have on several occasions censured friend Le Pen for his vicious and racist statements .
Freedom of expression does not include the freedom to make racist remarks .
For this reason a French socialist and democrat takes comfort today in responding to the request of a German judge .
The National Front 's claim that Mr Le Pen is a victim of political opprobrium , of political manipulation on the part of French justice in an attempt to wreck his electoral chances , does not hold water .
There was something particularly despicable in repeating the word ' detail ' in Munich , surrounded by former Waffen-SS . There is something particularly pleasing in acceding to the German judge 's request so that a case can be brought .
I see in this a clear sign of this European conscience which we are developing , born of the European democracy which we are working to build .
To conclude , the European Socialists will take great pleasure ...
( The President cut the speaker off . )
Mr President , Mr Gollnisch made a fair impression of synthetic indignation in implying that , as it were , this Parliament is engaged in persecuting Mr Le Pen .

I should like to recall the facts : the waiver of Mr Le Pen 's immunity has been requested on five or six occasions in this session of Parliament and , in fact , on several occasions Parliament has decided that the case did not merit his immunity being waived .
If we were engaged in a programme of persecution against Mr Le Pen , this seems to suggest that we are doing it rather ineffectively .
The issue is not one of whether Mr Le Pen is guilty or innocent , it is really whether there is a well-founded case for which a German MP would have faced prosecution .
Certainly , there are plenty of indications that Mr Le Pen holds a view very close to the one he is accused of repeating in Germany .
He said in France on a number of occasions that the holocaust is a point of detail of history , as he admits himself .
He has on at least one occasion ...
( Heckling from the French non-attached Members : ' Vous mentez ! c 'est faux ! ' ) said that the Americans built the gas chambers in the Buchenwald concentration camp after the War .
His statement was printed in Globe magazine in France .
He has not sued the magazine , so one can only presume that he accepts that their portrayal is accurate .
On that basis it is a well-founded case ; it is one where a German would have faced prosecution .
So it seems to us that it is fair and proper to allow Mr Le Pen to face the people making the allegations .

As Mr Donnelly said , Mr Le Pen claimed in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities that it was not an accurate report .
That is not a matter for Parliament or the Rules Committee to judge , it is for the Court in Munich to judge .
I look forward to the case being held .
Mr Gollnisch talks about the massacre in Katyn forest .
As far as I am aware , German legislation does not cover that particular area .
If it did , he is right , this would be a matter for the German courts to decide and not us .
I am delighted that Mr Le Pen is now in favour of freedom of speech .
He has certainly made progress over the last couple of years .
When I went to Marseilles with a Committee on Racism , in order to hold a press conference I needed French riot police , barricades and teargas because the Front national decided it did not want me to speak to the press in Marseilles .
So I welcome Mr Le Pen 's change of heart .
I look forward on a future occasion to going to Marseilles without the accompaniment of the French riot police and the Front national !
( Heckling from the French non-attached Members : ' Vous mentez ! c 'est faux ! ' )
My question is : why is such legislation not more common across the European Union ?
I hope that some of the Member States recognise that maybe they could do with holocaust denial legislation as well .
Finally , I welcome the fact that the extreme right has requested a roll call vote .
It will certainly keep Mr Bruno Mégret in line , supporting his leader in a way he does not normally do .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Drugs
The next item is the second report ( A4-0211 / 98 ) by Mrs d 'Ancona , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament with a view to establishing a common European Union platform for the special session of the UN General Assembly on international cooperation in the fight against drugs ( COM ( 97 ) 0670 - C4-0113 / 98 ) .
Mr President , the report on European cooperation on drugs policy was placed on the agenda for this plenary some months ago .
We asked you then to refer it back to the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs because I as the rapporteur hoped that a reopening of the debate might enable the differing views on the matter to be reconciled .
To a large extent , Mr President , they have been .
The report has been reworked in such a way that it provides a balance between the two approaches to the drugs problem which exist in our Member States , notably the moral-legal approach and the so-called medical approach .
The moral-legal approach wants to achieve a society free of drugs , while the medical approach acknowledges that there has always been drug abuse but seeks solutions which will minimise the risks , for example prescribing methadone or handing out fresh needles to prevent infection with HIV .
A balance between these two points of view means that harmonised measures are not possible because each Member State believes in its own policy , but you can combine the positive results of both approaches .
Consequently , as rapporteur for the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , I recommend among other things that more and better research should be done into the effects of different policies on drugs by the Monitoring Centre for Drugs in Lisbon .
We are very pleased that this Centre is gaining more and more expertise and that the search for indicators has produced positive results .
But the report calls not only for research results , but also for the pooling of practical experience by those who work with problem drug users and for cooperation , especially in border areas .
We are sympathetic to the idea of important initiatives at local and regional level because it is here that there is often the best understanding of how one should respond to specific problems .
For this reason , Parliament and the Commission too have already organised a number of successful conferences on this matter .
I would ask the Commissioner to think about how we can follow this up , because it really was extremely useful .
Mr President , my efforts to strike a balance between differing points of view inevitably meant that once again a large number of amendments were put down .
It goes without saying that those who believe in one way only are disappointed by a middle way which tries to combine the positive effects of a range of policies on drugs .
If you really think that ' this is the only way ' , a middle way seems weak .
So there are many amendments , some of them from those who want a far more liberal approach , and others from those who see every drug user as a problem user necessitating legislative and other measures .
I oppose these amendments , Mr President , because they upset the hard-won balance in the resolution .
Only a few , two from the Socialists and three from the Christian Democrats , do not do that , and I thus commend them to the House .
The report seeks to make it clear that it must be possible to transcend existing differences and work together where it is helpful and necessary to do so , because if we want to put an end to the drugs problem and the crime which goes with it , we must be prepared to acknowledge that no one , no single Member State , has all the answers .
I in turn would like to thank the rapporteur for her report .
It is no secret that she and I have highly diverging opinions when it comes to how to tackle the drugs problem .
But comparing the text we have in front of us today with the one tabled in January , I too must concede that it looks very different - and the changes are certainly for the better from my point of view .
Let me cite two of these improvements .
The report now states expressly that we must endeavour to honour the international conventions we have signed - and so we should .
Secondly , the difficult - but patently necessary - policy goal of a drug-free society is acknowledged .
Some minor flaws do nonetheless remain and I have put down a few amendments , two of which I should like to mention here .
One is to recommendation 12 , which deals with harm reduction projects .
I am not against evaluating these ; on the contrary , the results need to be assessed .
What I would like to see , however , are some comparative studies .
We need to know how a strategy such as that followed in Switzerland actually fares when the results are set alongside those of different policies implemented in other countries . We can then form an opinion as to where the strong points of the various approaches lie .
As for harm reduction , I have no objections per se - although I would like to see some of the references to it removed from the report .
What I do not want to see is harm reduction elevated to the status of our paramount objective .
That must never be allowed to happen .
The paramount objective of drugs policy must be to stop people in general , and the young in particular , from ever starting to use drugs .
That is what narcotics policy is all about .
A sound anti-drugs strategy should be based on an approach comprising preventive action , control measures , provision of proper care and treatment , plus coordinated work at international level .
Of these four integral elements , preventive action is the most important .
Mr President , Mrs d 'Ancona 's new report is a compromise document but nonetheless puts forward many sensible , pragmatic suggestions which the great majority can support and which I recommend to the Commission and Council to heed .
Our main objective has to be to keep as many young people as possible from becoming slaves to drugs .
This means practical cooperation and the ability to learn from one another .
In many respects we have come a long way compared to ten years ago .
The drugs monitoring centre in Lisbon has been set up and Europol , official this week , is now up and running but has a long way to go .
The monitoring centre can only work effectively if national information gathering and supplying agencies are properly funded and if statistics are supplied on a common basis .
Europol can only do a proper job if it is able to analyse , as well as exchange information , on drug trafficking .
In both cases the aim must be to establish what methods in countering drugs are working and what are not ; what monies are well spent and what are wasted .
The Dutch and the Swedish have very different drug policies but surely no one should query that both would be in a much stronger position if they had objective information available which shows what parts of their policies are successful and what can be bettered .
There are many common questions : which youngsters are most at risk from drugs ?
How best do we get to them ?
How best do we educate them not to take drugs or rehabilitate them if they are taking drugs ?
These questions must be answered .
We are also in need of imaginative new schemes for keeping young people out of trouble and helping addicts back to a normal life .
This requires , in many cases , both a national and local approach .
My good friend , Hubert Pirker will no doubt talk about drug-free schools .
I believe that we should be embarking upon a concerted TV advertising campaign across the whole of the European Community .
We need to think about a network of youth clubs across the Community to help keep young people out of trouble and to stop that gap between the time they leave school and their parents come home .
We need to do much more with therapeutic rehabilitation .
We need the help of local communities working together to give leverage to what is being done at top level and that is why this report gives so much emphasis to work at urban and local level .
To conclude , the main objective must be to provide a balanced and objective anti-drug policy backed up by sufficient funding to make these worthwhile .
I hope the Commissioner will agree with what I have said and that we can expect a positive response from her .
Mr President , Mrs d 'Ancona 's report is of course a bit like closing the stable door after the horse has bolted , and that is just as well .
To start with the plan was that we should take part in the United Nations conference on drugs in June , and happily we did not do so .
The initial thrust , after all , was that the criminalisation of drug use should no longer be a central issue .
A kind of legalisation was mooted together , with the possibility of obtaining heroin on a doctor 's prescription .
This approach was far too controversial and would only have been counterproductive , so referral back was the safest course for us to adopt here in the January part-session .
The second version of this report , which we have before us now , is more balanced .
There is less to object to in it .
It is disappointing , as Mrs d 'Ancona says , that the time is not yet ripe for policy on drugs in Europe to be properly harmonised , because there is much to be said for that .
As long as differences in approach persist , Member States will suffer as a result .
The Netherlands has had a great deal of trouble with drugs tourism as a result of its excessively tolerant policy and other countries in turn have suffered as a result of the Dutch policy .
So cooperation has to be the name of the game .
What form should it take ?
Action in three areas . Briefly these are prevention , treatment andcontrol .
Lastly , European cooperation is essential for those who advocate legalising soft drugs , cannabis too , because if we legalise them we have to opt out of the existing UN conventions and that can only be done at a European level .
That is for the long term .
For the short term , I think we have to work towards a low level of drug use in society .
Mr President , this report , by my good friend Mrs d 'Ancona , has both positive and negative aspects .
The positive is the clear objective stated in Recommendation 11 that the aim of anti-drug efforts is a drug-free society .
This is fully in line with point 12 of the political declaration adopted by the UN General Assembly last June , which also calls for the active promotion of a society free of drug abuse .
We would view any change in this objective as a reason for voting against the report .
Nowhere in the UN political declaration is there a reference to support for ' harm reduction ' policies .
Such policies leave the addicts addicted .
Harm reduction is the thin edge of the wedge leading to legalisation .
The United States report suggests that legalisation there would lead to around a 100 % increase in heroin consumption and around a 50 % increase in that of cocaine .
Last June 150 countries adopted a global UN strategy to tackle the worldwide drug problem .
The political declaration they adopted requires governments to implement new strategies and programmes to reduce drug demand , and new laws to counter money laundering by 2003 .
The report commissioned for the June conference warned that the international financial system has become a money launderer 's dream , processing a large part of the estimated $ 200 billion worth of drugs money every year .
Every means possible , including confiscation of assets , which we introduced in Ireland , must be part and parcel of an internationally agreed strategy .
We fully endorse the concerns expressed by the UN declaration . In particular we highlight the view that drugs destroy lives and communities .
Our group will have to decide tomorrow on this report , on the basis of what amendments are passed by the House .
Mr President , drug addiction is a real challenge to civilisation today .
More specifically , it is increasingly the young who are becoming addicted , at an ever earlier age , and the more precarious their lifestyle the greater their dependency .
And the free movement of goods and capital is a veritable gift to the drug traffickers .
So far , fine words by the UN or Europe on the war against drugs and all policies based on outright suppression of drugs at all costs have proved ineffective .
Faced with so vast and so complex a problem we cannot simply chant slogans or recommend middle ways .
On the contrary , we must not shrink from opening up scope for further debate , experience and proposals which will point us down new and realistic roads .
Mrs d 'Ancona 's first report was consistent with this approach , but it was too much for some in this House , who preferred to hide behind the walls of their conviction .
The second attempt has smoothed off the rough edges and simply gone along with the US conventions .
The consensus rule , a veritable disease of old age in this House , has once again prevailed and we end up with the noble objective that ' the aim of anti-drugs efforts is a drug-free society . ' You don 't say !
Extend this theory to all areas of society and we shall have this , for example : ' the aim of the fight against violence is a non-violent society ' , or ' the aim of the fight against stupidity is a society without imbeciles ' .
Brilliant !
You will agree with me that there is still a long way to go .
But the report acknowledges the need for an independent , scientific , objective and rigorous study of the US conventions on drugs , to update and complete them .
A study of this kind must draw on the views and suggestions of people on the ground ; it must be conducted with no holds barred and with a political courage which is all too often lacking .
For my part , I have three specific suggestions .
First and foremost , we must abandon laws which punish the user as severely as the trafficker and we must move resolutely towards decriminalising drug use .
We must give priority to preventing the risks , by strengthening structures for counselling and treatment and not forgetting the related social issues .
And we must step up the fight against the big international traffickers by greater international cooperation and by doing away with tax havens , which only serve as centres for laundering the proceeds of drug and other illegal trafficking or allow speculators to avoid taxation .
Finally , if the objective truly is to combat drugs , public health and education budgets must be increased to meet the challenge .
Mr President , I can be brief in commenting on Mrs d 'Ancona 's recommendations .
In some respects these are very good , for example the wide-angled approach and the fact that there is scope for local and regional experiments .
In a number of other respects , and regrettably there are many of them , it is very obviously a compromise compared with the draft recommendation of 1996 , as Mrs d 'Ancona herself admits .
I hope that this debate and subsequent debates will persuade both those for and against to abandon their ideologically entrenched positions , because otherwise this debate in Parliament is likely to become an exercise in repetition .
We believe the debate is important with a view to local and regional experiments .
I am convinced that the answers to future policy on drugs will be found in all those towns and villages , not only in the Netherlands but in Europe as a whole , where people are looking for careful and controlled solutions to the problems which we all acknowledge .
The solution will come from the bottom up , not at European level and not at national level , but as a result of these local and regional experiments .
Mr President , my apologies to our rapporteur , who is a well-loved member of the House .
There are some interesting things in her report , but also things which are unacceptable .
As Mrs Pailler said , there are references to a ' drug-free society ' , which is absurd .
There is also the fact that these interesting things tackle a marginal facet of the drugs problem but not the root of the problem , namely the reality that this huge trade accounts for 8 % of world GDP ; there is the power of this international mafia which is corrupting our police forces , our magistrates , our journalists , our economies , by pouring dirty money into sectors of the economy which are healthy .
There is all that , and on all that the report says nothing .
This House is not prepared to face up to reality .
The international conventions of the United Nations have been in existence for thirty years and for thirty years , year on year , we have seen a rise in the consumption of drugs .
Mr Andrews made the point that this year alone there has been a recorded increase of 50 % in heroin use , and so it goes on .
The European Parliament does not want to know about all that .
We are hiding behind an absurdity .
Mr President , an attempt to shut the stable door after the horse has bolted , that is how Mr Wiebenga described the proposal for a recommendation we are debating today , and he is right .
The UNGASS Special Session took place last spring , so one wonders at whom the recommendations of this report are in fact targeted .
More important still : what exactly is the recommendation recommending ?
It seems to me to be pretty neutral stuff .
To my mind a few changes are needed here and there , as proposed by Mrs Lindholm and the PPE Group .
But even so I wonder what the point of the report is .
No new views are put forward .
The recommendations are not actually directed at anyone in particular .
It is apparent , from the large number of amendments which have been put down , that other people are dissatisfied too .
In short , all this report does is cause irritation , and I think it was pointless putting it before the House again .
Another point of irritation is part B , the explanatory statement contained in the d 'Ancona report .
Now that the recommendations have been drastically altered , the explanatory statement makes no sense .
It seems to me obvious that it has to be revised .
The majority of Parliament seems not to share Mrs d 'Ancona 's political view .
It seems to me that she can draw her conclusions from that .
What Mrs d 'Ancona said just now about the legal-moral approach as opposed to the medical approach seems to me to be a false comparison which clouds the issue .
The experience of delinquents who instead of serving out their time are forced to kick their habit tells a different story .
Serious addicts previously at death 's door are brought back to life and can contemplate a future .
We cannot and must not give up on these people .
So ' harm reduction ' is not the answer , any more than free heroin is .
Just take a look at last Saturday 's Nieuwe Rotterdamse Courant .
I was against including this report on the agenda .
Including it when there is nothing much of substance in it does nothing to enhance our image as a serious parliament .
Mr President , first of all I must pay tribute to the spirit of consultation and dialogue shown by the rapporteur .
Throughout the slow process culminating in this report we are discussing today , she has shown herself to be very much open to dialogue .
Knowing where she herself stands , we can appreciate the effort she has had to make in putting together a text for us which pulls together the threads of so many and so passionately held controversial views , which have to be considered in the drafting of a policy on drugs .
Conscious of the wide differences which separate us , she opted for a policy of a little at a time , gambling that despite our differences in thinking we would manage to agree on a number of moves forward which would enable the damage done by certain drugs to be reduced : reduction of the risks and of demand , social measures to support this , entitlement to medical support and , above all , support for a number of pilot experiments .
Speaking for myself , I approved of her approach even though , obviously , I am far from happy with the result .
But I think it is unfortunate that the concessions have been all in one direction and that some of the amendments tabled and voted on in committee upset the balance which Hedy d 'Ancona was seeking .
I am not referring here to the numerous amendments tabled in the plenary .
So what exactly is the position ?
On the one hand the advocates of a restrictive policy argue in favour of a drug-free society , but offer no new suggestions on how to achieve it , other than following unflinchingly the policy we have at present even though everyone acknowledges that it has failed .
And to prevent any departure from this line , to block any form of new experiment , they endlessly hold forth about compliance with the UN conventions which are so ill-adapted to present-day society that very few countries are able to apply them .
That leads to a truly surreal and unhealthy mismatch between what the laws of the Member States say and the way in which they are implemented .
Ah , the utopian dream of a drug-free society !
I had it in mind to make a few ironic comments , but Mrs Pailler took the words out of my mouth in exactly the terms I would have used .
So I will let that pass , but if this slogan had merely been unrealistic , utopian , it would be less of a problem ; in the event , I regard it as frankly dangerous .
Nurturing false hopes in the public mind , foisting on them false remedies which will resolve nothing , will further fuel scepticism about the impotence of political action and promises which are not kept .
What are we asking for , in the face of these people who so confidently argue in favour of retaining the status quo ?
We want it to be possible to explore other avenues which have produced encouraging results , where these have been tried .
And the UN conventions must not impede and prevent such exploration .
Mrs d 'Ancona said again that harmonisation is not possible at present .
So there is no question of imposing rules on a state which does not wish to implement them .
And if our Swedish colleagues are happy with their policy , let them continue with it .
No one wants to stop them .
We just want them to accept that we may not all think the same way .
All we want is a calm debate based on impartial considerations , without arbitrary edicts and without anathema .
Surely that is not too much to ask ?
I agree with Mr Blokland that , in terms of principle , it was a mistake to refer this report back to committee .
Hedy d 'Ancona 's earlier rallying cries for the legalisation of cannabis and the authorisation of heroin maintenance treatment have , however , been silenced , and we have before us a set of recommendations which are in line with the PPE Group 's fundamental approach to narcotics .
Our group 's coordinated stance has contributed towards this acceptable result .
Combating drugs is unequivocally the issue . The question is how we do it .
I am not too happy about centralising the management of rehabilitation and therapy for addicts .
We do not need a supranational approach to matters which can equally well be handled at the local level .
The EU should restrict itself to things that it alone can do effectively : working with Europol , coordinating policy on border checks , etc .
European cooperation is a unique instrument when it comes to fighting international crime .
I am not so sure about its place on our city streets , in drugs ghettos and treatment centres .
We all deplore the damage done by drugs and wish to limit the suffering caused .
The details of how this should be done remain to be defined .
The concept of harm reduction has been marred by the failures of some programmes to break addicts ' dependency .
The PPE Group and I have therefore tabled a number of amendments designed to tighten the supervision of harm reduction programmes and introduce stricter regulatory provisions .
Drug abusers need therapy , education , and social back-up if they are to overcome their misery and appreciate that there is more to life than drugs .
The UN 's Convention on the Rights of the Child grants children the right to a drug-free life and we in the EU would be well advised to adopt as our own the drugs policy objectives outlined by the UN in June .
Mrs d 'Ancona 's report is not perfect , but I would nonetheless congratulate her and commend her stamina . It is in our mutual interest to find out more about one another 's methods .
We can then select those that are working and set about solving the problems .
Mr President , it is useless to take the moral high ground when debating about drugs .
The drugs scourge has many sides to it but it is , above all , about wasted lives and human suffering .
It requires more than an ideological straight- jacket ; it requires policies that achieve results .
The d 'Ancona report was written in this spirit .
It calls on the Member States to make it possible for authorities at different levels to engage in new , innovative , results-oriented approaches .
We support this message because we feel that no policy should simply be ruled out .
The drugs problems requires pragmatism and an open mind .
I therefore prefer the approach of Sir Jack Stewart-Clark to that of Mr Blokland .
Of course across the new Member States the approaches to drugs are different .
This creates problems of its own , not least in the form of drug tourism .
In an ideal world we would have harmonisation of legislation .
The d 'Ancona report is realistic in this regard - we only have to listen to this debate here .
It recognises that harmonisation is premature and instead calls for concrete and enhanced cooperation between the authorities at national , regional and urban levels .
This is necessary to settle contention between the Member States as a result of different policies .
It will also help to promote a better understanding of which policies are effective and under which conditions .
This surely will be one of the founding blocks of an effective European drugs policy .
In practice we might find that our experiences of which policies work are not so different from one another .
I was in Sweden and I do not see that in practice the police in Sweden are doing things much differently from what is done in Holland .
Here the d 'Ancona report touches another sore point : it calls for an end to the gap that exists between the policy that is preached and the one that is implemented .
Let us end the hypocrisy between the law and practice .
The legal instruments that are at our disposal must be adapted to the new reality .
The UN General Assembly on Drugs held in July 1998 could have been an opportunity to address the most severe discrepancies between legislation and implementation , as well as incorporating in the Convention the recent developments on the drug scene .
That is why I prefer the human approach of Mrs d 'Ancona 's report to the ideological approach which I still hear too much in this Hemicycle .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mrs d 'Ancona on her attempt to try and bring about a consensus in the House with regard to what is a very difficult subject , on which there are many divergent viewpoints and opinions in this Parliament .
However , Parliament is acting a bit like a political eunuch , because we are talking and making recommendations about a UN extraordinary session on drugs that has already occurred .
Bearing that in mind , as well as the comments made by other Members , it is important that a certain number of key factors are laid down so that the public can understand what we are about within this Parliament .
Firstly , we are in favour of protection of the people of the European Union .
Secondly , we are in favour of helping the people around the world who are dependent on growing drug crops because of the economic conditions in their own countries .
Thirdly , we are in favour of ensuring that we can give the best education and the best tools of knowledge to our young people to guarantee that they can make informed decisions about their own personal lifestyle .
Fourthly , we are in favour of getting rid of useless and wasted ideologies and , in particular , we are there to take a political stance and a visionary outlook with regard to how best we can help everybody to live within a drug-free society .
It is not a perfect solution , it may not be totally achievable .
But if we allow ourselves to be complacent and say that we can accept a certain percentage of drug addiction , then we have already lost the battle .
We should strive for the best possible Utopian ideal and work towards that .
Mr President , I found the climate in this House fascinating last time this report came up .
One thing was blatantly clear , namely that we were miles away from any serious commitment to harmonisation .
The drugs debate generated more heat and talk than any other I can remember - bar the discussion on our own allowances and benefits .
A lot has been said about Sweden 's attitude to the whole issue , so perhaps I might pass on one interesting result from a survey published last week of young people in their early teens .
The numbers experimenting with drugs turned out to be on the decrease .
That this was so had nothing to do with moralising crusades , but was rather the result of massive investment in outreach work in the areas of our towns and cities where marginalisation is at its worst .
What better demonstration could there be of the need to proceed with pragmatism , particularly when dealing with our young people - who primarily crave a helping hand .
We should also be looking at how to give shape to a restrictive , as opposed to a repressive policy approach .
Mr President , the world community has given out a clear signal as to what it expects of drugs policy . We now have the three UN drugs conventions , plus the political position taken at the New York meeting from 8 to 11 June this year .
Under the 1989 UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , the community of nations - including the EU and its Member States - undertook , in Article 33 , to protect children from illegal drugs and involvement in unlawful production and distribution
Today , 5 October , is International Children 's Day .
We all share responsibility for ensuring compliance with the conventions our Member States have ratified .
I therefore urge the House to vote against any amendments and recommendations which violate the Convention on the Rights of the Child . Otherwise we will be running counter to the goal of a drug-free society .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the debate we have been engaged in for months and , so far as I have followed it , in today 's debate too , Members seem less concerned with how to tackle prevention and rehabilitation most effectively than with trying to show that their opinion or the strategy being pursued in their country is better than that in another country .
What does this endless debate teach us ?
Firstly , there is no royal road to combating the drugs problem .
At any rate , there is nobody either in the House or outside it who can say : I have found a way to tackle both the prevention and rehabilitation problem .
I do not know anybody who can do that .
Secondly , that means that whatever the different approaches we take to combating drugs , one thing remains certain : that we are helpless and at a loss here because none of the many different attempts that have been made has managed effectively to combat this phenomenon .
We really have to take that on board and then , in my view , we must draw the same conclusion as Mrs d 'Ancona .
Basically it goes like this : taking account of the historical background of the various societies in the various countries , taking account of their special cultural features , taking account of the different national structures - because the medical system can differ widely from country to country - we must , to put it in simple terms , obtain results that are country-specific .
I am not suggesting that the Netherlands is doing anything dishonourable , or Sweden either .
There are two opposite poles in the debate and the two countries take very different approaches .
Both have the same problems .
We should respect both approaches because both countries are trying just as hard .
Yet we should also stop pretending there can be any meaning in a debate in which one country tries to convince the other that its approach is the better one .
That is why Mrs d 'Ancona endeavoured , after a lengthy debate , to put forward a compromise proposal in which she says : I have my own position - and she has described it better than I could - but within the framework of my position there is room for all sorts of different approaches , each of which should be regarded as of equal value , rather than pretending one is better or worse than another .
I regard that as an excellent means of attempting to reach at least a minimum consensus .
On behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I therefore thank Mrs d 'Ancona for her report , in which she at least attempts to bring about a consensus , even if it represents the lowest common denominator .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the consumption of drugs , not just in Europe but everywhere , is rising sharply .
I believe we all share the same aim : to protect young people and society as a whole as best we can against drugs and drug consumption .
We are also agreed that we can only combat drugs with a package of measures and that we need to establish a balance between prevention , repression , treatment and rehabilitation .
Anyone who disregards this balance - as Mrs d 'Ancona did in her first report in which she called for the decriminalisation of drug consumption and the free sale of cannabis products and heroin on production of a medical certificate , must accept the consequences .
That report was rightly referred back to committee .
Today 's report reflects a different approach .
It tries to establish this balance .
It incorporates much of what our drugs expert , Sir Jack Stewart-Clark , proposed and lays great emphasis on the social aspect .
This report can therefore be supported .
But what I find most striking is that amendments have once again been tabled that attempt seriously to disturb that balance and to talk this Parliament into legalising drugs .
That is quite unacceptable !
What we need for the future is for people to realise that prevention will protect .
So let me ask you to support prevention : drugs-free schools for children , for society , but severe punishment for dealers , and aid to help dependent youngsters to get off drugs .
Our only chance to achieve a drugs-free society , a drugs-free life , is by establishing a balance between these three measures .
Mr President , Parliament 's image will have been enhanced by the decision , supported by my group , to refer this report back to committee .
Our proclaimed goal is now a drug-free society .
I cannot , however , endorse all the recommendations .
Some of the points I would wish to make have been covered by Jan Andersson .
This debate is highly polarised .
It is being claimed that those who back my kind of policy cannot simultaneously advocate harm reduction .
I disagree ; there must be some misunderstanding here .
I too want to mitigate suffering , and references to Trojan Horses are misplaced in my view .
People say that our prisons are in the state they are in because of our narcotics policies .
I maintain that it is our policy on crime that is wrong .
Finland has proportionately fewer prisons than many other countries , yet it takes a tough approach to crime .
It is possible to reconcile the two objectives .
The Council of Europe would be well advised to address the whole area of crime and punishment in an effort to rectify the situation .
A much better option is to provide people with improved social and health care facilities .
Mr President , I would ask for your understanding .
I do not want to delay the proceedings , but both Mr Pirker and Mrs Thors got the facts wrong in their statements .
The report was not referred back by the plenary ; instead I asked , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , for it to be taken back from plenary to the committee .
That is a rather different matter .
Members keep implying that the House said : we don 't want this rubbish .
The fact is that Mrs d 'Ancona requested me to withdraw the report so as to give us an opportunity to negotiate compromises .
That is a considerable difference !
Let us not split hairs , Mr President .
You should not argue in this way .
I used a word that covers both the situations you referred to .
Återremiss in Swedish means cases where it is asked that something is taken back and it is then taken back to the preparatory body .
Mr President , the real truth is that the report was sent back to committee because the British Labour Group - the single biggest part of the Socialist Group - was going to vote against it .
It was under instructions from the British Home Secretary whose son had just been done for drug dealing and it was embarrassing for it to support the report .
Mrs d 'Ancona 's original report was a very good report .
This , unfortunately , is not so good although there are some good things in it .
There is a sweet smell of hypocrisy in this Chamber tonight which mingles with the smell of a drug outside - a drug called tobacco which kills half a million Europeans each year .
This Parliament cannot even stop people smoking in areas where they are not meant to smoke , such as right outside this Chamber .
Instead it tries to water down a sensible policy which Mrs d 'Ancona put forward on drugs .
I know that many British Labour Members have in the past smoked dope and some of them still do .
But they will all vote against it because of the hypocrisy that is prevalent in this Chamber .
We need a sensible policy on the decriminalization of cannabis , as they have in Holland , in Australia and in many parts of the world .
Then we could deal much more effectively with the real problem of hard drugs and the young might take us seriously .
Mr President , I think the fact that we have Mrs d 'Ancona 's report here in its present form is a major step forward .
In any event , the fact that it states a few clear principles will attract interest in my country .
For example , the principle of a drug-free society , ' life without drugs ' , is one of the principles stated : limiting demand , greater emphasis on implementing laws and international agreements .
In other words , this means abandoning the policy of tolerance .
I have the feeling that ideas like ' the tolerant society ' , which I used to read of in liberal party manifestos , have quietly died the death as far as drugs policy is concerned .
And I think this is most important because drugs are a major nuisance both to the user and to the people around him , especially , as we all know , amongst those who are at the bottom of the social pile .
And I think it goes without saying that , at a given point , Social Democrats and Christian Democrats should agree on an issue such as this , because it is surely our first guiding principle to combat suffering amongst those who are the most vulnerable .
And I find it quite proper that a drug-free society should be held up as an ideal .
I am very surprised that this ideal is rejected by some , as if the ambition of full employment , the ambition to eliminate poverty , the ambition of a society where right prevails and imbeciles are kept out of Parliament , are not also ideals which we should pursue with vigour .
So I think it is splendid to have this report .
It is a compromise , but fortunately it does outline a policy , and that is what matters .
Mr President , Mrs d 'Ancona has produced a thorough report on this subject .
This second report is clearly a more rational , more composed and , above all , more constructive one than its predecessor .
I believe that the long and stormy parliamentary debate on Mrs d 'Ancona 's reports has strengthened the view of most that the battle against drugs cannot be won by proposing that the harmonisation of EU Member States ' drug laws should be achieved merely in terms of a liberal approach to the drugs problem .
We are all , in our own way , victims of drug abuse .
The fight against drugs in the Member States of the Community must be an active , not a reactive , one .
Simply focusing on the control of problems that are the result of drug abuse is not the right approach .
The debate on synthetic drugs has shown that the EU should be giving special attention to educational programmes for children and young people .
The fight against the various designer drugs used by young people , such as ecstasy , is the only way to make it difficult for people to get hold of drugs .
We urgently need to develop and enhance systems for sharing information among the relevant authorities and setting up joint databases for the registration of new narcotic substances , with the help of EU funding .
I would finally like to point out that the opinions being expressed in the gallery are , to my mind , out of order , Mr President .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome our return to the subject of drug addiction this evening , especially since no miracle solutions are being put forward : drug addiction cannot be overcome with a magic wand !
No solution can be found that transports us immediately , overnight , into a drug-free society .
We have a good deal of hard work ahead of us : not just the European Parliament , but all the Member States too must commit themselves to a global strategy - as was stressed at the last UN General Assembly - a strategy which calls on us to opt above all for the prevention route and attempt to reduce the demand for drugs in our Community , providing information and education , in the knowledge that synthetic drugs are a major risk .
Prevention is not enough . Young people who are travelling through the tunnel of death , the tunnel of drugs , need above all to be cured , not only with a view to damage limitation , but in the knowledge that the voluntary sector has a wealth of experience of working in a spirit of solidarity .
Therapeutic communities have brought many youngsters back to life .
Prevention and cure go hand-in-hand with rehabilitation , reintegration and finally repressive policies , not just against small-scale trafficking but primarily against large-scale trafficking in hard drugs .
In attempting to lance this boil , priority must be given to the issue of banking secrecy , because enormous and lethal flows of money are passing through the legal economy .
The European Parliament should turn its attention to this problem in the first instance .
Mr President , I read Mrs d 'Ancona 's revised report with interest . Today 's debate has been very stimulating .
Drugs policy is an area where the European Parliament , the Council of Ministers and the Commission have been cooperating closely and fruitfully for several years now .
We have organised some important conferences together and the exchange of information between us has been good .
Last summer , representatives from the European Parliament were included in the Commission 's delegation to the United Nations General Assembly special session on drugs .
Like Mrs d 'Ancona , I look forward to more of this effective cooperation in the future .
As I have said many times before , and cannot repeat enough , cooperation is the bedrock upon which to pursue a constructive and focused dialogue on the central issues of drugs policy .
Past evidence of this is the way in which we collaborated to get synthetic drugs onto the political agenda .
Europe emerges strengthened from such exercises , for we are seen as standing shoulder to shoulder in the battle to halt the spread of drugs .
The EU 's political priorities undergo adjustment , bringing them more into line with the concerns and fears of ordinary citizens .
Thanks also to our cooperative efforts , we now have a situation in which legislation and regulatory practices are similar across the EU .
This is partly because the UN conventions offer a shared basis from which we all start .
The Union 's common rules on money laundering and chemical precursors have also had an important part to play , but we cannot afford to close our eyes to the major discrepancies still in existence as regards narcotics .
Penalties for possession , dealing and trafficking vary , as do attitudes to possession for personal consumption . Views differ on whether to classify some substances as less dangerous than others .
Furthermore , there are major variations in the way existing laws and regulations are applied .
These differences are not irrelevant ; they reflect a fundamental disagreement over the future design of drug strategies .
More work needs to be done before we have a coherent European approach to narcotics policy .
But let us not exaggerate the discrepancies .
Otherwise we will end up devoting valuable time and energy to relatively minor issues , losing sight of the really significant ones .
The problems are out there , and to resolve them we need consensus and a pooling of joint resources .
Mrs d 'Ancona 's report also states clearly and unequivocally that our common goal now and in the future is , and must remain , a drug-free society .
I welcome that , for there is no place for ambiguity here .
Mr President , the combination of preventive and restrictive policies we see across Europe is the result of efforts extending over almost 30 years .
Various methods have been tried out by different Member States at different times , but the overall conclusion certainly seems to be that preventive action and social measures are just as important as bans and restrictions .
Three things are necessary when it comes to the practical shaping of a policy for drugs : demand-reduction , access-limitation and international cooperation .
These formed the foundation for the EU 's five-year action plan , adopted in 1994 . It is that plan which is currently being updated .
The key elements are continuity and sustainability - an assessment borne out by the conclusions of the final text adopted by the UN at its special session in the summer .
I am particularly pleased , therefore , to see such unequivocal commitment to the UN conventions in one of the recommendations in the d 'Ancona report .
A clear statement of this kind is salutary and sets the parameters for our future policy to combat drugs .
We now need to fine-tune and adjust our methods of cooperation , so that we are better equipped to meet the current challenges .
There is no place , however , for revolutionary change or high-risk experimentation .
Mr President , most people here today appear to agree that the emphasis should be on preventive action .
The way forward is not to call for more policemen and customs officials , or to mete out harsher punishments , or to launch a merciless crackdown on drugs-linked crop production .
What we need is an established framework within which to work , coupled with a willingness to shoulder social responsibility .
I appreciate the fact that the rapporteur devotes space in her text to the Community 's financial programme , under which funds would be made available for preventive measures to combat drug abuse .
The Union has earmarked ECU 27 million over a five-year period to support preventive work in the Member States .
The programme offers a unique opportunity for cooperation between government bodies and voluntary organisations .
There will be scope for methodological work - devising new ways of evaluating the results of prevention strategies in the Member States , for example .
The idea is to pinpoint strategies which foster a broader exchange of information and experience .
I wish to say loud and clear , however , that the Community programme cannot be viewed as a source of support for experimental work in the field of drugs .
Unfortunately there are occasionally some misunderstandings on this front .
By way of conclusion , let me make it clear that the task of updating the Union 's action programme has only just begun .
I am responsible for coordinating the Commission 's contribution .
A first draft should be ready around the beginning of next year .
Between now and then , I will be working alongside others in the Commission on evaluating the range of measures taken over recent years in this area .
As coordinating Commissioner , I am sure that there will be plenty of opportunities for me to discuss matters with Parliament , both here in the House and in committee .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Combating corruption
The next item is the report ( A4-0285 / 98 ) by Mr Bontempi , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on a Union policy against corruption ( COM ( 97 ) 0192 - C4-0273 / 97 ) .
Mr President , the report which I am presenting to the House today for debate and vote relates in particular to the Commission 's communication of last year setting out its proposed approach .
Furthermore , in view of the many interesting developments taking place internationally to thrash out a strategy to combat corruption , the report outlines and assesses priorities , as well as identifying some urgently needed initiatives .
In actual fact there are many proposals and ideas before various international bodies : concrete steps are now needed to bring them to fruition .
I should like to give a brief overall assessment of the Commission 's communication , reserving the right to return later to certain aspects .
The document is a good one , but it has two glaring omissions : the first relates to the lack of action even in fields for which the right of initiative lies with the Commission and is not delegated to other agents ; the second - politically even more significant - lies in the fact that there is no hint of the problems , risks and possible measures relating to internal corruption in the EU institutions .
Certain very high-profile cases have arisen recently - the latest being that of ECHO - and these show how necessary it is to put one 's own house in order , at least in terms of rules and priorities , before giving lessons to others .
The report outlines various proposals in this area , and I sense that the Commission is willing to carry this further .
This very matter is , moreover , dealt with in Mr Bösch 's report , which we shall be discussing tomorrow .
As far as the general picture is concerned , I would recall that alarm has grown considerably over the past three or four years .
This is clear from the sensational cases which have occurred in various parts of the world - Kenya , Japan , Mexico , South Korea , the Czech Republic , Italy , Spain and France - where leaders or entire leaderships have been caught up in corruption cases .
Further , it is estimated that 5 % of all direct foreign investment into the most exposed countries disappears through corruption , without counting internal corruption .
We had in fact noticed the growing alarm , because even bodies which until a short while ago were afraid to utter the word corruption are now placing it at the top of their agendas .
I am referring , not to be controversial but to emphasise this aspect , to the Monetary Institute , the World Bank , the OECD : all bodies which - as I said - have never previously adopted a stance , despite witnessing many and widespread cases of corruption , for example in international trade .
I am very pleased that now , faced with the latest dangerous upsurge , the business community and these institutions have acknowledged the situation .
In this connection , on 14 and 15 April we - the Council , Commission and Parliament - held a very interesting joint seminar on corruption in the business community , and the latter made some very important undertakings on that occasion .
We are now awaiting confirmation and a follow-up .
One very important new element that I would mention here is the emergence of an NGO - Transparency International - which has been active in Berlin since 1993 , fighting corruption from the perspective of the business community .
I would merely list the new elements to which it has led : a European Union convention , recently approved by the Council along with the Protocol on the protection of financial interests and , above all , in December , a heavyweight OECD convention , which is perhaps the first joint act by such a large-scale forum with the express intention of combating corruption .
I would also recall that the new legal base established at Amsterdam has strengthened the mechanisms available for fighting corruption .
All of which shows that mechanisms do exist . I should like now to touch on a few points from the conclusion to my report , which sets out to identify the main approaches and priorities for action in this area , assuming that action will be far-reaching .
It draws attention to the need to ratify these conventions , and in particular the need for the Member States and Commission to take measures against the tax deductibility of bribes - a scandalous practice still going on in our countries - and lists a whole series of measures to prevent corruption , such as transparency and the reduction of red tape , ensuring that politicians too commit themselves to fighting corruption .
Judicial independence is vital but , if corruption is to be combated effectively , a moral commitment is required from citizens and - if I may say so - from institutions and politicians likewise .
Personally I believe that many Members of this House wish to be respected and not merely tolerated as politicians , and the fight against corruption is the ultimate test here .
Mr President , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has highlighted five measures which either already existed or are to be introduced to tackle and remove corruption .
In particular , the Legal Affairs Committee would like the Commission to bring forward legislation to extend the scope of the existing money laundering directive to cover criminal activities such as corruption .
We would also like the Commission to name explicitly those Member States which permit tax deductions for the bribery of foreign officials , so that the tax-deductibility of bribes paid to such officials can be abolished .
We would also like the Commission to bring forward legislation to clarify the conditions of access for tenderers to public procurement procedures , with the aim of eliminating any person convicted of corruption from participating in these procedures in future .
We would also like the Commission to study the criteria which would enable steps to be taken to establish a comprehensive system to blacklist rogue undertakings and exclude them from competing for or being awarded future contracts and subsidies , and to alert third parties to possible risks in conducting business with such undertakings .
Clear criteria for inclusion on such a blacklist , and appropriate appeal procedures should be established by the Commission .
Finally , the Legal Affairs Committee believes that all competitors for specific projects should give a written undertaking that they will not use bribery to obtain a contract for public procurement .
We believe this is worthy of further attention .
While we understand that the Member States have the remit in terms of criminal law , these are five measures we would like to see the Commission introduce at European Union level .
Mr President , first let me thank Mr Bontempi for his good report and for incorporating many of our suggestions in it .
On the question of corruption the Commission might be well advised to put its own house in order first , before lecturing others .
That was the main point we made when the Committee on Budgetary Control adopted its opinion on the Bontempi report on 21 October 1997 , i.e. nearly a year ago .
We noted at the time that the Commission 's communication on an EU policy to fight corruption does indeed contain much that is true and worth considering , but that it does not address the question of corruption within the Commission and the other EU institutions .
To be quite frank , this aspect of the matter was simply suppressed .
Now it has been under intense discussion for days if not weeks .
That confirms how right Parliament was to defer the discharge to the Commission this spring .
At the time we made two crucial demands : firstly , that Parliament be kept regularly informed of all ongoing internal investigations into cases where EU officials might be involved in fraud and corruption and , secondly , that the appropriate judicial authorities be informed rapidly and fully of any suspected cases .
Regrettably we note that these conditions have still not been satisfied .
People are getting worked up about particular cases just now , but what is far more serious is that we do not have a reliable overview of the scale , nature and results of the suspected internal cases investigated by the Commission .
All we have is a number : 27 cases which may well also involve Commission officials are currently under investigation .
Yet the Commission almost systematically denies us any access to the relevant reports .
We have not even been given a list of the cases .
Unless this situation changes rapidly and radically , the Commission will not just be jeopardising its own political future , but also doing serious damage to the reputation of the European Union as a whole .
And in that case it has no right at all to lecture others about the right way to fight corruption !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Bösch has very sensibly stated his position today in anticipation of tomorrow 's debate .
So I will not add any further comments to what Herbert Bösch said , given his personal commitment .
We will be dealing with the matter in depth tomorrow .
But there is one fact that is quite undisputed : corruption is a phenomenon that represents a huge danger to the rule of law .
We must be fully aware that corruptible representatives always pave the way towards the destabilisation of a constitutional state .
Be they freely elected Members , be they officials , anyone who carries government responsibility , anyone who assumes de facto government responsibility in the free economy and is susceptible or open to corruption helps destroy the cornerstone of democracy , which is transparency , the visibility of government action .
This goes hand in hand with the destruction of trust in democracy , and the moment the public loses its trust in democracy , democracy is finished . That is to say that the fight against corruption is not just a fight against crime , but also a fight for the stability of the democratic institutions .
We must bear that in mind when we discuss Mr Bontempi 's report .
To return to what Mr Bösch said , that is why we must realise that with the European Union in its present form we have built up an organisation in which huge economic powers are amassed , in which huge financial opportunities are being created , but all within a structure that is becoming ever less transparent .
It is not that I am blaming anyone here , let me make that quite clear .
I would remind Mr Bösch that it was very often the Commission that supported our Parliament 's calls for more transparency .
The fault lies far more with the Member State governments , with the Council of the Union , which is responsible for what I have just described , i.e. the accumulation of more economic power , more financial power , without a corresponding build-up of powers of control , in particular of Parliament 's powers of control .
So I say that if such an important structure as the European Union , in the form in which it now exists , transfers the powers of economic and financial action to an executive which cannot be adequately controlled , that will obviously open the door to corruption .
To return therefore to what I said at the beginning , we are facing the internationalisation of economic power in Europe while national structures are still being used to combat the abuse of this economic power - which is precisely Mr Bontempi 's point of departure .
We need to standardise anti-corruption systems internationally with the aim - which I believe we share with the Commissioner - of eventually incorporating them in EU legislative structures . That would mean giving the EU its own margin of power and discretion in the fight against corruption , which brings us back to the Bösch report which is on tomorrow 's agenda .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all my compliments to the rapporteur , Mr Bontempi , on his report which the PPE Group will be endorsing without reservation .
I think that I can seamlessly agree with Mr Schulz , who made the point that many forms of corruption which have come to light in the last ten years in various Member States of the Union have caused great alarm in public opinion and in the population in general .
So without exaggeration one can speak of a crisis of values of the kind we like to evoke when we talk about democracy in Europe .
A series of scandals has raised grave doubts as to the integrity of persons in high positions of responsibility in industry , government and political life .
In addition to the example already quoted by Mr Bösch and Mr Schulz on the fraud surrounding the ECU 700 000 intended for humanitarian aid to former Yugoslavia , I would point to the notorious case currently going on before Belgium 's Court of Cassation in connection with hundreds of millions allegedly spent by Agusta and Dassault on helicopters and aeroplanes for the Belgian armed forces .
So work is needed to arrive at a final definition which will distinguish active and passive corruption from other criminal or non-criminal deals .
This definition must be applicable in all Member States of the Union , jointly and severally .
I do not think that this practicable definition will be enough .
It is of course a necessary precondition , but more is needed .
We have to have preventive and punitive measures as well .
Prevention can be assured by making public tendering procedures , government procurement , trade agreements and other policy measures as transparent as possible .
That is the main thing ; transparency , the ability to check , the ability to measure against standards and criteria , and these supervisory mechanisms are an essential part of democracy .
We should learn from the experience of Europol and UCLAF , Commissioner .
So we need a Community window to look through in addition to all these conventions , international agreements , OECD codes of conduct and so on , and we are counting on the European Commission to provide us with that window .
Mr President , corruption undermines the legally constituted state and corruption threatens our democracy .
On that I fully agree with Mr Schulz .
Mr President , I should like to begin by complimenting the rapporteur , Mr Bontempi , on his excellent work .
One point on which I think we must all agree is that corruption is a highly destabilising factor , not only of our democratic structures but , in a more obvious way , of the free market and free competition .
It seriously disrupts free competition , so that the winner is not the best bidder , the one offering the most efficient service , but the craftiest , most dishonest and most corrupt .
This phenomenon deserves our attention .
In the light of this increase in corruption - clearly , corruption has existed since public institutions and government bodies were first created , in other words virtually since the world began - we must all consider whether a greater use of penalties and repression is the right response .
I believe on the contrary , as the last few speakers have said , that corruption comes from within .
Surely it is often the mechanisms themselves that provoke criminal behaviour and generate corruption : it is the barriers placed between commercial or economic operators and the pursuit of their business that opens the door to corruption .
I therefore welcome the acknowledgment by the rapporteur - and the Committee on Civil Liberties - that in combating corruption we must begin by reducing bureaucracy , simplifying procedures and making contracting arrangements more transparent .
Mr President , I am in favour of very firm and effective action to combat corruption and fraud .
We must strengthen our common efforts by ensuring that UCLAF and Europol function optimally , we must demand that the Commission work out a common strategy for the fight against fraud , and we must ensure that this common strategy is translated into concrete initiatives .
But we do not want a common prosecution service or a common criminal justice system .
On the other hand , we must coordinate our action and strengthen the practical cooperation that exists between our countries .
Furthermore we must be ruthless in dealing with corruption in the EU institutions .
Unfortunately we are discussing an all too topical subject here .
The Commission has some troublesome matters on its conscience at the moment , and that is something that does not exactly enhance the Commission 's already rather tarnished image in the eyes of so many EU citizens - the image of a closed and élitist institution that looks after its own .
In this connection , I would ask the Commission to give an account of a very scandalous affair .
I am thinking here of the cancellation of the Commission 's selection test .
One point is the general disorder that prevailed during the tests , with a lack of supervision of toilet visits and use of mobile phones .
We would be right to call it corruption , when Commission staff supply the answers to selected persons taking part in the tests .
I think it is disgraceful . We have a problem when we come to explain to European taxpayers that this selection test had been planned for three years and had cost ECU 12 million to hold .
Mr President , an atmosphere of outright scandal reigned when I left Portugal this weekend , after the former president of a State entity which has extensive influence in matters relating to public works had revealed practices of the most blatant corruption ( so he claimed ) in connection with the financing of political parties .
I travelled by way of Belgium , where the news has been dominated for several weeks by the corruption scandal relating to the ' Agusta ' case involving former members of government and political parties .
And we go higher yet , to the portals of the European Union , and we learn that a competition involving tens of thousands of ' Eurocrat ' candidates was cancelled on account of serious irregularities . We even know of rather dubious situations in connection with humanitarian aid .
There are two factors which appear inevitably to be present in the underworld of corruption : bureaucracy and an absence of transparency in decision-making .
We agree overall with the rapporteur 's assessment and proposals .
However , in tackling the matter of contributions to political parties in the context of combating corruption , we must have the courage to call a spade a spade , to recognise that the democratic contest for power fought by political parties and politicians , given over as it is to the dictates of marketing , advertising and the use of information to manipulate voters , takes vast sums of money which are obtained , for the most part , from generous donations by powerful economic interests .
These obviously do not loosen their purse strings simply out of sympathy to a particular politician , but because they expect advantages in return , what in Portugal we call ' giving a sausage in exchange for a fat pig ' .
Unfortunately , we are undergoing a red- and pink-tinted phase , in which public opinion polls have become more important than beliefs for those who are supposed to govern or to offer alternatives in power . This is the so-called third version of democratic socialism which , backed by enormous funding , is sweeping through the western world , and which obviously has no interest in taking the courageous step , for instance , of banning private financing of political parties .
It is as simple as that .
Member of the Commission .
I have read Mr Bontempi 's report on corruption with great interest .
It gives us a very useful overview of the various initiatives in this area .
As you know , the Union has been increasingly active in fighting corruption during the last years .
In 1996 the Convention on protection of the financial interests of the Community was enlarged with the first protocol .
This protocol criminalised bribery by or against national or Community officials which affects the EU budget .
A further protocol adopted in 1997 criminalised laundering of the proceeds of corruption .
The same year the Council also agreed on the Convention criminalising corruption affecting official duties of national or Community officials .
Unfortunately , none of the instruments that I have just mentioned has as yet been ratified by any national government .
This sends a conflicting message .
We all agree on the need to fight corruption , but when it comes to passing Union legislation through national parliaments the process grinds to a halt .
The Commission 's communication on the fight against corruption from last year covers many areas : tax deductibility , public procurement , financial transactions , blacklisting of shady operators , civil remedies and the fight against corruption in development assistance and in the pre-accession strategy .
I will briefly review the progress achieved .
The OECD Convention signed in December 1997 criminalises the bribery of foreign officials in the context of international business transactions .
The Convention will probably enter into force in 1999 .
Most Member States have either already changed their laws or are committed to doing so .
Member States should obviously change their tax laws to ensure that such kickbacks are not tax-deductible .
A questionnaire has now been sent to Member States .
The Commission and the Council will review progress in November .
To give you an example , disallowing tax deductibility only where there has been a conviction of a foreign official for bribery is not enough .
It must be clear in tax law that only lawful expenses may offset taxable income .
So it is possible that EU legislation is required , as suggested by Mr Bontempi .
As regards public procurement , it is common knowledge that transparency in the marketplace acts as a powerful brake on corruption .
The Commission has pushed for more transparency concerning prices and tender conditions .
We have also advocated the inclusion of specific anti-corruption measures in public procurement procedures .
Tomorrow the Advisory Committee on Public Procurement will discuss how Member States may exclude companies or persons who are being investigated for involvement in organised crime .
The Commission is also suggesting that Member States cooperate on these aspects .
The Vade Mecum on grant management will enter into force on 1 January 1999 .
The Vade Mecum provides for minimum standards for the award and monitoring of certain subsidies . The aim is to ensure more transparency , publicity and efficiency in the proceedings .
In May , the Commission launched a discussion on reform of the statutory auditing .
Better audits must become a deterrent against fraud and corruption .
A new committee on auditing is going to check the auditors ' approach to fraud .
Fraud risks must be reported by auditors and company boards .
The Commission has also looked at professional risk . Certain professions such as accountants , notaries , lawyers and auditors may be vulnerable to corruption and influence by organised crime .
The Commission is currently gathering information from their representatives to gain a full picture of the risk and to pursue the reflection on the need and feasibility of establishing at Union level some basic ethical requirements .
As regards money laundering , Mr Monti intends at the beginning of 1999 to propose a stronger directive to cover several professions beyond the financial sector .
Mr Bontempi sees combating corruption inside the EU institutions as an important issue .
The Commission and I myself share his concern , and as you know the Council has asked all institutions to help UCLAF to conduct internal inquiries .
We will come back to this tomorrow in the context of Mr Bösch 's report .
However , the Commission has already been quite active on the preventive side .
The sound and efficient management programme for the year 2000 aims at streamlining administration , simplifying procedures , improving transparency and reducing red tape throughout our administration .
A number of supplementary steps are now being taken by my colleague , Mr Liikanen , to make sure that all decisions and management principles are carried out properly .
The Commission 's own fraud fighting service , UCLAF , is also active .
Its efforts are beginning to bear fruit .
I have recently strengthened its independence and its organisation , and a dedicated anti-corruption cell and a legal unit have been set up .
An early-warning system was put into place last year . It identifies dubious beneficiaries of Community funds who may be involved in corruption .
The Commission is at present checking whether such grey- or black- listing systems could be introduced in all EU policy areas where EU funds are spent .
As regards the candidate countries , the fight against corruption is a priority in the pre-accession strategy .
The accession partnerships outline the programmes and their financing .
They all require progress in the fight against corruption .
The Commission is currently developing two new anti-corruption actions .
Within the horizontal programme for justice and home affairs , all ten candidate countries will be involved in a two-year joint project with the Council of Europe , Octopus 2 , with ECU 1.5 million against corruption and organised crime .
It will focus on improving investigative means , inter-agency cooperation , protection of vulnerable targets and criminalisation of corruption .
Also , a new facility called a pre-ins or catch-up facility , which concerns ECU 100 million for 1998 / 1999 , has been launched to help Bulgaria , Latvia , Lithuania , Romania and Slovakia .
Among the three priority areas is the fight against corruption .
Obviously , all the candidate countries must improve their record on corruption in order to fully live up to the first Copenhagen criteria .
The fight against corruption is also high on the agenda for development assistance .
It now constitutes an essential principle for good governance .
Concerning the ACP states , the communication on democratization , the rule of law , respect for human rights and good governance highlights the good governance concept to be followed .
It proposes an action plan aimed at the protection of the financial interests of the Union .
It also suggests that this be used in other areas of external assistance and cooperation .
On all these points , I am prepared to regularly brief Parliament on progress made , as requested by the rapporteur .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Common fisheries policy : control system
The next item is the report ( A4-0331 / 98 ) by Mr Teverson , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 2847 / 93 establishing a control system applicable to the common fisheries policy ( COM ( 98 ) 0303 - C4-0357 / 98-98 / 0170 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , it is always a great thrill to speak to such a full Chamber , in particular at this time of the evening .
I congratulate colleagues who have turned up for what is a very serious issue .
I would like to make clear to the Commissioner that control and monitoring of the common fisheries policy has attracted a great deal of unanimity , going beyond almost any other issue which has come before the committee .
It is one which we feel particularly strongly about as was shown in Mr Provan 's excellent report which we debated at the last part-session .
It is clear to us as legislators involved in the fishing industry and the fishermen themselves that this is a common policy .
And if we say it is a common policy then there is an expectation that we will have the same rules throughout Community seas , equal enforcement across those seas and similar penalties for wrongdoers throughout the European Union .
That would be a just and acceptable common policy .
It is , however , equally clear that we do not have that at the present moment .
So as a committee we very much welcome the Commission proposals to tighten up control and monitoring of this particular policy .
Having welcomed that report , I would say that we still found areas that were wanting and areas that could still be strengthened .
These are areas which the Council of Ministers should strengthen when it makes its decisions later this month .
What are these ?
Firstly , there is the issue of Community inspectors .
We are very aware that much of their time recently has been taken up with the tuna fleet , with NAFO and with many other areas of Community involvement in the fishing industry .
But their core task is making sure that the common fisheries policy is working properly .
Clearly that is not happening .
So we are saying to the Commission that not only are we asking it to implement its own proposals to strengthen those EU inspectors but also to increase their powers to those of national inspectors .
They should not be mere observers but should be able to take initiatives so that all EU fishermen can be assured that rules are being enforced equally .
The report also says that the way to enforce the fisheries policy must be primarily through landings and what happens subsequently through the supply chain .
That is the way to bring pressure to ensure that these rules work and are enforced .
We are saying in this report that there should be a legal liability - not just paperwork as in the Commission proposal - that flows down through the supply chain so that people who knowingly sell or transport illegal fish - whether they are undersized or out of quota - also take legal responsibility .
At that point we will start to have a real tightening up of this policy .
What else do we need ?
We need better information .
When cooperation between Member States increases we must have a proper exchange of information so that prosecutions can take place in a straightforward manner by national jurisdictions with information supplied by the Member States .
This will expand and increase the powers asked for by the Commission .
Mrs Fraga has brought forward the idea that we must make sure that third countries dealing with fish products in Community waters and landing in Community waters are treated in exactly the same way as our own fleets .
It is a matter of justice and equity .
We have a great opportunity here .
I know that the Commission is very much in favour of strengthening control and monitoring .
We have an annual report that needs to compare like with like and make sure that we can assess what is going on .
We are fully behind you and ask you to strengthen the proposals through amendments and make sure that the Council of Ministers later this month passes a regulation that has backbone to ensure that there is equity so that everyone can at last have confidence in this common policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , there has been a sharp increase in deep-sea fishing capacity of late .
The trend towards the consumption of frozen fish has had a bearing here ; probably it has not been possible to keep pace with the equivalent increase in aquaculture , although aquaculture is responding satisfactorily to a certain growth in the market .
Demand for fish is high .
There is no doubt that the proposals contained in Regulation No 2847 / 93 go a long way : simplifying the procedures , conducting more meticulous checks before and after landing , and using electronic devices .
We endorse these proposals , and are likewise convinced that those being made by the Committee on Fisheries , involving inspectors , will lead to a more responsible attitude on the part of governments .
There is however a broader issue here , which is beyond our control , namely that of international conventions and how to ensure that the fishing industry really does act responsibly .
Regarding international conventions , we are concerned that the agreement on deep-sea species to which we ourselves signed up - both the committee and the European Union - has been ratified by only 18 countries .
This is a major political weakness : we have done our best , but many countries reject such agreements .
We are likewise convinced that the protocol on responsible fisheries , proposed by the WWF , would be a solution , but not all countries accept it .
The FAO code of conduct could be an extremely useful measure in respect of surplus capacity - and in the long term , surplus capacity is a very serious problem for shipowners .
In short , what is needed is an international framework of reference , enabling us to do our job properly and extend our activities to international level .
Moreover , this argument applies not only to fishing effort but also to broader issues concerning fisheries .
Thus I agree on the need to go the extra mile to comply in full with Directives 96 / 61 and 91 / 676 , the latter on nitrates , the former on preventing and combating pollution . After all , both of these aspects have a direct impact on the environmental balance .
Without a doubt , however , a good deal of innovative research is required to devise new and more selective types of fishing gear .
In this context , satellite monitoring has an important role to play , and we are all in favour of it , but selective gear is also important .
Although the multiannual guidance programme sets out certain important aims , the Member States must abide by these aims whilst at the same time carrying forward research .
For example , experiments performed with netting , square mesh and other selective gear have led to significant findings . So have experiments carried out in the English Channel with technical gear for catching shellfish .
In short , the fisheries policy is operating in a range of areas , and control and monitoring are crucial .
This draft regulation is welcome , but clearly everything possible must be done to make fishermen themselves adopt a responsible attitude , since they are the main players in an environmentally friendly fisheries policy .
Mr President , I think the Commissioner recognises the fact , and in the Commission 's proposals it is very clear , that along with common regulation we need common control , and that really ultimately means common penalties .
Robin Teverson and I have been working very closely together on this issue over the last months .
It is significant that Parliament is discussing control measures two months running and it shows the importance attached to this issue by the Committee on Fisheries and by Parliament .
Last month the report went through unanimously .
That was a very important issue too .
This report is really putting flesh on the bones of what we discussed last month .
It is important , when we make regulations , that we make sure that they are applied properly .
Regulations need to follow through not only the catching industry , as Robin Teverson stated in this report , but right through to the retailers : right through the processors and right through to the retailers .
A number of us were very impressed when we visited Norway a couple of years ago and saw their regulatory system : simple , unbureaucratic and supported by the fishermen .
That is what we have to try to achieve within the European Union .
We do not want too much bureaucracy .
I have to say that there are a couple of amendments in this report , supported by the Green Group , which we in the EPP Group will probably not support when it comes to the vote tomorrow .
That is not to say we are against control , it is only that we are against an extra layer of bureaucracy .
We would rather see the control mechanisms from the bottom up , rather than from the top down .
We need the fishermen 's support , we need to ensure that the programmes work properly , and that means local control with the fishermen 's involvement rather than too much heavy bureaucracy .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Teverson on the presentation of a very fine report , which I welcome .
It is a comprehensive and thorough report , containing many innovative proposals and , indeed , amendments .
I agree that there should be , as a matter of priority , intensified inspection and surveillance of vessels against which regional or international fisheries organisations have taken measures of any kind .
This will put pressure , in particular , on those who repeatedly offend with impunity .
The standardisation of engine-house power and tonnage across the Community is long overdue .
There are too many grey areas .
In order for control systems to be fully effective , monitoring effort must be measurable , comparable and transparent between the Commission and Member States , and between the Member States themselves .
There has to be harmonisation and it must come as quickly as possible .
I also agree that procedures must be adopted to ensure that comparable penalties are imposed for comparable infringements across the Community .
It is essential to ensure accurate verification and recording of trans-shipments and landings .
However laudable all of these proposals of the European Union are , they will come to nothing unless there are adequate national inspectors on the ground .
Irish and UK fishermen claim to be the most controlled fleet sectors in the Union , and that need for evidence of inspectors on the ground applies to all of us .
However , when we look to the antics of quota-hoppers and see the hostility of fishermen and other companies challenging TV crews , we can hardly be surprised if both Irish and British fishermen have serious questions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal attempts to improve the control system for the common fisheries policy , with a view to making it more responsible and to conserving stocks .
This is apparent in the amendments relating to the more reliable measurement and comparison of vessels ' engine power and tonnage and to harmonising penalties and inspection procedures .
However , it is equally apparent that these more onerous requirements and procedures are not accompanied by increased funding which , bearing mind that this relates to a common policy , can no longer continue to be borne almost entirely by the Member States .
It is also clear that the control exercised over Community vessels may well continue to be much more stringent than over third-country vessels .
It is quite possible that even in Community waters and / or ports a balance may not exist , while quite considerable differences could well exist in other places .
The lack of funding and absence of equal treatment between vessels of different origin could give rise to suspicion and cause the regulation to be less efficiently and transparently implemented than is desirable and possible .
I would like to take advantage of Commissioner Gradin 's presence here to request her to clarify her own position and that of the Commission regarding the amendments proposed in the Teverson report .
Mr President , all the speakers before me seem to agree on the need to improve , through this regulation , the control and monitoring of the common fisheries policy , and hence the fisheries situation in general .
I wish to say , on behalf of the Green Group , that we endorse the spirit of the Commission 's amending regulation , but we also agree with the amendments put forward by Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries .
We believe that all the amendments should be adopted , obviously including those - and I turn here to Mr Provan - tabled by our group , which we think are especially relevant in terms of improving controls and monitoring .
It is true to say that Amendment No 8 refers to a convention so far signed by only 18 countries , but it is a good thing for the Community to be in the vanguard of such developments , in the hope that they may spread throughout the world .
Mr President , my interest in fish goes back a long time - longer than anyone in this Parliament - to 1975 .
I remember when we had no common fisheries policy .
When we got it we all thought that we would have inspectors who would have the powers of national inspectors in any port , any place in the whole of our association , before it was called the European Union .
At last , in Mr Teverson 's report , we have this very proposal that was envisaged from the word ' go ' , namely that inspectors will have the right to make observation visits without notice to vessels , sites , documents , to every aspect .
For that reason I really welcome this report from the Commission and from Mr Teverson .
We must have a system that is seen to be fair .
I liked the word in the explanatory statement about trust .
Fishermen are always suspicious and trust is important .
Unless the system is seen to be fair to all they will never have trust and it will never really work .
The UK has many faults , failure to support decommissioning and many other things , but Spain has faults too .
For many years some of the fishery inspectors of Spain lived in Madrid .
We have seen films on television showing under-sized fish on sale in supermarkets in Spain .
To be fair to Spain , Britain does nothing about it ; it just lets the situation continue .
At last we have a proposal to try and be even-handed on penalties and inspection .
I really welcome that and the linking of landings , and all the difficulties with trans-shipment .
There is a proposal to amalgamate fish and agriculture .
All fishing interests oppose this , the chairmen of the Committee on Fisheries and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development are against it .
We have taken 10 years to get a common policy .
How dare anybody suggest that farmers are the best people to decide about this vital industry !
At the last part-session we discussed ways of improving the implementation of the common fisheries policy and , in approving the Provan report , stressed the essential part which monitoring had to play in it . Today we are debating the amendment of the regulation on the control system .
As amended in the Committee on Fisheries , Mr Teverson 's report contains conflicting provisions .
Amendment No 1 , tabled by the Committee on Fisheries , conflicts with Amendments Nos 8 , 9 and 10 adopted in committee with the backing of the rapporteur .
Amendment No 1 says that if a system of monitoring is to be fully effective , fishing effort and results must be measurable and verifiable .
Amendments Nos 8 , 9 and 10 require skippers to record in their logbook the species and quantities of fish discarded , something which is not only an additional constraint but also totally unworkable .
How can one check that this logbook is correct ?
It is quite simply impossible .
If this measure were to be adopted , fishermen might well reject the whole of the inspection process .
Efforts to introduce measures which are unrealistic , uncheckable and which carry penalties can only undermine the credibility of the inspection system .
For this reason , our group will oppose the adoption of these amendments .
Admittedly , the problem of discards is a very real one and we are all aware of it , since the Committee on Fisheries is currently drafting an own-initiative report on the matter to be presented to the House shortly .
Other , truly effective ways must be found of limiting discards , which have been blamed for the decline in stocks of certain fish species and which rob us of a valuable source of protein .
We are , however , fully behind the rapporteur in her proposals to harmonise penalties .
Fishermen are in no way hostile to inspections , quite the contrary , provided they know they are fair - fair between Member States , and fair between themselves and non-Union countries .
A good system of inspection must also be simple , easily implemented and not cumbersome , and it must discourage fraudsters .
So it should be possible , Mr President , to make a marked improvement in the monitoring process without adding to Community bureaucracy , but by encouraging exchanges between national inspectors , stepping up checks on non-Union countries and making use of professional expertise .
Mr President , Commissioner , this new proposal for a regulation represents the practical implementation of the European Commission 's communication amending the regulation establishing a control system applicable to the common fisheries policy , which we discussed here in the House in September .
We must finally remove some of the weaknesses of the current policy for monitoring fisheries .
That means simplifying the keeping of logbooks in which catches are recorded , more stringent monitoring of landings of catches , careful registration of fisheries products from the catch to the final marketing stage , Commission access to Member State databases , more careful monitoring of fishing vessels flying the flag of a third country and the possibility of inspections without prior notice by Community inspectors in the Member States .
This is a whole package of measures , which we have long called for in the European Parliament .
Now they are to be implemented .
That is why we note today 's proposal for a regulation from the Commission with satisfaction .
However , in my view a wide range of problems remains unresolved .
This includes , in particular , the question of a uniform list of penalties for the entire Community .
The penalties applied for infringing the control rules differ from country to country - indeed too much so .
The question of how to measure engine power has not been finally resolved either .
So today 's proposal will not be the last amendment of the original proposal , particularly since some very important suggestions were not incorporated , such as involving the fishermen themselves more closely in the monitoring policy - which should , after all , be a matter of course .
Yet we have made quite good headway .
So I thank the rapporteur for his constructive and important report and ask you to endorse it .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Teverson for the effort he has made in his report to again identify the main weak spots in the Community control policy and , in particular , the lack of harmonised standards on infringements , inspections and penalties in the various Member States .
Very little action can in fact be taken against fleets which fail to meet these standards if each Member State continues to apply different rules for the same infringements and also if the data sent to the Commission is so varied that no useful analysis can be made .
Although control is a national competence , we believe that the Commission can do a great deal more to force Member States to harmonize their legislation .
Even so , it is clear that the Community sector is subject to much stricter standards than that of third countries , at least on paper .
We therefore welcome the new article in the regulation controlling the activities of third country vessels . However , we also note that there is a lack of forceful measures relating to vessels with flags of convenience and the activities of such vessels are becoming an increasingly serious problem .
These vessels do not respect any standards whatsoever , be it in terms of conservation , safety or on how they work . This is what allows them to fish in any circumstances and to lower prices to the point where they are jeopardizing the future of many businesses that do respect international standards .
For this reason , we would like to ask the Commission to immediately adopt the control measures put forward by the regional and international fisheries organisations . We would also like to ask that , within the framework of the regulations to be applied to vessels from third countries , priority be given in Community ports to inspecting and monitoring vessels that have been the subject of any infringement proceedings initiated by these organisations .
Given that Mrs Ewing mentioned my country , I have to say , Mrs Ewing , that for quite a while you have had very little to do with matters relating to fisheries . And I would simply ask you to examine now how many inspectors there are in the various autonomous communities in my country .
Mr President , first of all may I thank Parliament and the rapporteur for this report which will be helpful to the Commission , especially in our debate with the Council scheduled for the end of this month .
I have three things to say in the interests of having a frank debate with you .
I fully acknowledge the importance - I see it every day - when one has a common policy , of giving fair consideration to other aspects , namely controls and penalties .
I am pleased to see Parliament becoming more and more federalist - even though , at present , this word has very unhappy connotations .
I am also grateful to Mrs Ewing for at least mentioning the effort we have put in to improve the system of control and monitoring , though some responsibilities still remain with the Member States .
Secondly , Mr Teverson , we may step up our controls but we cannot make a special case of fisheries .
Even in agriculture , the common agricultural policy has inspectors and penalties which are far from being harmonised , and the inspectors , who also come under my area of responsibility , really are far from having all the powers you would like , even if they ought to .
Quite simply , we have not got that far yet .
Personally , I am not even sure the Council will agree to inspectors carrying out observation visits without prior notice , even though this is something we would very much welcome , not in an attempt to displace existing inspectors but simply to have some additional tools .
In any case , Parliament is going further than the Commission 's proposal .
I am grateful , even if I cannot accept all the amendments , for legal reasons .
As regards the substance , there are no points of disagreement between us but , since you asked me to be specific , the Commission thinks that Amendments Nos 1 , 5 , 7 , 10 and 12 - we are happy with the substance of these - are already covered in the action plan .
I could perhaps do more , Mrs Fraga Estévez , and the Commission is trying its best , even considering an action plan for monitoring , which is a unilateral measure .
In any case , I welcome Parliament 's support , and I can tell you that your councils and your governments do not show quite the same willing spirit .
As always , each minister thinks that his own Member State does things right and that it is the others who are the culprits .
I can tell you , since you have seen the latest monitoring assessment report , that the Commission considers monitoring to be mediocre everywhere in Europe , and even in non-Union countries .
A propos of the latter , the international rules are very clear , namely the coastal state has responsibility within its own waters and the flag state is responsible for vessels .
The international rules of maritime law cannot suddenly be overturned .
This is why the Commission has to reject certain amendments , not because it does not acknowledge the problem , but quite simply because international law has not yet developed to a stage where we can cope with them .
But that does not mean that considerably greater progress cannot be achieved already through regional conferences .
I suggest that Parliament does a few sums one day to work out how much fisheries monitoring costs us .
We may find that if we go on as we are doing , the fish we eat will become disproportionately expensive .
That is why we are endeavouring to use new technologies .
We are trying to give fishermen more and more of a say in all this , but without overburdening them unnecessarily .
For example , the amendments on logbook offences , exceeding the 50 kg limit on discards , are frankly unacceptable .
These things are hard to check .
We are in danger of setting rules which , in the case of discards , cannot be policed .
But I agree with you that we ought increasingly to have uniform penalties , which is not the case in all sectors of common policy .
This is something we are currently thinking about : until such time as we can achieve a little more harmonisation , let us at least introduce greater transparency .
Let us make it possible for the sector to know what the penalties are in the various Member States so that interested parties can compare them .
It is far from possible at present .
As regards access to records , I agree , it is just a question of finding the right wording .
It is not legally possible to give the right of access to all records because there is after all a measure of confidentiality to be observed in respect of trade secrets .
Nevertheless , access can already be quite extensive , provided confidentiality is maintained in respect of commercially sensitive information .
As for research , Mr Baldarelli , the problem again is that research is the province of the Member States .
We for our part carry out pilot studies , for which provision is made in our fisheries budget .
We are trying more and more to get Member States to do research and I have to say that , with a few very specific exceptions , generally speaking they are not interested .
We put in a great deal of effort for very little result .
So I hope you will appreciate that we cannot accept the amendments on penalties or inspectors ' powers .
Nor can we accept amendments which are already covered by Article 26 of the action plan .
We agree with the principle of them , but we think they would be better included in other legislative instruments .
As regards personal liability , Mr Teverson , and this will be my final point , since we have opted for monitoring of the whole supply chain , the legal liability will , in our view , flow from Articles 9 and 28 as stipulated in the regulation , in the sense that once you have the papers , any infringement means that the individual is legally liable .
This is how our Legal Service construes it .
Lastly , ladies and gentlemen , I await your own-initiative report on fisheries monitoring .
But I wanted to assure you that this is one of the fisheries dossiers with which we are most keenly concerned .
We are using every instrument we can , including codes of conduct .
I know these are not perfect , but that is the way we have to go when we cannot use regulations .
Thank you again for your support and at the end of the month , in the Council , I hope to achieve some of the success which has not been forthcoming so far .
Mr President , I do not wish to infringe upon the procedures of the House or the interpreters ' time , but the Commissioner made an important point when she said that she thought Parliament was becoming very federalist .
I say to her that probably everybody would agree that the Committee on Fisheries of this Parliament is very anxious to make sure that we get to the stage of more regionalisation of the management of the common fisheries policy and the economic zones .
That is an important point .
She should recognise that this is the background to the report .
On a point of order , Mr President .
The television sets in our offices can , I believe , receive 36 channels .
One of them was a Dutch channel carrying the Dutch morning , midday and evening news .
Well , it is no secret that since the start of the week that channel has vanished from our screen .
Can you please ask the authorities responsible to reinstate it so that we can once again receive the news from the Netherlands in the morning , at midday and in the evening ?
Certainly , Mrs Maij-Weggen , we will see to that .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I see that my name does not appear in yesterday 's Minutes .
I do not know whether this is due to an oversight on my part but I would be grateful if it could be rectified since I was present .
We will try to do that , Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza .
Mr President , I wanted to draw your attention to an article which has appeared in the European Parliament magazine . It is entitled : ' The EPLP 's selection controversy ' .
Much of this article is political commentary which is of no interest to Parliament as an institution .
However , it contains some allegations which are worrying , including one to the effect that persons who wished to become Members of the panel for the forthcoming elections were compelled to sign a memorandum making over some of their staff allowances to the Labour Party .
It is claimed - perhaps justly - that this may be a breach of European Parliament Rules .
Is it possible for the presidency to examine this question and give us a ruling ?
Mr Coates , let me say for a start that the magazine you are referring to is not a European Parliament publication and Parliament is therefore not responsible for it .
It is a magazine which receives support from the European Parliament so that it can give information about Parliament , but the Bureau and our services are not responsible for the content of articles published in it .
Mr President , you are going to have a number of these incidents over the next months .
It is pure politics on Mr Coates ' part .
He is one of the disappointed in this Chamber .
He is someone who is no longer a member of the Labour Party but who was elected as a Member of the Labour Party .
And if he had any decency he would resign his seat now and let us hold a by-election .
I would not like this discussion to become a personal confrontation between Mr Coates and yourself .
Mr President , would you be prepared to agree with me that anonymous articles quoted in evidence are about as useless as statements by Mr Coates ?
( The Minutes were approved )
ECB : minimum reserves - ECB : sanctions - ECB : statistical information
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0332 / 98 by Mr Hoppenstedt , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the recommendation of the European Central Bank for a Council Regulation concerning the application of minimum reserves by the European Central Bank ( ECB0002 / 98 - C4-0451 / 98-98 / 0808 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0329 / 98 by Mr Katiforis , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the recommendation of the European Central Bank for a Council Regulation concerning the powers of the European Central Bank to impose sanctions ( ECB0003 / 98 - C4-0452 / 98-98 / 0809 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0327 / 98 by Mr Hendrick , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the recommendation of the European Central Bank for a Council Regulation concerning the collection of statistical information by the European Central Bank ( ECB0001 / 98 - C4-0450 / 98-98 / 0807 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report on minimum reserves is one of the many building blocks in the intensive dialogue conducted between the European Parliament and the European Central Bank for the purpose of formulating a set of basic conditions for monetary measures .
In his address to the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs on 22 September 1998 , Wim Duisenberg re-emphasised the importance of a minimum reserve requirement as a potential instrument of monetary policy .
As the parliamentary rapporteur on this topic , I am pleased to be able to assist in fleshing out the concept of this monetary instrument .
In the discussion on minimum reserves over the past few months , three key functions of this instrument have taken shape .
First of all , a system of minimum reserves could contribute to the stabilisation of short-term interest rates .
Secondly , such a system could help to increase demand for central bank money , thereby creating and increasing a structural liquidity shortage in the money market .
The ECB considers this helpful , because it gives the Bank greater leverage to operate efficiently as a provider of liquidity and to respond effectively in the longer term to the development of new payment procedures , such as electronic money .
Thirdly , the minimum reserve system of the ECB could also serve as an instrument for controlling the supply of money , since it is able to influence demand for money by means of interest-rate elasticity .
Nevertheless , the use of minimum reserves an instrument of monetary policy is not universally accepted , since it can result in distortions of competition with countries outside the economic and monetary union .
Against this background , I welcome the ECB decision to fix the minimum reserves at a fairly low level on the one hand and to set the interest on these minimum reserves close to market rates on the other .
Both of these measures reduce the risk of transactions being shifted to financial centres outside the euro zone .
In this context I should like to highlight two other important elements of this report .
The first is that the ECB should submit a study dealing with the inclusion of off-balance-sheet items in the basis of assessment for the minimum reserves .
In view of the explosive growth in off-balance-sheet transactions , especially in derivatives , the stability of the entire financial system would benefit from the inclusion of off-balance-sheet items .
The second point I wish to make is that , in view of the increasing importance of electronic money , which the ECB itself has also recognised and studied , something it had not yet done a short time ago - at the hearing there was talk of a 10 % ratio , but a good deal more thought has been given to the matter since then - the policy on minimum reserves should be devised in such a way that it can respond flexibly to such future developments .
The inclusion of electronic transactions in the basis for the calculation of reserve requirements could prove to be an important aspect of the control of money supply .
Let me stress that the purpose of the present report is to provide the ECB with an effective instrument and to enable the Bank to make flexible decisions on how to use the instrument to respond to present and future developments .
That is why I assume that the Council will adopt this recommendation at the next ECOFIN meeting on 12 October 1998 in order to support the ECB in the implementation of its monetary strategies .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , despite the technical character of this debate , we can say that it is of historic significance because this is the first time that our Parliament has been called upon to legislate on issues relating to the European Central Bank , and I think we should take note of that .
The special draft legislative resolution I am bringing before the House concerns the adoption of a Council regulation on the powers of the European Central Bank to impose sanctions .
Under Article 34 ( 3 ) of the ECB 's Statutes , the ECB is entitled to impose sanctions in connection with its rules and decisions concerning the carrying out of its duties in the area of formulating monetary policy and , in a more limited way , in the area of monitoring the banking system .
Mr President , I think it must be seldom that circumstances can have made a debate on a rather technical subject as topical and important as this one .
The events of the last few weeks in the money markets have revealed three things : firstly , that the scope of speculation is virtually uncontrolled ; secondly , that it has brought us to the brink of economic ruin and , thirdly and most importantly of all , in relation to what we are debating here today , that the people responsible for those events and dangers are not only private speculators , but that those who are supposed to be monitoring them are also involved , i.e. the central banks , which not only cover up their speculative activities but also , when the markets happen to impose sanctions , hasten to redeem the losses they would have sustained .
I am referring to the well-known affair , the notorious scandal of the Merriweather hedge fund in the United States .
You may say that such things only take place in the United States , but the ethos and dogma of the central banks are the same everywhere , and we in Europe have no guarantee that things would have been better over here .
Because what is happening is this : we have the phenomenon of the Central Bank of Italy , which itself speculated with public money in the hedge fund that was speculating in Italy with Italian government bonds , which the Central Bank of Italy is supposedly committed to protecting so as to maintain some discipline in the market .
Now , Mr President , who is to keep tabs on the Central Bank of Italy is an interesting question , because the Treaty is quite incomplete as regards the subject of controls on credit institutions .
Who is to keep tabs on the Central Bank of Italy ?
The Italian authorities ?
The bank can retort that it is independent .
We have made central bankers independent .
The European System of Central Banks ?
The bank can respond by invoking the principle of subsidiarity .
So what with independence and subsidiarity , central bankers have managed to acquire rights and powers unmatched even by the divine right of kings .
And they are supposed to be serving democratic regimes .
It is a dangerous situation - how dangerous is clear from what has happened in the last few days - and of course it is unacceptable .
The weapon we will be putting into the hands of the Central Bank to enable it to exercise control and impose discipline is quite inadequate , because we are dealing with a procedural decision - which we must of course adopt , which is certainly excellent from the technical standpoint , as shown by the fact that not a single amendment has been tabled - and your rapporteur 's opinion is that we should approve it and commend the quality of the work .
But we should be aware that what we are doing is quite inadequate , because the checks must become much more substantial if the public is to be protected against the situations that are developing in the international money markets .
Because , with the powers we are conferring upon them , the central bankers should understand that their job is to make sacrifices on behalf of the public and not on behalf of speculators , as they have unfortunately been doing until now .
Of course , central bankers point to their triumph in relation to inflation .
But where inflation is concerned , many factors have played a part : not just the policy of the central banks , but the financial policy and the policies of governments in the area of prices and incomes .
But in the very place where the central banks should have achieved their greatest success against inflation , i.e. in their own back yards , they have completely lost control because the inflation of shares and bonds resulting from speculation - which they did nothing to control , but covered up as we are now finding out - has reached a peak and has created an enormous danger for European stock markets , American stock markets and for the worldwide economy .
We are giving them a weapon today , as indeed we ought to , but at the same time we must warn them that weapons they receive from democratic regimes are intended to serve Europe 's peoples and not its speculators .
Mr President , Article 5.1 of the Statute of European System of Central Banks requires the European Central Bank , assisted by the national central banks , to collect statistical information for carrying out the tasks of the European System of Central Banks .
The information is to be collected either from the competent national authorities or directly from economic agents .
The draft recommendation for a regulation is quite straightforward in a number of respects .
However , I am concerned about certain matters relating to the confidentiality of statistical information supplied to the ECB .
It appears to me that the ECB , in its drive to be as independent as possible , would like all the benefits of this statistical regime but without the responsibility that Eurostat are placed under by Community law .
The good faith of the NCBs in collecting the information on behalf of the ECB should not be prejudiced by the ECB failing to respect the confidentiality of the information in its possession .
In this respect , I have tried in my amendments to tighten up these aspects .
In order to collect the information necessary for carrying out the tasks of the ECB , particular attention must be paid to ' the reference reporting population ' .
A number of issues were raised .
Firstly , on sanctions : if no information is received by the ECB or NCB by the established deadline , a daily penalty payment not exceeding 10 000 euros may be imposed .
Secondly , if the information supplied is incorrect or incomplete , in a form not complying with the requirements , a fine not exceeding 200 000 euros may be imposed .
If the reporting agent obstructs the verification of the accuracy of the information , again a fine not exceeding 200 000 euros may be imposed .
Confidentiality is a big issue and , in order to gain and maintain the confidence of the reporting agents , I consider it a prerequisite for high quality statistical data .
Such data should remain confidential wherever possible .
Looking at the regime itself , recital 22 argues that the confidentiality regime in this Regulation ' must differ to some extent from the general Community and international principles on statistical confidentiality ' .
This is the argument about it conflicting with the Eurostat provisions .
The justification for this is unclear and the use of information should therefore be made to conform with the provisions on confidentiality in the Council Regulation itself .
Concerning the imposition of sanctions , there is no ' get-out ' clause to allow for circumstances where reporting agents are themselves unable to provide statistical information , i.e. there is no provision for a fax machine that does not work .
There should be provisions for this and my report makes provision for that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in exactly 87 days ' time European economic and monetary union will begin .
The preparations for the introduction of the euro by the European System of Central Banks are well under way and are keeping to schedule .
Today 's adoption by Parliament of the secondary legislation permitting the imposition of sanctions for failure to comply with the monetary element of minimum reserves and on the collection of statistical information represents a very important step in this direction .
We should take this occasion to remind ourselves that monetary union is a project without historical parallel .
For the first time in history , nations are ceding sovereign rights to a federal European institution .
In so doing , however , they are gaining in sovereignty over monetary policy .
This point has just been proved once again by the current turbulent state of the finance markets , in the midst of which the euro zone has emerged as a haven of stability .
In this situation , every effort must be made to create the technical and legal basis on which the European Central Bank can best perform the tasks assigned to it in the Treaty .
It is a matter of ensuring that the secondary legislation is implemented as soon as possible .
The European Parliament has arranged its timetable with this objective in mind .
This means that the ECOFIN Council can now complete the adoption of this legislation on 12 October .
The involvement of the European Parliament in this legislative process is only one element in establishing the democratic legitimacy of European monetary policy through monetary dialogue between the European Central Bank and the European Parliament .
It is not only a question of guaranteeing the democratic accountability of an institution which enjoys a historically unprecedented degree of autonomy ; conversely , it is also about the fact that only a policy backed by the public acceptance and credibility that comes from democratic legitimacy can achieve the goals imposed upon it by the Treaty .
That is why a monetary dialogue with the European Parliament is in the best interests of the European Central Bank , enabling it to acquire credibility and acceptance in the marketplace and among the population at large .
The Hoppenstedt report rightly draws attention to an important instrument of monetary policy .
If the European Central Bank is to achieve the aims set for it in the Treaty and if monetary union is to succeed , care must be taken to ensure that the ECB has a set of differentiated and efficient monetary instruments at its disposal .
The minimum reserve is one such key monetary instrument ; it is able to steady the banks ' demand for central bank money and thus to prevent highly volatile short-term interest rates .
Active use of this instrument to prevent speculative flows of capital , as happened in Germany , for example , in the early 1970s after the abandonment of the Bretton Woods system , does not feature in the armoury of European monetary policies at the present time .
In view of the worldwide financial crises and the speculative movements of ' hot money ' , minimum reserves will serve even more purposes in the future .
Potential developments in the domain of electronic money , which could supplant cash and thus reduce demand for central bank money , it is important that the ECB should have this instrument in its monetary toolkit .
Minimum reserves do , however , create problems , in that their use acts like a tax on the banking sector and could result in competitive disadvantages for financial markets in the euro zone .
Now that the ECB Council has decided in favour of moderate reserve ratios and the payment of interest on money deposited with the ECB by way of minimum reserves , the way is clear for the introduction of a compulsory minimum reserve .
The European Parliament can assent to this proposal , as the Katiforis report has also spelled out very clearly in connection with the right to impose sanctions .
So the European Parliament rightly has no objections to the draft regulation .
Similarly , the collection of statistical data is a necessity in the European Union , especially when the money supply has to be controlled in this way ; since the development of money-management and saving patterns in the European monetary union is an unknown factor , a broad database will be vitally important .
As Mr Hendrick and also the draft regulation rightly state , the European Central Bank must be given the legal authority to assemble an adequate database .
It goes without saying that the European Central Bank cannot act in a legal vacuum in this area .
The general precepts of the law must be the yardstick against which its actions are judged .
That is why the Hendrick report is right to draw attention to the problems of confidentiality and protection .
It is important , in other words , that proper provisions are adopted , as the European Parliament has underlined in the compromises proposed in its amendments .
As has been the case over the past few months , European monetary union is still on schedule and undergoing thorough preparation so that it can begin 87 days from now , on 1 January 1999 , and can do so with an European Central Bank which is equipped with an efficient set of instruments .
Mr President , a few days ago , Mr Duisenberg , the President of the European Central Bank , addressed the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs , which is chaired by our colleague , Mrs Randzio-Plath .
He assured the subcommittee that the relevant deadlines and provisions were being met as required to ensure that the operational mechanisms of the European Central Bank run smoothly when the euro comes into effect on 1 January next year .
However , he did suggest that there were still some important aspects that needed to be clarified sufficiently before the euro came into effect .
These three reports , which were approved by a large majority in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , refer to some basic points of those issues that are essential to ensure the smooth running of the European Central Bank .
And , as the various rapporteurs have demonstrated , there are still some fundamental questions that must be taken into account . Similarly , any observations that have been made in this respect must be included , for example on issues such as the reserves , the relations between Member States and the European Central Bank , the level of sanctions , the application of these sanctions , etcetera .
As Mrs Randzio-Plath said , there are less than 90 days left before the euro is introduced and , in these times of economic and financial upheaval , it has been shown that the euro will provide extremely important security and stability for the euro area .
But the euro must be consolidated for this to happen .
And I believe that - from Mr Duisenberg 's speech and the comments that have been made here in committee debates on these basic issues - there is still an excessive imbalance between the running of the European Central Bank and the application of economic and monetary policies by Member States and their own central banks .
This is a matter that we should resolve as soon as possible , and we must take all the necessary precautions to ensure that the euro runs smoothly from 1 January next year .
Mr President , today we are dealing with three regulations pursuant to Article 106 ( 6 ) of the Treaty , covering the application of minimum reserves , the power to impose sanctions and the collection of statistical information by the European Central Bank , which have been drawn up according to a special procedure laid down by the Treaty .
In this case the European Central Bank and the Commission are agreed that the bank itself prepare the projects for recommendation to avoid duplication .
With regard to the regulation on the collection of statistical information , our group , for its part , considers that the amendments adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy define yet again the area and the methods of collecting statistical information by the bank .
The text before us seems to be satisfactory .
With regard to the regulation on sanctions , I note that the bank has been granted powers in a wider area of responsibility than most national central banks on the subject of statistics .
It is not unusual that the armoury of sanctions foreseen by the regulation is vast .
In Article 2 the regulation specifies that the sanctions must be proportionate to the faults committed and provides , before their implementation , for a detailed procedure to be followed which guarantees that the establishments threatened by sanction can evaluate their position before the competent authorities .
That appears to be a good idea .
I come now to the regulation on obligatory reserves .
We must remember that in July the European Central Bank announced the constitution of obligatory reserves from 1 January 1999 , which would be paid at the rate of their principal operation of refinancing of the European Central Bank ; this would guarantee a remuneration at the level close to the rate of the monetary market .
We must remember , nevertheless , that this point does not appear explicitly in the draft regulation .
The legal base on which this is based is Article 19 ( 2 ) of the European Central Bank statutes .
This does not allow it .
On the other hand , certain Parliament amendments propose to include more explicitly in the assessment of obligatory reserves a due date which is linked to posts outside the estimate and particularly to derivatives ' to support a monetary policy aimed at stability ' and contribute ' to the stability of the whole financial system ' .
Some here question the merits of these amendments in the sense that the request is already covered by Article 3 of the draft regulation .
On the other hand it belongs to the ECB to determine , according to the objective criteria , the coefficients which should apply to each category of requirement .
In any case the inclusion of derivatives in the assessment of obligatory reserves could not be justified for precautionary reasons , as seems to be suggested in one of the amendments .
Finally , the obligatory reserves are an instrument of monetary policy aimed at stabilising the rate of interest of the monetary market and at mastering the growth of money supply .
From this point of view , in our opinion , the inclusion of certain derivatives in the assessment is justified .
Mr President , the reports of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy unreservedly approve the three draft regulations concerning the powers of the European Central Bank to impose sanctions , apply minimum reserves and collect statistical information .
These regulations demonstrate the excessive power of the Central Bank .
The direct management of the measures involved would effectively be handed over to the ECB without any intervention by national governments or even national central banks .
No political control would be exercised over the ECB at Community level because the ' euro ' Council is , at the moment , a powerless structure .
Yet I am hearing that the euro zone will be a zone of stability .
I would say my colleagues are being rather optimistic .
If the global financial crisis weakens the economies of the emerging countries , everyone knows that the industrialised countries will also be affected .
This is actually already happening , and it is also clear to everyone that this will have serious economic and social consequences .
Obviously , it is therefore imperative that we begin considering this matter and that we put forward proposals on the objectives and operating procedures of the European Central Bank .
We cannot allow the Central Bank to become the censor of national budgets by imposing policies , in the name of the fight against inflation , which are restrictive in social and employment terms .
It is a matter of urgency that we change the priorities and redefine the objectives of the Central Bank so that it can help by boosting appropriations for employment and growth and so that it can act to limit the free movement of capital and to curb the power of the financial markets .
Our citizens and their elected bodies must have the means to control this Central Bank .
It is therefore essential to establish the transparency and democratic control of its activity , particularly through control by the European Parliament and the national parliaments and by opening up the major economic and monetary challenges to public debate .
Beginning work to redefine the objectives and activity of the Central Bank is essential if we wish to start gradually redirecting European integration so that it really can respond to the needs and aspirations of the people of Europe .
Mr President , here we are in the last furlong of a trotting race that is suddenly being taken at a gallop .
Suddenly there is an unholy rush to complete in a matter of months the work that has lain undone over the years .
We should at least admit that the whole thing is making us somewhat breathless .
It is indeed true that minimum reserves are a key dimension of monetary policy .
Mrs Randzio-Plath has already explained why .
However , we should also perhaps go on to ask whether we ought not to envisage minimum reserves as a means of stabilising the euro in the global context and to create a broader basis for the reserve requirement .
I can encapsulate the reasons for this in the words ' derivatives ' and ' casino capitalism ' .
As far as sanctions , supervision and control are concerned , Mr Katiforis has already said that these are not enough .
When irresponsible traders operate with enormously potent hedge funds , the guarantees set out here will be insufficient , and as far as the statistics are concerned , not even a broad database will give us any genuine influence on real economic developments .
For all we may be on schedule , it is still worrying , I must say , that the present level of technical preparation for the introduction of the euro offers no guarantee against the eventuality of our being confronted with major problems .
As far as political support , adjustment and preparation are concerned , however , I do hope that the essential last-minute adjustments will indeed be effected .
Oskar Lafontaine certainly shows a clear understanding of the problem when he enumerates the main economic goals as follows : reducing interest rates as the key monetary task , putting economic governance into effect , incorporating equal rights as an employment target and contributing actively to the stabilisation of the international financial edifice .
Mr Katiforis rightly said that it is simply not enough to keep closer tabs on the situation .
More supervisory control is essential .
We cannot only protect the rights of those who own monetary assets ; it is high time we also closed the open wound resulting from the lack of democratic legitimacy and control of the European Central Bank .
Mr President , we are in the final stages of launching the euro , which will come into force in under 90 days .
And , as promised by its President Wim Duisenberg , the European Central Bank is sending Parliament its recommendations in connection with the Council 's approval of the necessary regulations to ensure the smooth operation of the ECB and the achievement of the stated goals . The first of these is price stability , but economic and monetary measures are also needed to maintain Europe 's present economic expansion which is jeopardised by the monetary crisis in Russia , Asia and Latin America .
The three regulations in question relate to the application of minimum reserves by the European Central Bank , the power to impose sanctions and the statistical information to be provided by the Member States .
The rapporteurs were respectively Messrs Hoppenstedt , Katiforis and Hendrick , whom I congratulate .
These are essential measures in ensuring the smooth operation of the third phase of monetary union , and they are no doubt consistent with the way in which the money supply in the 11 euro countries will be controlled with a view to making the markets not only more attractive but also safe , which is no simple task or foregone conclusion .
The requisite measures are covered by these three regulations which , overall , deserve our approval .
In respect of Mr Hoppenstedt 's report on the application of minimum reserves , there is a clear need to balance the advantages and security offered by this measure against the need for flexibility to ensure that there is no distortion of competition .
As we know , a system for the application of minimum reserves has three fundamental functions : first , to stabilise interest rates on the money market ; second , to create the conditions to deal with a structural liquidity shortage and third , to control monetary expansion .
The 10 % level proposed by the ECB , on which interest is payable and including electronic money which is increasingly widely used , and the broader scope of its application merit our approval , as do the remaining proposals .
With regard to Mr Katiforis ' report on the ECB 's power to impose sanctions , I agree with his sound and sensible conclusions .
The balance between the ECB and the national central banks under the regulation is particularly appropriate : while both the ECB and national central banks can initiate a sanctions procedure , decisions can only be handed down by the competent bodies of the ECB .
It is thereby simultaneously ensured that the central banks remain vigilant and that the sanctions procedure is uniform at all levels of the system of European central banks .
Lastly , let us consider Mr Hendrick 's report on the collection of the ECB 's statistical information .
Everybody knows that exchange rate and monetary decisions should and can be taken on the basis of the most accurate statistical data possible .
This explains the precautions contained in this regulation and all the provisions that it includes .
I share the rapporteur 's belief in the absolute need for confidentiality of the information that is made available by national central banks to the ECB .
The proposed amendments are more stringent in this regard .
We are living through an extremely important , difficult and interesting period : the birth of a new euro currency which is designed to be stable and is shared by countries whose economies are pursuing rigorous budgetary control policies , but where growth remains strong , in a climate of widespread monetary crisis and instability .
We hope that this new currency will become a factor of stability , not only in Europe , but throughout the world .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have less than three months to go before the euro is with us and the European Parliament is being been asked to give its view on a number of technical points .
Let me use this opportunity to say that the Union should be proud of what is happening .
A new process has been launched - promising stability and growth - and I once again lament the fact that Sweden is stuck with a government committed to remaining outside .
The right monetary policy instruments must be deployed if the European Central Bank is to enjoy credibility . Equally important , however , is the collection of sound information upon which to base policy decisions .
I think that Mr Hoppenstedt has produced a very good report .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy was invited to comment on the ECB 's recommendation for a Council regulation concerning the application of minimum reserves .
In his excellent explanatory statement , Mr Hoppenstedt notes that the importance of minimum reserves is waning .
If monetary policy objectives can be achieved using the other instruments available to the ECB , he argues , the possibility of a 0 % lower limit could be envisaged .
I believe that the scope for adjusting liquidity via open market operations is probably adequate and agree with what the rapporteur said earlier about incorrect use of minimum reserves leading to distortions of competition .
The reserve requirement is also a temptation for itchy-fingered bureaucrats who are eager to tax the banking system .
We can therefore support the proposal for a regulation , since it gives the ECB plenty of leeway to assess whether minimum reserves are necessary and , if so , how high they should be .
The PPE Group has no doubts as to the ability of the Central Bank 's management to make the right judgements and decisions .
If the European Central Bank is to act credibly and effectively , its decisions must be based on correct information .
Monetary policy has to be underpinned by reliable statistics , verifiable by outside parties .
The Hendrick and Katiforis reports cover the provisions for imposing sanctions on institutions which fail to meet their responsibilities and honour their commitments .
I congratulate the two rapporteurs on their good work .
Forwarding statistics to the ECB is a sensitive matter and presupposes a climate of trust between the national and European levels .
Data must be of high quality and based on common standards .
We cannot afford any lack of clarity , although the reporting burden should not be too heavy .
Provided it has the right foundation upon which to work , I am confident that the ECB will be capable of taking the necessary monetary policy decisions .
If it is open in its dealings with the markets and transparent in its decision-making , the foundations for a successful European Central Bank will have been laid .
Mr President , over the last few months it has become commonly accepted that the IMF has failed in its task of rescuing the world 's organisation of its finances .
We are on the brink of worldwide deflation .
The IMF has prescribed policy cures for different countries that have not improved , but only served to make worse , the disease brought about by the virus of speculation .
In all its operations the IMF has been guided by an invisible hand : liberalist logic .
The IMF , with our money , has baled out supranational banks , instead of individual countries .
The ECB is now being given the means to prevent a financial crisis in Europe caused by speculation .
For that reason , according to Mr Hoppenstedt 's report , we have good grounds to include all the financial institutions in the minimum reserves base as well as many of their off-balance-sheet items .
The securitisation of credits and speculation in the derivatives market could generate a bank crisis .
However , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy is mistaken in its second recommendation .
The banks should not be paid market rates of interest on their minimum reserves .
In that way the ECB will be able to more effectively protect the banking system from overheating , which has recently been the case in Asia , Russia and Latin America .
The job of the ECB is not to rescue banks , but societies .
The ideology of the European Central Bank is the logic of free capital markets .
The ECB faces the impossible task of overseeing the same monetary policies for different countries .
It should take heed that Europe does not fall under the control of the logic of capital market inflation and deflation of the real economy .
Mr President , I would mainly like to speak about Mr Hendrick 's report , which concerns the powers of the European Central Bank to collect statistical information .
The European Central Bank creates a source of information from these statistics as a basis for practising a common monetary policy .
This information is in principle collected from various agents in confidence , but as the rapporteur and the committee state , this proposal for a regulation is not absolutely clear from the point of view of confidentiality .
That is why the committee is proposing that this notion of confidentiality should be made more precise and that another Community regulation should be observed in so doing , one that concerns the confidentiality of statistical information .
Information can in principle be very sensitive .
It can even contain industrial secrets , and it may be that inner-circle problems will be caused if this information , surrendered as it is to the Central Bank , does not main entirely confidential .
Information that is not directly identifiable can be deduced , just as the rapporteur says , so this really must be clarified .
All this makes for continued tension when it comes to the demand for openness on the part of the ECB .
The ECB should therefore draft general rules on the public 's right to access documents in its possession without delay and to acquaint themselves with the open regulations on restrictions and exceptions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the euro must be strong and dependable .
In the present economic turmoil of Asia and Russia , we can see that money and monetary policy are inevitably tied to the economy , social relations and politics itself .
Confidence in the market is not enough .
It is the confidence of our citizens that is needed for the euro .
That means the need for more democracy , supervision of the Central Bank and responsibility to democratic bodies .
A central bank for democratic states cannot shut itself away merely to execute monetary policy .
It has to realise it is part of a broad economic policy that takes the social dimension into account , with the emphasis , as we have pointed out here , on employment .
For that reason , I am in favour of the idea of creating a secretariat in contact with ECOFIN , for example , to prepare questions relating to finance and economics .
Supervision of the ECB must be in accordance with today 's standards - standards that acknowledge social responsibility .
With the ECB , money appears to be getting further and further away from democratic systems of decision-making , circulating as it is in electronic form and in worldwide networks .
We seem to have given up the monitoring and control of money , which has resulted in money controlling us and currency speculators controlling entire states .
The decisions of the ECB affect the economy and thus have an impact on employment .
Consequently , the degree of unaccountability hitherto granted to the Bank and its jealously guarded secrecy are no longer acceptable .
Changes have to be made .
The ECB must be accountable and that is because neo-liberalism , which has wrought havoc in the lives of ordinary people , has come crashing down in all major recent elections .
Is the message not clear enough ?
We have to address the big issues like the control and regulation of speculative money and the global giants .
Income tax has risen tremendously in the last few decades , while tax on capital has fallen .
Most lucrative of all business occupations is thought to be that of international currency speculator .
It falls entirely outside the scope of taxation .
At the same time SMEs , which actually employ people , complain that they are taxed too highly .
We have to remember that we have 18 million SMEs and 17 million unemployed .
This is the wrong sort of ratio .
The wrong people are paying excessive amounts of tax .
The euro must be in competition with the dollar , but more is required of the euro than the dollar in the ethical sense .
Ruthless speculation on the stock market causes a great deal of damage .
The speculators are the ones who enjoy the fruits of human labour .
As my colleague Mr Katiforis said , instead of trying to penalise the speculators , we are helping them .
And there can be no good grounds for this .
Many particularly large companies are prepared for the third stage of the euro , the figure being 64 % of them in my own country , Finland .
This is hardly true of the SME sector .
Only 7 % have started to prepare themselves in this way .
The situation is even worse in companies in the service sector .
The SME sector , however , as I said , is the main employer in Europe .
This being the case , I hope that the Commission will produce a guidance package for the SME sector as we move towards the single currency .
Mr Hoppenstedt mentions in his report that minimum reserves act like a tax on the deposits of the banks ' clients .
As a result , there may be a shift from domestic activities subject to minimum reserves requirements to foreign activities free from such requirements .
The banks in the euro area will thus be placed at a major competitive disadvantage compared with non-member countries .
The worst situation of all will be the one that bank employees will face here in Europe before long .
It has already happened in Finland .

Mr President , Commissioner , with regard to the Hendrick report , in my opinion the independence of the European Central Bank and its role of ensuring that the euro is a strong currency fully justify this regulation . This will allow the ECB to collect the statistical information needed for carrying out its tasks .
Unlike our rapporteur , I am not worried about the confidentiality of statistical information supplied to the ECB .
We have entrusted the European Central Bank with the task of independently managing our European currency - the euro - whether or not this suits some of my colleagues sitting opposite me who are clearly nostalgic for systems which have failed where they have been applied , for example in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
I therefore believe that it would be absurd to try and impose obstacles which would block the production of carefully interconnected statistics within the European Union .
Confidential statistical information on , for example , cross-border financial transactions may prove to be necessary .
Preventing confidential statistical information collected in this way from being used to respond to additional requirements would be as overprotective as trying to labour the point using the provisions of such a regulation . This would just be in vain and would involve , for example , the need to limit the constraints imposed on people subject to the reporting obligation .
Everyone is agreed on this .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy voted for some of my amendments , including those which specify that the statistical information may be used to carry out basic tasks , in accordance with Article 5 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
These safeguards , I would say , are quite adequate .
With regard to sanctions , we should refrain from proposing texts such as Amendment No 4 which would only benefit lawyers , by giving them plenty of work , without really limiting the burden inherent in the preparation of declarations by undertakings , however these are affected .
There can be no question , in an area as delicate as the management of the single currency , of allowing reporting agents to gamble on the payment of fines instead of supplying information which the ECB would certainly not collect if this was not essential to its task .
We should not forget , Mr President , that a central bank , as with any other political or other type of decision-maker , will make poor judgements and decisions if it is poorly informed .
Mr President , these three reports on the European Central Bank obviously emanate from the need to regulate the activities of the new institution .
Which , it may be said , is not only necessary but positive .
Regarding the first regulation on the application of minimum reserves , there is clearly some concern about the possible distortion of competition if such reserves are seen as a tax on deposits , and also about the broad margin of manoeuvre that is permitted .
This might be a good time to reflect on the role of reserves in the banking system .
But what we would like to emphasise in this brief statement is that the approach and philosophy adopted in the other two regulations give the ECB substantial power to impose sanctions .
We have already sharply criticised the ECB for not being sufficiently democratic and for having disproportionate powers which are not subject to political control , in the name of unrestricted independence , and our criticisms and concerns can only be exacerbated by this power to regulate and impose sanctions .
We do not question the need for reliable and timely statistical information , but the power to impose sanctions , particularly in connection with statistical information , could create a series of obligations and pressures whereby the ECB acquires new and more broad-ranging power without the necessary political and democratic constraints and limitations .
These regulations , as proposed and as supported by the House , serve to strengthen the powers of an institution which is beyond all form of control . We therefore feel that these powers have become excessive .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the three reports before us , dealing with minimum reserves , sanctions and the collection of statistical information , were unanimously adopted at the committee stage - to all appearances , three more or less routine reports , but in view of the latest developments in the international finance markets they are anything but insignificant .
Allow me , therefore , to make a few basic remarks about these developments .
The background , briefly , is as follows : in the early summer of 1997 , the failure of a building loan triggered mass hysteria among creditors in the South-East Asian finance markets and plunged the ' little tigers ' into a gigantic economic and social crisis .
This crisis of confidence then spread to Japan , South Africa , Latin America and finally , for political reasons , to Russia as well .
The results are sufficiently well known : growth forecasts had to be scaled down , and plummeting share prices led to worldwide losses in the order of four trillion dollars - equivalent to Japan 's entire GDP .
Many of these crisis-torn countries are caught in a liquidity trap from which only an injection of funds can extricate them .
The G7 decision to set up an emergency fund must be seen in this light and is naturally a welcome step .
One of the crucial factors in this whole crisis , however , has been the failure of the IMF to perform its supervisory function properly .
The real economic impact of the speculative movements and the loss of growth that has resulted from this crisis of confidence , which actually has nothing at all to do with purely economic developments , cry out for a change of system .
The present system simply costs the general public too much .
The opinion that finance markets should be subject to control and regulation is gaining ground , even among major owners of capital .
Europe , with its converging economies and stable currencies , has largely succeeded in keeping clear of this crisis .
This stability has had to be bought time and again with high interest rates .
That affects growth rates in turn , but - and this is a decisive point - the use of interest-rate policy as a means of currency stabilisation , especially through the minimum reserve ratio , is an object lesson to European banks on how to behave in a deregulated supranational economic system .
It provides the Central Bank with the means with which to restrict the commercial banks ' lending activities and to control the money supply .
This national instrument , as it has hitherto been , must now become a European instrument of supervision and control .
This is the line of thought that has to be pursued .
One reason for this is that up to 1.8 trillion dollars is moved around daily on the international finance market in the form of speculative transactions - that represents about 10 % of global GNP .
In the case of Thailand , for example , the lowering of the minimum reserve ratio generated a rash of high-risk short-term transactions .
This naturally provided greater scope for the hedge funds , which operate not only in the money market but also in the commodity market and which , because they can be quickly liquidated , lead to a doubling of costs for entire industries .
If , for instance , commodity prices soar because of poor cotton harvests , buyers can already expect to be charged an additional hedge-fund supplement , as it were .
Surely that is not the name of the game !
It certainly has nothing to do with work or with innovations in the finance market .
The general public have to foot the bill , which is precisely why I really do believe that it makes more sense to base a minimum reserve policy to a greater extent on the true-cost principle than on remuneration for so-called competitive reasons , which is somewhat contrary to what Wim Duisenberg has been saying .
But Mr Duisenberg , of course , need not always be right .
Excessive deregulation makes expectation the main determinant of the finance markets , which stop using economic development as their yardstick and allow their actions be governed by competitors ' performance patterns .
Growth and employment must have priority , and that must be reflected in political decisions .
This means that the open market must be governed by recognised international rules .
The minimum reserve is one such rule . The discussion is not about abolishing it but about making it into an effective instrument .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with the present reports we are consolidating the strength and independence of the European Central Bank .
May I congratulate Mr Hendrick on his report .
I believe that he has grasped the main thrust of the case .
It is very important that we give the ECB the greatest possible degree of independence , but at the same time its activities must be governed by the legal principles that apply in the European Community .
I am especially pleased to see that , with regard to the collection of statistical information , we intend to take special account of the interests of small and medium-sized businesses .
We know from many surveys that the administrative effort required for the collection of data , which is often badly structured , tends to get out of hand and to hamper companies in the performance of their actual work .
We intend to combat this problem by means of Amendment No 7 , which seeks to establish thresholds in order to ensure that compulsory reporting does not apply to all small businesses - and even , in extreme cases , to households - as soon as they engage in cross-border transactions .
The European Central Bank itself is to set these thresholds and is to set them quite liberally .
This preserves its independence and the efficiency of the system .
Lastly , it is perfectly natural that the sanctions provided for in the regulation should be governed by the general principles of criminal law and statistics .
For that reason , penalties must be determined in accordance with the proportionality principle and with the degree of culpability .
In the case of force majeure , in other words if failure to transmit data is caused by factors beyond the control of the reporting agent , sanctions are not to be imposed at all .
The present proposals strike a reasonable balance between the need to collect data and the aim of avoiding additional burdens on businesses and households .
The key role played by small and medium-sized businesses in job-creation within the internal market shows why these specific refinements are necessary .
Mr President , we are debating three Council regulations which confer enormous powers on the European Central Bank and which should be considered very carefully indeed by the European Parliament , especially at this time .
I sometimes wonder whether the current financial crisis is happening on some other planet .
The scope of speculation is uncontrolled .
The vast worldwide economic crisis , which is still very much alive and shows no sign of coming to an end , is most evident in the stock markets and the financial credit system , but it will soon have a direct impact on working people , with higher unemployment , lower disposable incomes , drastic cut-backs of consumption and international trade , and a significant fall in production all over the world .
Can it really be that the central banks have no responsibility for the tragedy being experienced by millions of people all over the world ?
Authoritative international economic organisations are already sounding alarm bells in connection with the creation of the euro .
The reports we are debating today concerning the European Central Bank express a historic irony .
At a time when the world 's economic leaders , under the aegis of the International Monetary Fund , are debating how to deal with the impact of the crisis , even to some extent , the European Parliament and the European Union persist in applying old and outdated prescriptions .
These reports place the low cost of banks and freedom of competition above exchange-rate security and protection of the public , and entrust to the central bankers the task of monitoring speculators , a control which should be exercised by politically and democratically elected organisations and bodies .
An agonising question is emerging . Who is to guard us from the guardians ?
Who is to impose political and democratic control on the uncontrolled European Central Bank ?
Mr President , as we know , Sweden will not be taking part in monetary union .
The explanation lies not with the Swedish Government 's attitude - as stated by a previous speaker - but with the climate of public opinion . Swedes in general are highly critical of EMU and they have the support of an overwhelming majority of academic economists , who see a threat to monetary stability if control over exchange rates is lost .
Yet I did not take the floor to talk about Sweden , but rather to comment on these three excellent reports we have before us .
My main focus will be the provisions governing minimum reserves .
Minimum reserves constitute an extraordinarily important monetary policy instrument - one which we deployed with great success in Sweden until 1985 .
Minimum reserve requirements were then abolished in the wave of banking deregulation which followed .
The result was financial mayhem , with annual increases in borrowing of 25 % .
The main lesson for us is that minimum reserves do matter in terms of monetary stability .
Admittedly any such system has its shortcomings. l have three particular areas of concern .
For a start , new liquidity is constantly being created .
Mr Hoppenstedt refers in his report to the recent rise in the number of promissory notes circulating ' off-balance-sheet ' . The effect of this is to boost monetary demand .
Secondly , we have trading in derivatives - which also swells liquidity .
And I can readily imagine that once people have got used to trading in derivatives , they will soon move on to derivatives of derivatives . This will alter the price of derivatives and trigger further rises in liquidity .
Reference has already been made to my third worry : electronic money .
All these elements make it very difficult to come up with precise rules on minimum reserves - and , over time , there will anyway be a loss in effectiveness .
It is not easy to draw a line between institutions which should be subject to minimum reserve requirements and those which should not .
Do we focus solely on the banks , or should we take in other financial institutions ?
Swedish experience suggests that it is wise to have as broad a base as possible .
The constant risk is that peripheral companies will be created , whose very position will enable them to circumvent the regulatory structure .
Another point touched upon was the competitive disadvantage that could arise from the introduction of a minimum reserve requirement throughout the euro area .
Capital is a volatile thing and there will always be a strong tendency to move business to parts of the world where there are no rules on reserves .
My conclusion is that we must have minimum reserves , but these are not enough in themselves to create monetary stability . Other regulatory measures are needed .
In a global world we have to look to global agreements - primarily in order to pre-empt the kind of unhealthy competition just described .
I have just one further point concerning the Hendrick report on the collection of statistical information by the ECB .
My concern is not so much confidentiality as the quality of inflation statistics .
International research has frequently highlighted how easy it is to overestimate inflation by not taking account of improvements in the quality of products .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Telecommunications equipment
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0337 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0342 / 98-97 / 0149 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive on radio equipment and telecommunications terminal equipment and the mutual recognition of their conformity ( Rapporteur : Mrs Read ) .
Mr President , colleagues on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy will know that this is the second attempt we have made to reach a working directive on this matter .
The previous proposal from the Commission in 1990 relied on the ' test house ' method of ensuring conformity before terminal equipment could be placed on the market .
For a variety of reasons which are now , I think , shrouded in history , that directive did not work particularly well .
The Commission has quite properly brought a second proposal here which is shifting the emphasis away from a ' test house ' method of certification to a method involving a manufacturer 's declaration .
I , as the rapporteur , think that is the right approach and have no quarrel at all with the Commission 's ideology on this matter .
The Commission has also properly included radio equipment as part of the remit of this directive .
Again , I think that is perfectly proper .
I was lobbied in the early stages of the first reading on behalf of radio amateurs who were fearful that their own activities could be affected by this , but they are now well on the way to being reassured about that .
I have spent a considerable amount of time - perhaps the Commissioner could comment on this - on the vexed question of harm to the network and the likelihood of harm to the network .
I have tried to ensure that my recommendations on this matter , both in the first and second readings , are in proportion to any likely damage .
Many people concerned with implementation of the directive were naturally interested in this matter .
The proposal , and Parliament 's response to it , also recognise there have been very major technological changes between the first and second proposals .
We have tried to take account of that , as indeed we have tried to take account of the question of consumer interests and liability and , particularly , to take into account the needs of disabled consumers , particularly blind and deaf consumers .
There has been an enormous amount of work , for which I thank colleagues in Parliament , the Commission and the Council , to arrive at a workable text which satisfies all of those reservations .
There was considerable pressure to avoid a conciliation on this .
It is right to say it openly .
I am sure that the Commissioner will appreciate Parliament 's sensitivities about this .
We know that there is to be a major review of all of the legislation next year .
I am sure that if there are any points about this that prove not to be workable in practice , they can be reviewed at that time .
I want to be able to explain at the time of the vote why the compromise text in the name of my colleague , Mr Hendrick , is particularly to be commended .
This is Amendment No 18 .
This is the best option .
I hope Parliament will support it , not just to avoid a conciliation - although that has been a goal - but more importantly to make sure that we come up with a directive that can help the industry , help consumers and particularly help the most vulnerable consumers .
I commend the text to you .
I very much hope it is going to get widespread support across the groups when it comes to the vote later this morning .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the rapid pace at which new telecommunications equipment is developed these days , the liberalisation of telecom markets and the fiercer competition which this creates all mean that swift procedures are needed to introduce telecom equipment such as phones and faxes onto the market .
The directive we are discussing today , the RTTE Directive , relieves the manufacturers of these products of the burden of difficult and protracted national approval procedures .
Our thanks are due to Mrs Read for her help with the broad lines of this highly technical directive and also for the excellent cooperation we have received from her in recent weeks and months .
I must thank the Commission too for the constructive manner in which it has worked with the European Parliament and the Council to improve this proposal , which was very unclear to begin with .
The focus of the directive is the essential requirements which telecommunications equipment has to meet in Europe .
It is very important to telecom companies with their own networks to keep inferior products out of them , because otherwise consumers may get the impression that the network is not efficient .
So the Economic Affairs Committee , on the basis of a proposal from the European People 's Party , accepted an amendment to the effect that competent national authorities may exclude inferior equipment from the network if it is apparent that there are problems and that these are documented .
Why is it so important that they should be documented ?
In the Netherlands if a telephone company , such as Telfort , for instance , can show that an item of equipment seriously harms or abuses the network , the national radio communications authority in Groningen can decide to remove that equipment from the market .
But imposing the condition that documented problems must have arisen before equipment is taken off the market will stop operators from possibly abusing this directive in order to keep new competitors out of the market .
At the same time , this proposal by the European Parliament will provide an incentive for network operators to spend money on expanding and improving the quality of their networks .
Better innovative products do , after all , place more demands on the network .
Operators cannot resist these products on the grounds that their networks are not up to it .
So I believe that this balance safeguards the interests of both operators and the manufacturers of terminal equipment .
Regrettably , Mr President , the industry was not involved to a sufficient degree in the preparation of the Commission proposal .
Happily , the common position adopts my suggestion that the Commission must regularly consult the representatives of network operators , consumers and manufacturers .
This guarantees that these market players will have a say in future developments .
This directive takes account of the needs of the 50 million or so handicapped people in Europe and all praise to Mrs Read for that .
Parliament has made it a part of the directive that disabled people must be able to use telecom equipment either without or with only minimal adaptation .
The directive assumes that manufacturers will operate self-certification but that ultimately each Member States will have a body to oversee compliance with the directive .
So I think this flexible approval procedure will allow the fast-growing telecom market to work better .
Mr President , any scheme that simplifies the European system of telecommunications terminal equipment is surely to be welcomed , as is the special emphasis on the need to ensure that such equipment can be used by people with disabilities .
In actual fact we are faced with another problem , to which too little attention has perhaps been paid .
There is an enormous disparity between the prices of the equipment which consumers can buy in Europe at the present time and equipment prices in other continents .
More and more inhabitants of the European Community are returning from holidays in the United States or Asia with equipment that is considerably cheaper than in Europe .
A method must be found to enable the Member States to exclude substandard equipment from the market without affecting competitiveness .
We have one more wish to add to the list of outstanding tasks , namely simplification of market transactions between the United States and Europe .
Mr President , as always , it has been a real pleasure to work with the rapporteur , and the outcome we are discussing today is a considerable improvement on the common position .
This is reflected in the fact that we are able to accept all the amendments apart from Nos 1 and 13 , and our objections to these are purely formal , as the rapporteur knows .
We also support the proposal she has presented again here on merging Amendments Nos 15 and 18 into a compromise to avoid the need for conciliation with the Council .
The very fact that this directive replaces two directives that we previously adopted , as well as about 1500 national instruments , is proof of its importance .
This means that our change of approach will eliminate a great deal of red tape , and I believe that this alone will enable us to achieve an improvement in telecommunications markets .
The new instrument takes very good account of many special needs , and may I say to Mrs Read , as Mr van Velzen has already indicated , that the provisions which have now been formulated also seem to guarantee compatibility with the networks , so that no unduly serious problems ought to occur in this respect .
It is true that , come what may , we shall have the opportunity next year to review this entire matter if necessary , and I should like to express my gratitude for this opportunity to continue our cooperation .
I believe that the position we have now adopted on the information society in the widest sense is the envy of our main competitors .
We have become leaders in this field , primarily through our technological development , but also through the way in which we have monitored and promoted this development on the political side .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Changeover to euro
The next item is the report ( A4-0304 / 98 ) by Mr Langen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission communication on the impact of the changeover to the euro on Community policies , institutions and legislation ( COM ( 97 ) 0560 - C4-0591 / 97 ) .
Mr President , we are dealing today with a report on the impact of the changeover to the euro on Community legislation and policies , a report that dates from the end of 1997 .
It was tabled by the Commission before the decisions on the 11-country euro area were taken , and we are able to affirm today that some of the tasks referred to in the report have already been completed .
Quite a substantial amount remains to be done , particularly in terms of implementation by the Member States , but progress has been made in the intervening period with the homework assigned to the Commission itself .
The decisions in favour of the euro , I believe it can be said at the start of a debate on this subject , were highly gratifying , and the stability of the European economic and financial area throughout the Asian , Russian and Latin American crises has shown that a large euro area will benefit the people of Europe and the world economy in general .
We can therefore see clearly now that the decisions on the euro may be unreservedly reaffirmed and that this European monetary union can enter into force on the appointed date of 1 January 1999 .
One of the subjects addressed in the report is the agrimonetary regime , a matter we have discussed in connection with Mrs Schierhuber 's report , which is on the agenda for Friday ; this relates to the new scheme that must at all events be ready for entry into force on 1 January 1999 .
The Commission has tabled two draft regulations on this point ; these will be discussed on Friday and are also dealt with in the present report .
The Commission communication covers three sectors in all : the Community budget , agricultural policy and administrative expenditure .
You can judge the intensity of our parliamentary discussions from the fact that a total of five committees were asked to deliver an opinion , and we have finally reached agreement on a report that incorporates the arguments from the budgetary , agricultural , regional , external economic relations and legal perspectives .
The second field is the amendment of Community legislation to provide the legal framework for the euro and the main implications of the euro for Community legislation .
The third field covers the operational aspects of the changeover , which relate to statistics , treasury and financial management , information systems and communication issues .
Let me refer briefly to the main sectors covered by the communication .
First of all , there is the Community budget . The problem of exchange-rate crises and the cost of the financial management these entail have been a considerable burden on the Community budget .
On the expenditure side , about 44 % of payments have been made in ECU and just under 56 % in national currencies , while the vast majority of the EU membership contributions are paid in national currencies .
In the past this has necessitated an enormous input in terms of financial management and resources , since all payments were based on national exchange rates and currencies , but this will not be required in future for the 11 participating states .
As for the agrimonetary regime , in addition to the variable official ECU rate , there has also been a so-called green rate , the purpose of which was to counteract exchange-rate fluctuations , thereby guaranteeing comparable incomes for farmers in all countries of the European Union .
Agricultural conversion rates were used for this purpose , and in recent years these rates have deviated more and more from the actual market conversion rates and thus from the value of the ECU .
When exchange rates shift , the fixed prices and payments in national currencies change in value ; according to the Commission , the old form of the compensatory system , which had to be abolished in 1995 , was costing ECU 8 billion per annum .
Even today , the reformed system can still cost ECU 1000 to 1500 million every year ; in other words , an allocation of almost three billion marks is required in extreme cases .
Only a new agrimonetary regime will be able to prevent these expenses , subject to a five-year transition period , and will only apply to non-participating countries , but we shall discuss that on Friday , especially the question whether a country such as the United Kingdom which has chosen not to sign up for monetary union should receive the same compensatory payments in future as it has received in the past .
The third sector is administrative expenditure , which amounts to about ECU 2.7 billion .
There are 30 000 EU officials ; 90 % of them live in Belgium or Luxembourg , and since both countries have signed up for EMU , some of the problems are surmountable .
But it will no doubt be quite a task to encourage the Member States in which EU officials live to complete the conversion as quickly as possible and to ensure that the European Commission does likewise .
I should like to express my sincere thanks to all the committees which have delivered their opinions .
The report , I hope , will secure the support of a broad majority .
The two amendments tabled by the Group of the European Radical Alliance are misguided , in my opinion . Particularly in the light of last week 's discussion with the President of the ECB , Wim Duisenberg , in the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs , I firmly believe that the House will not feel able to approve these amendments .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , I would like to congratulate Mr Langen on his excellent report and on the goodwill and generosity he has shown in including the modest contributions from our committee in the report .
The Committee on Regional Policy agrees with the warm welcome the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has given to the communication from the European Commission on the impact of the changeover to the euro on Community policies , institutions and legislation .
As the rapporteur points out , this Communication is the result of a wide-ranging dialogue within the European Commission and with other Community institutions .
It is clear that , within the framework of the Structural Funds , the fact that contributions and payments are already expressed in ecus will make the changeover smoother and , at the same time , the exchange risk will be eliminated for participating countries in the euro area .
The situation of the ' pre-in ' countries is indeed very different and we must ensure that these countries are not penalized in terms of their structural measures by the fluctuations of their national currencies against the euro .
The changeover to the euro will have a significant impact on Community statistics and , therefore , we support Eurostat 's intention to re-scale the time-series for primary statistics to guarantee the continuity of this series .
We also welcome the fact that in his report our rapporteur has asked that priority be given to a common conversion policy for the entire European statistical system .
Our committee asks , too , that we use this opportunity to create a cooperation network for administration in the fields of informatics and statistics in order to guarantee coherent systems , not only for routine follow-up financial information but also , and above all , for the general information needed in decision-making .
The Committee on Regional Policy believes that in its information campaigns the Commission should do its utmost to ensure that regional authorities and beneficiaries of Structural Funds are well informed of the impact of the changeover to the euro .
Finally , we would like to point out that there is still a need for a more efficient and detailed study of the impact of monetary union on existing disparities between regions in light of the principle of cohesion .
And we are therefore anxiously awaiting the findings of the general study that the Commission is currently preparing .
Mr President , in what is undoubtedly a good report , the rapporteur has made it very clear how much work awaits the European institutions and how important a prompt changeover to the euro will be to the future of the Community , not only because some 4000 legislative acts will be affected by the changeover , but also because the coming of the euro age will manifest itself in substantive changes to the positions adopted by the European institutions .
The brunt of this effort will naturally be borne by the national administrative bodies , from the tax offices to those responsible for the conversion of parking meters and the levying of public charges , but what we are concerned with here is that the budget of the European Union , agricultural conversion rates , emoluments and pensions should be converted into euros and converted in good time .
In adopting the Green Paper on the introduction of the euro , we in the European Parliament made it very clear that we believe the public sector must lead the way in the introduction of the euro .
Sadly , we could not fail to observe that this has not been the case in the Member States or within the Commission , for it must be remembered that the communication has been in circulation since 1997 .
We see no signs of further progress in the domain of secondary legislation , even though the Commission has rightly agreed that there will be further legislative acts .
For the private sector too , I consider it very important that clarity should prevail and that numerous provisions of ' winmark ' legislation in the realms of statistics and accounting should be regulated as soon as possible .
One reason why this is so important is that it will enable even more businesses to make arrangements for the timely introduction of the euro , since the statistics still tell us that only about 24 % of European businesses actually intend to conduct their non-cash transactions in euros in the new year when the euro age has dawned .
It will therefore not only be important that the budget is changed over to euros , for although the budget is currently drawn up in ECU , most payments into it are made in national currencies , while disbursements are made in both ECU and national currencies .
We can make truly enormous savings in terms of exchange-rate risks and the cost of financial management , and - as the rapporteur has expressly indicated - the agrimonetary system will benefit when prices and subsidies are fixed in euros , since the old regime with its distortions and pressures will be swept away .
The regulation on the introduction of the euro and the other European monetary legislation have created legal certainty and guaranteed the continuity of the Treaty .
No one may be compelled to use the euro , nor may anyone be prevented from using it ; the European institutions are called upon to prove by their involvement in the euro changeover that the euro age has indeed dawned , but that fact must not turn out to be the Achilles ' heel of the changeover process .
I am relying here on fresh dynamism and a new wave of activity from the European Commission and the other European institutions .
Mr President , I congratulate the Commission and Mr Werner Langen on their reports which deal , in some cases in great detail , with very important aspects of the implications of the changeover to the euro in such diverse spheres as the Community budget , including agri-monetary payments and operational spending , customs tariffs and contracts , as well as statistics and financial management .
Their analysis confirms the anticipated positive micro-economic impact of the euro in all these spheres , as a result of the elimination of transaction costs , uncertainty and the current calculations required by the existence of different national currencies .
Indeed , the Commission itself concludes in its report that the overall assessment is clearly positive .
However , we surely cannot expect to cover every last detail in all these different areas . For instance , it should be accepted that the communication proposed in conclusion No 27 detailing all the monetary references in the 4 , 000 Community acts in which the monetary denomination will change to euros is of secondary importance .
Judging by the manner in which the process is currently proceeding , both economic operators and citizens in general will immediately identify with the new currency .
I believe , therefore , that every effort should be made to continue the successful information campaign regarding the euro and , with possibly greater implications , to continue to make the necessary adaptations , ranging from equipment to commercial management , particularly in small and medium enterprises . Also , although it is not a subject of this report , we should continue with the dissemination of the euro abroad , given the interrelationship between all world markets .
The expectations generated by the euro are prompting companies to publicise their choice as a sign of efficiency and modernity , as is occurring for instance in my country .
This represents a form of widespread promotion , and is of benefit simultaneously to companies and to the new currency that we are launching .
Mr President , the report now before us shows , from the point of view of the Commission and of the rapporteur Mr Langen , how many complex procedures we shall have to complete together before the introduction of the euro .
So I think it is most important to be properly informed .
The Commission 's and Mr Langen 's reports tell us that the change will bring considerable savings because in agriculture alone , for example , there will be no more monetary compensation between Member States and abolition of the green rates will save about one to one-and-a-half million .
This prompts me to ask what will happen to the money saved ?
Is there a chance here of extra aid to industry or for information purposes ?
I should like to know a little more about that .
I should also like to say that our group will be supporting the ARE Group 's amendments .
We believe that the euro countries must speak with a single voice vis-à-vis the outside world and that the ECB is the body which must speak for our monetary authorities in international summit gatherings such as the G7 .
Our group has drafted some oral questions on this point for the next part-session .
We shall certainly be voting in favour .
Lastly , Mr President , there is the possibility of new distortion or discrimination between countries which are and countries which are not adopting the euro .
We face wide-ranging reforms as part of Agenda 2000 , and we saw with the MacSharry plans that some countries handled the reforms neatly by devaluing their currencies .
Similar things may happen here .
My question is this : how are the two regulations to coexist in the longer term and are we not going to have new forms of discrimination here ?
Mr President , it is imperative , when the new euro currency and the euro rate come into existence in January 1999 and when the green pound is abolished , that farmers do not lose out in terms of the value of their income supports under the common agricultural policy .
In Ireland at present there are two green rates : the first is for CAP support , such as the payment of export refunds and intervention stocks and has varied substantially over the last eighteen months .
The second green rate is for direct income support for farmers such as premium payments .
The green rate for these payments has been frozen at a favourable level since 1995 and therefore has not been subject to currency fluctuations .
I support Mr Langen when he states that he is concerned to see that European farmers do not lose out as the new euro currency comes into play .
His draft resolution recognizes that agricultural compensation will need to be put into place so that all sectors of society can benefit from the EMU regime .
Those close to our farming sector will be aware of the growing concern about the future viability of our traditional family farm structure .
The continuing decline in the number engaged in farming and the deteriorating age profile of farmers are social indicators which we ignore at our peril .
The Commission has brought forward proposals to the Agriculture Council on this issue outlining possible courses of action .
A working group has been set up in Europe to bring forward conclusive proposals on the basis of draft regulations which have been drawn up , so that a level playing field can be reached on this issue .
Compensation measures for beef price reductions are included in the new draft regulations , but more work needs to be carried out to guarantee that Irish and European farmers are fully protected when the new euro changeover takes place .
The present agrimonetary system in Europe is a very complex regime mainly as a result of the dual rate , whereby expenditures increase due to CAP conversion rates which are higher at times than market values .
There is currently a need for simplification to be brought into any new arrangement , with the minimum of red tape .
This would serve a very positive function for all farmers in receipt of CAP payments in future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Langen report deals with the impact of the changeover to the euro in three sectors , namely national and local authority budgets , agriculture and administration .
As far as agriculture is concerned , it is not enough to limit the changeover to the euro to purely administrative action .
The euro will gain in stability if we adopt a completely new agricultural policy , as this House has so often advocated and demanded , and if the new Commission proposals for this domain are recognised internationally , i.e. throughout Europe .
Let me make one point on the information campaign . It has emerged time and again in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy that the information campaign is a very important central element in the changeover to the euro .
However , let me express this earnest plea quite clearly here and now to the responsible Commissioner in particular : in the domain of consultancy , please do not portray women , for example , as disabled persons , but rather adopt a different approach to the issue .
Allow me to add a few words on the SMEs .
It is not enough for us to launch an information campaign in this area .
The consultancy service offered to SMEs must include the free conversion of computer software and of other facilities .
We must press vigorously for such provision .
We can thus bring the euro closer to the people and remove the hurdle that the euro still has to overcome in this respect .
A brief comment on the preceding debate regarding the European Central Bank : I have the feeling that the previous speakers have been asking too much of the European Central Bank and have been weighing it down with a great amount of unnecessary baggage .
Transparency and control are what the European Central Bank lacks .
That , indeed , must be the core policy on the euro .
Even at this early stage , when I look at the example of Italy and see how little transparency the European Central Bank can operate with , it becomes crystal-clear that transparency is precisely what it will take to prevent future weaknesses and instability .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I did not quite understand the reference made by our colleague from the Green Group to Italy and the lack of transparency in the handling of Italian monetary policy ; she can explain it to me later .
I should now like to turn to the Langen report , naturally to announce that our group will be voting in favour , but also to ask colleagues and the rapporteur to consider the two amendments put forward by Mr Castagnède and myself .
It seems to me - and current events and the latest meeting of the ECOFIN Council have made this abundantly clear - that , over and above the many and varied important points made in the report - not only technical ones , but political ones too , of course - one of the key problems in the changeover to the euro is the external representation of the euro . This is missing from the report , despite being at the very heart of the debate over the past few weeks .
It is no accident that the ECOFIN Council has still not managed to give a clear indication as to who will represent , in international forums , the monetary and economic policy , the economic and monetary union of the euro zone members .
I think that it is important for this issue to be pointed up in the Langen report , so that we can come back to it later and be involved in the overall debate .
To my mind , the President of the European Central Bank , and he alone , would be the person to participate in international meetings on behalf of the euro zone members , in the name of EMU .
Parliament must , I believe , make it absolutely plain that this issue can no longer be fudged - first all three are to participate , then they are to take turns , then it is to be someone else - because all of this only adds to the confusion , puts us in a poor light and prevents the euro from obtaining the confidence which is crucial to its success .
In conclusion , I hope that you will accept these two amendments from the Group of the European Radical Alliance .
Mr President , I have often heard two one-sided opinions expressed in the debate on the euro .
One says that the euro will bring nothing but benefits , and the other that it will bring nothing but drawbacks .
I have little time for either view .
The financial benefits of the euro for the Community budget are obvious .
It is only logical , when the number of currencies involved is ten fewer .
Great savings are also expected in the agrimonetary system .
The so-called ' dual rate effect ' will disappear because there will no longer be a green rate .
But the new agrimonetary system is still open-ended in that compensation will be paid for revaluations but no action will be taken for devaluations , even though the income of the farmers concerned will temporarily have improved .
There is something of a distortion of competition in that .
The financial risk to four Member States is far less great .
The saving of 1.3 billion guilders seems to me to be a cautious estimate .
But if the European Union is to be enlarged by new Member States which do not take part in EMU , the Commission will have to do something about the open-ended nature of the system if it wants uncontrolled excesses to be a thing of the past .
Finally , I cannot understand the political and symbolic significance of wanting to express the salary payments of Community staff in euro as of 1 January 1999 - certainly not when the money concerned is still largely spent in Belgian or Luxembourg francs .
For the staff 's sake I think it is most important to proceed with clarity and care here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the economic and monetary turmoil in the world , as I said before , is so great that it is producing shockwaves in the lives of ordinary people far and wide , including people in countries other than those it which it began .
The issue in Russia is more of a political crisis which has economic consequences .
For that reason , I think that the next EU summit should have on its agenda the question of currency speculation , its taxation , and its control in general .
We would have more than enough to discuss on that subject .
We also have to ensure in particular that , at the start of stage three , structural funds are used for currency reforms , so that Union policy may be fully applied in the transition stage too .
There are examples of many types of operation , such as the administration of TACIS funds , that must be properly in place .
Obviously , the EU 's own institutions have to lead the way here .
I agree with my colleague Mr Langen that reforms to the agrimonetary regime are a sensible idea and very necessary .
The changeover to the euro will reduce losses of income for those who practise agriculture , at least in the respect that exchange rates will become stable .
The position of those Member States remaining outside monetary union will become a problem .
We have to bear in mind that the notion of the single market should hold true in those areas too .
The prospect for the currency of the euro area would appear to be one of stability .
But our citizens need to have faith in this currency , and questions of responsibility have once again to be considered .
I am worried about the position of SMEs in this respect .
In Finland they are barely prepared for the change .
There is a lack of know-how .
For this reason I would like to refer back to the suggestion that the Commission should produce an information pack with SMEs employing staff in mind , in particular for the service sector , which seems to be the furthest behind in preparation for the changeover to the euro .
Mr President , there are now roughly one hundred days to go until the launch of the single currency , and the Commission intends with this communication to assess in full the effects which the changeover to the euro will have at Community level , as well as its repercussions on the Member States .
There will be both risks and opportunities ; obviously the latter will outweigh the former .
We must use these three years , when technically speaking nothing will be compulsory and nothing forbidden , to prepare as best we can , involving the private and public sectors , companies and institutions , and conducting targeted information campaigns for the public as well as training within companies .

Mr Langen 's report quite rightly details all these moves , and says in essence that a number of positive elements should be borne in mind .
The first is the disappearance of exchange-rate risks and the elimination of banking and foreign currency charges ; the second is peace of mind for a whole series of people , be they public servants , for example Community officials , or pensioners ; and the third is certainty for firms that - from 1 January 1999 onwards - at least 75 % of their turnover will no longer be subject to exchange-rate risks , whereby they stand to gain one year or month and lose the next , because all their buying and selling will be done in a strong currency , one which will be a match for those other two strong currencies , the dollar and the yen .
So there will be risks and opportunities , but we must above all assess the risks - even though at present they are outweighed by the opportunities - so as to be ready technically and psychologically for the advent of the single currency .
On this subject , let me end with one minor point .
I would ask the Commission to defer by one year the printing and issuing of the 500 euro banknote .
This denomination is too high , given that we will also be getting to grips with six other notes with new denominations .
In my country , for example , 500 euro are equivalent to a million lire , and the highest value note in Europe corresponds to half a million lire , or 250 euro .
What is more , all of this should be linked to the well-known fact that counterfeit euro designs are already in circulation . One print plate has already been stolen .
Hence the need for psychological and also practical assurances for the single currency , which will usher in more opportunities than risks .
Mr President , the report presented to us is an excellent catalogue of all the financial implications that the introduction of the euro will have for the European Union .
Permit me , nevertheless , to observe that the report perhaps has one weakness in so far as it does not indicate that the abolition of the present agrimonetary system will release a large sum of money from which the Member States ought to benefit .
The stringent savings packages adopted by the EU Member States in preparation for the euro have drastically reduced the volume of public investments in Europe , thereby contributing to a rise in unemployment .
As we all know , public investment in Europe is at a very low level .
In order to strengthen public confidence and thus to achieve increased consumption in Europe , every effort must be made to ensure that the Member States can benefit from the funds released by the introduction of the euro to finance measures designed to combat unemployment .
The total savings should therefore be specifically used to fund a practical reduction in the Member States ' contributions to enable them to take special measures to combat unemployment .
Mr President , in expressing my thanks to the rapporteur , may I also ask him and the Members who have been taking part in this debate to accept the apologies of my colleague Mr de Silguy , who is unable to be here this morning .
He is on his way back from Washington and has asked me to state the case for the Commission on his behalf in this discussion .
It is true that a considerable time has now elapsed since the communication was adopted , and so it might be appropriate for me to give you a brief résumé of the present situation .
I shall begin with the adaptation of Community law .
In cooperation with the interinstitutional working party , we examined the body of Community law systematically to identify where changes would be required . Up to the present time , all deadlines for the formulation and implementation of amended provisions have been met .
We have presented the following proposals : amended financial regulations , on which Parliament is currently deliberating and which , if my information is correct , can be in place by the end of the year , amendment of the regulation on staff retirement pensions and emoluments , which will be fixed and paid in euros from 1 January 1999 - this proposal can probably be adopted in November - and the much-discussed amendment to the agrimonetary regime , which is designed to phase out the difference between the green exchange rates and the fixed exchange rates ; this process can be completed for the countries in the euro zone by the end of 2001 and for the countries that have not signed up in the first wave in the year 2004 .
This proposal can also be adopted before the end of the year .
The amendment of customs and fiscal legislation is also running to plan .
For that reason , we do not consider it necessary to take up the rapporteur 's suggestion and publish a list of the legislative provisions affected by the introduction of the euro .
Incidentally , in accordance with your wishes , we have decided , in agreement with the participating Member States , to establish a new uniform system of commercial interest reference rates for the euro .
The new system will shortly be presented to the members of the OECD ; responsibility for its implementation will lie with Eurostat .
As far as the practical aspects of the changeover are concerned , as your rapporteur has recommended , we are preparing for the changeover of all internal information systems to the euro .
The most urgent changes relate to the switchover to euros for the drafting of the budget from January of next year .
Here too , Eurostat is continuing its work on the conversion of the statistical systems and data files .
Mr Langen has rightly drawn attention to the importance of the information campaigns directed at the staff of all European bodies .
The first phase of this campaign was launched at the start of this year , and a second phase is now being prepared .
Before the end of the year we intend to distribute to the entire staff of the Community bodies , including superannuation recipients , a brochure explaining the effects of the introduction of the euro on pay and pensions .
I therefore believe we can say that the targets set out by the Commission in its communication have been achieved on time , so far at least .
In response to the wish expressed by the rapporteur , we can certainly also submit a report on the entire process that is taking place to prepare the Community for the euro , and we shall probably manage that by the end of November , which I hope will ensure that Parliament is not only informed about the present situation but is aware of the action that remains to be taken .
Thank you for your comments and suggestions .
Mr President , may I express my thanks to the Commissioner for his review of the situation .
On behalf of Parliament and in my own name too , I should like to commend the Commission for its timely and focused performance of all these tasks and to thank you especially , Commissioner , for acceding to our request for the presentation of a general report to the House at the end of November .
We shall then be able to use the report as the basis for another discussion of the various specific measures that we in Parliament can take to ensure that this process is successfully completed .
However , I should like to put one question to you , and I do not know whether you are willing or indeed able to answer it , because this is not your own area of responsibility .
Following on from the request made by Mr Dell 'Alba , I should like to ask whether the issue of external representation of the euro area and the role of the European Central Bank in international conferences could also be included in the report .
As I mentioned briefly before , ECB President Wim Duisenberg said last week that there will be considerable problems with the legal status of the ECB in international organisations because the ECB is not a state , and only states have hitherto been actively represented on these bodies - the International Monetary Fund , the World Bank and the G7 .
The question is whether the ECB needs to have itself drawn into the political realm in this way at all or whether its role is purely advisory .
In any event , Article 105 of the EU Treaty gives it a quite clearly defined responsibility for the maintenance of stable exchange rates and prices .
Should political decisions run contrary to this objective , the ECB might be required to implement them , even though that could cause problems .
One question , Commissioner , which I am aware may be unreasonable : could you provide us with any information about the Commission 's thoughts , and perhaps even those of the Council too , on the subject of external representation ?
Mr President , may I thank Mr Langen for asking that question , because there is nothing I like better than wandering outside the confines of my own portfolio .
However , I must point out to him that there is quite a considerable difference between the subject of the report we have been dealing with today and the issues he has raised , very important though they undoubtedly are .
The report deals with the practical problems that occur in connection with the implementation of our decision to create a common currency .
I think we have reached agreement about the fact that we have done what had to be done and have observed all the deadlines , so far at least .
At the last ECOFIN meeting , when these problems were also discussed , the Commission was entrusted with the task of making proposals in a report of its own .
These are complex and difficult issues , which naturally have to do with the legal character of the Union and with international organisations that are perhaps a little helpless in the face of the dynamism we have been developing here .
We plan to submit that report before the end of this month , so that you can then enter into the discussion , and together with the Council and yourselves we can adopt a position which will ensure that the European Union is duly and properly represented in the global institutions where monetary and economic decisions are made .
There are no grounds , of course , for assuming that , having given an entirely new dimension to global monetary policy by introducing the euro , we should then retire to the sidelines .
That must not happen .
I presume that in this report we shall not only emphasise the need for our involvement but shall also make sound proposals to that end .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.25 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

VOTES
The Danish Social Democrats voted for the report extending Regulation No 1408 / 71 .
The regulation currently only applies to EU citizens and to stateless persons and refugees .
This amounts to discrimination against the 13 million citizens from third countries in the Union , who pay their taxes and social contributions in a Member State but lose their entitlement to social security if they move to another Member State .
The problem is , however , that to be covered by Regulation No 1408 presupposes that the persons concerned already have the right to freedom of movement .
As things stand at present , citizens of third countries do not enjoy freedom of movement within the Union .
We therefore think that a solution should first be found to the problem of freedom of movement for third country citizens .
Once that has been settled , the question of extending Regulation No 1408 can be addressed .
I welcome this proposal from the European Commission because it will remove an anomaly in current social security rules for third country nationals .
This anomaly was flagged up by the European Parliament and I am pleased that the European Commission has taken up this issue and produced this sensible proposal .
Third country nationals who are legally resident in one EU country working and paying tax will be able to transfer their social security contributions to another EU country if they move for work .
This is particularly important in the UK where the national health service has about 40 000 overseas doctors working for it .
Many are very well qualified and are offered consulting positions in other EU countries .
It is completely unjust that at present social security contributions cannot be transferred .
I commend this proposal to Parliament .
We support the principles behind this report which extend the same rights to legally resident third-country nationals who are workers and their families ( as a means of extending equal treatment ) that apply to EU citizens .
We wish to await further consideration of the implications of the details contained in the proposal as they affect the UK , which will take place on 4 November by the Select Committee , before determining our final position , in view of the possible effect upon the non-contributory benefits system .
Leperre-Verrier report ( A4-0342 / 98 )
I am fully in favour of Bulgaria participating in the Youth for Europe programme .
It is important , under the pre-accession strategy for such countries , to provide instruments like this which help to educate people about Europe and give them an understanding of Community policies and their operation .
The urgency of this measure is linked above all to the punctuality and precision with which Bulgaria has provided all the information requested for its inclusion in the programme , particularly in respect of the purely financial aspects .
Wibe report ( A4-0317 / 98 )
Madam President , future historians , if any have the courage to study the role of this Parliament , will consider today 's vote against Jean-Marie Le Pen as an abject detail in a long list of even more abject details .
The only freedoms which the majority in this House is prepared to defend are the freedoms of division , decadence and now even drugs , in defiance of the morals of the Decalogue and natural law . This Parliament refuses to defend the freedom of thought or the freedom of expression .
Nowadays , the great French Jewish historian , Robert Aron , would be condemned for having written on page 178 of his memoirs that he and others took for granted the horrors of the Hitlerian regime of the Gestapo and its work and that , for the rest , they did not go into this in detail .
Similarly , the immunity of the great aircraft manufacturer and Gaullist deputy , Marcel Dassault , who was deported to Buchenwald , would be waived given that he described in length in his memoirs the role of the Communist ' capos ' , led by the Communist , Marcel Paul , and given that , in particular , he described the reality of this camp in a manner far removed from the legend which some are trying to impose here .
Shame on this Parliament which is behaving like a reserve of the Stalinist thought police ; this is a Parliament where no inquiry , no evocations , no condemnation have ever occurred about the endless depiction ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , since 1989 the European Parliament has received 50 requests for the waiver of parliamentary immunity .
It has approved only five , rejected 32 , and the other 13 were inadmissible or incomplete .
No request has been approved since 1994 .
The case law of our Parliament actually takes the view that , in any case where the offence which a Member of the European Parliament is alleged to have committed forms part of a political activity , immunity is not waived , and the freedom of expression must prevail .
This is specifically the position which we took recently with regard to our colleague Mr Campos .
Our case law would therefore indisputably advocate the rejection of the request for the waiver of Mr Le Pen 's parliamentary immunity .
To approve this request would be to take a decision based on who Mr Le Pen is , on the specific nature of the offence committed and on the words spoken .
However , when using its power to waive or not to waive parliamentary immunity , the European Parliament must not take any account of the person involved .
It must not establish a hierarchy for the offences committed , it must not consider the merits of the case , as pointed out in Article 5 ...
( The President interrupted the speaker ) Madam President , you allowed the previous speaker 30 seconds more ; please allow me to have my say .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , I note that the majority of the Members of this Parliament claim to be rationalists and are proud of it .
Whether they are Liberals , Socialists , Christian Democrats or of other political persuasions , they all claim to be supporters of the 18th century rationalism of Voltaire , Rousseau or even Kant or Goethe .
And yet here we have all these rationalists yielding to a totally archaic ideological taboo which is a real insult to the freedom of thought , because Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen clearly stands accused on the grounds of freedom of thought .
To say , as Mr Rothley does , that the German law aims to protect the truth is the very essence of totalitarianism .
The purpose of the law is not to protect dogmas , but rather to protect freedom of thought , because no one holds a monopoly on the truth .
Consequently , this German law whose defence is being claimed in this case is based in the tradition of the Third Reich .
This is no cause for celebration .
I consider that immorality rules in this Parliament , since the freedom of speech , which is an essential human right , is not being respected .
Gutenberg , who lived in Strasbourg , and Goethe , must be turning in their graves .
Madam President , I should like to address the German members of this Parliament who voted to waive the parliamentary immunity of Jean-Marie Le Pen , by reminding them that German bullets , bombs , shells and mines killed tens of millions of men and women in Europe and caused infinitely more deaths than the gas chambers .
However , as you seem keen to reopen 50-year-old wounds , we will remind you of your duty of remembrance .
Jean-Marie Le Pen remembers the German mine that killed his father , but he has forgiven the German people .
Now , 55 years on , a German public prosecutor has the arrogance to ask for an explanation from Jean-Marie Le Pen , a war victim and a war orphan , relating to a comment on events for which Germany is solely responsible .
Do you have so much to be forgiven for that you must look for the guilty among your victims ?
It is not Jean-Marie Le Pen who built the concentration camps .
These camps were yours , not ours .
If you want to settle accounts among yourselves , as Germans , that is your problem , but the time has passed when you could impose your laws on France and the French .
The Occupation is over , the French people are free , and we are too .
Madam President , in waiving the parliamentary immunity of Jean-Marie Le Pen , the European Parliament has committed an error .
It has deliberately forgotten that parliamentary immunities were rightly established to guarantee the freedom of speech of elected Members .
Obviously , the freedom of speech only comes into its own in the case of words which risk causing offence , which may even be shocking , even if this was not the intention of their author .
This is an example of witch hunting .
In France , the definition given in dictionaries for the word ' detail ' has been changed to allow more room to condemn Jean-Marie Le Pen .
In the European Parliament , the last speaker from the Socialist Group , Mr Ford , lied to justify the unjustifiable .
He lied by stating that Jean-Marie Le Pen had described the Holocaust as a ' point of detail ' , which is false .
He lied by attributing revisionist opinions to Jean-Marie Le Pen , because the latter , in a weekly paper , denied the existence of the gas chambers at Buchenwald . However , official historians acknowledge that there actually were no gas chambers in Buchenwald , and this is since the statements made by Doctor ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , Article 9 , on legal matters , of the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities limits immunity , if I may say so , to the performance of duties .
What does the performance of duties mean ?
Should it be interpreted in a broader or a narrower sense ?
Since this is a guarantee , it should be interpreted in a broader sense .
In fact , the Court of Justice of the European Communities has widened the interpretation of this so far that it covers a Member 's whole term of office and not just the session .
And what is the criterion for interpreting the performance of duties ?
For the rapporteur , it is a geographical criterion .
A Member is performing his duties when he is in the European Parliament building .
If Jean-Marie Le Pen had said these words in the building of the European Parliament delegation in Germany , then depending on which side of the door he was standing , he would or would not have enjoyed immunity .
That is quite absurd .
The interpretation must in fact be teleological , relating to the intended purpose .
This is so true that the accounting rules for the reimbursement of travel expenses are not based on the official nature of the building to which we travel , but on the political purpose which we are pursuing .
And this is also so true that , on 23 June 1789 , when the Revolutionary Assembly considered immunity for the first time , it decided that those who attacked the State were to be regarded as traitors and criminals acting against the State .
However , it is true that for you , the State ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , I would ask you to examine , as a matter of urgency , whether this European Parliament is a platform for speeches that repeat the same thing time and again , the selfsame thing for which Mr Le Pen has been cited .
My blood boils , my stomach turns and I am deeply saddened to think that anyone here can desecrate the memory of the Holocaust victims by conducting a debate of this kind .
May I ask you to consider urgently whether we cannot restrict this platform to one such speaker rather than permitting all of them to speak .
Everyone has the right to speak here , Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , and everyone speaks for themselves .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this Parliament has just taken a vote which goes totally against what it claims to defend and embody .
Your vote represents a very serious blow for democracy in Europe , because one of the essential principles of democracy is the separation of powers .
It was precisely to protect the legislative power from the judicial power that parliamentary immunity was established .
Now , the judges themselves intend to define what politicians can or cannot say .
This is what the Munich judge is trying to do , and this represents the total negation of the independence of the elected members .
And you , through a petty hatred for politics , are denying these essential principles . By waiving the parliamentary immunity of Jean-Marie Le Pen , it is not just his rights which you are denying but also the parliamentary institution which you are calling into question .
Now , because of you , democracy in Europe is moving closer to that of Stalin ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , I deliberately refrained from participating in the vote on the waiver of Mr Le Pen 's immunity .
I took it for granted that this House would vote in favour of the waiver , whereas personally I believe that Voltaire 's famous maxim should apply even to the odious politician from beyond the Alps : ' I disapprove of what you say , but I will defend to the death your right to say it ' .
I would point out that I am deputy chairman of the parliamentary delegation for relations with Israel .
In my view , Mr Le Pen represents the worst that politics has to offer : racism , intolerance , incitement to hatred and bigotry .
The German judiciary wishes to try him for having said that the gas chambers are a detail of history : a ludicrous assertion , but still only an assertion .
Democracies must not use against their enemies the same intolerant methods as those used by Mr Le Pen .
Madam President , I voted in favour of waiving Mr Le Pen 's immunity .
From the contributions that we have heard from the right of the House , there seems to be some confusion about what parliamentary immunity actually is .
We have parliamentary immunity in our Member States , which includes immunity for Germans in Germany and for the British in the United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom we have the right to say anything we wish in the parliamentary chamber .
We have full parliamentary immunity , as Mr Le Pen has here .
Despite my abhorrence of his views I fully support that .
But you do not have that right outside Parliament , not in Germany either .
Mr Le Pen , either by commission or omission , overstepped that mark .
Whether he is guilty or innocent is an entirely different matter .
That is something that the courts will decide .
The contributions from the extreme right in the House seem to indicate that it is not on the same planet as the rest of us .
If the aliens ever do take over they may have the same view of history as it does .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen : ' I do not agree with what you say , but I will do my utmost to ensure that you can continue to say it ' .
This is a concept which is at the very heart of democracy , and from which we are a long way removed today .
Conversely , two centuries ago , the bloodthirsty Saint-Just invented an expression which gained a following among all those in favour of totalitarianism .
He said that there can be no freedom for the enemies of freedom .
That says it all .
When those in power become both judge and judged , when they lay the foundation for a single line of thought , when the majority imposes silence on the minorities , when the freedom of speech is challenged , then it is clear that democracy no longer exists .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are no longer in a democracy .
Madam President , I have to say that this is the first time I have voted to waive the immunity of Mr Le Pen .
Hitherto , my stance has been dictated by the arguments put forward which , according to Parliament 's case law , reject the waiver of a Member 's immunity when the accusations against the latter are clearly political in nature .
This is the case with the statements of Mr Le Pen , with these statements as with others .
And yet I have changed my mind , for a simple reason : the fact is that the relationships between the executive , legislative and judicial powers , and particularly the reinforced independence of the judiciary , now mean that it is unjustified for a Member to benefit from any exemption over and above the exemptions that our citizens may enjoy .
What Mr Le Pen would call a privilege of establishment is also therefore unjustified .
Mr Le Pen yesterday asked to be treated like a citizen .
That is precisely what I wish to see .
Madam President , although I demonstrated yesterday the perfidy of the Munich public prosecutor , 420 Members have voted to waive my immunity .
I would say to them : ' Many enemies , much honour ' .
I noticed yesterday the spokesmen for the political groups in Parliament giving their voting instructions , which resoundingly proves that this is basically a political matter conducted on the orders of those who wish to censor individual thought .
The ' Europeanists ' and ' Euro-internationalists ' of this Parliament have seized this opportunity to oppose the President of the National Front , a patriotic Member who prefers his native country , France , to the Europe of lobbies , unemployment , immigration , insecurity , taxation , corruption ... and even cowardice .
Madam President , as expected , this Parliament has once again brought disgrace on itself .
Faced with the diktat imposed on it , nearly all its members have bowed .
Why this fear ?
Why are the words of Mr Le Pen regarded as blasphemy when they would have raised no objection if they had referred to any other comparable drama of the twentieth century ?
What is the still uncertain truth of this history , discussion of which is forbidden ?
Why this strict ban ?
This senseless taboo is primarily down to the Communists , their Socialist allies , the Conservatives and the Liberals who have been so accommodating towards each other because they want to ensure that their own long lists of crimes are forgotten .
However , the involvement of Israeli extremism and its international connections must also be considered .
The precarious situation of the Israeli extremists and their desire for power requires the burden of guilt to be generally and perpetually imposed on everyone else so that they can assert their moral superiority .
The absence of any critical capacity is a prerequisite for the extravagant financial demands which they arrogantly claim should follow on from the reparations which Germany has stopped paying .
If certain Germans , Socialist internationals ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , as a printer by profession , I am therefore particularly attached to the freedom of thought , which is also the first freedom acquired thanks to Gutenberg , who is well known to Strasbourg .
I am therefore horrified that Parliament could vote to waive the parliamentary immunity of Mr Le Pen for a crime of thought .
This House brings disgrace on itself with such actions and lowers itself to the level of a Supreme Soviet .
The fact that everyone is voting according to group instructions and not according to their consciences is particularly shocking .
This waiver of parliamentary immunity today concerns our colleague Mr Le Pen .
Tomorrow it will be someone else 's turn .
So today is a day of mourning for freedom and particularly for Strasbourg .
Madam President , it is incredible and scandalous that this Parliament is today waiving the parliamentary immunity of a man whose father was killed by the Germans .
I myself am the daughter of Resistance fighters .
I just missed being born in a concentration camp and I find it difficult to accept these lessons and these actions .
Yes , we have suffered at the hands of the Germans .
It is true that , today , in order to forget an extremely troubling past , we are prepared to do anything .
Immorality rules in this Parliament .
Drugs are allowed , but Jean-Marie Le Pen is refused the freedom of expression .
Shame on this Parliament which is disgracing itself !
Shame on those Members who have not had the courage to be independent , as the great philosopher Voltaire was !
The lifting of parliamentary immunity of a public elected Member of the European Parliament is a very serious matter .
However , the European Parliament has had to look at this issue following a request made on 17 April 1998 by the Public Prosecutor 's office in Munich relating to statements which Jean-Marie Le Pen had made at a press conference in December 1997 .
Mr Le Pen stated that ' the gas chambers are detail in the history of the Second World War ' and ' the extermination of those who were killed in the gas chambers is to be considered as merely an insignificant part of the history of the Second World War ' .
The Public Prosecutor 's office in Munich has asked the European Parliament to lift the parliamentary immunity of Jean-Marie Le Pen on the basis of Articles 130 and 220 of the German Criminal Code , which provides for a maximum prison sentence of five years or a fine to be imposed on anyone who publicly approves , denies or presents as inoffensive any act committed under Nazi rule .
Mr Le Pen uttered similar statements in France which subsequently led to him being fined substantially .
Censorship is always a very difficult issue to address and the European Union and national Member State governments of the EU must strike a balance between freedom of expression and the protection of public policy .
The right of free speech is enshrined in the Irish Constitution but there comes a time when the State must be given the necessary power to tackle naked hatred which can result in breaches of national public policy or national public security .
I support free speech but not in an unfettered manner .
In Ireland we have the incitement to hatred act , which is a legislative device giving the State power to prosecute those who seek to promote naked hatred in society as well as enshrining freedom of expression as a fundamental right in our constitution .
Mr Le Pen 's comments were made in Munich in December 1997 during the presentation of a book ' Le Pen , the Rebel ' written by the former MEP Franz Schönhuber , the leader of the German Republikaner Party .
His comments were wholly inflammatory and an incitement to hatred and if the German criminal legal system wishes to pursue the matter , the European Parliament should not stand in its way .
I condemn the statements made by Jean-Marie Le Pen in Munich , with regard to both their basis and their form .
The gas chambers are not a ' detail in the history of the Second World War ' ; on the contrary , they are an essential aspect and it is indecent to choose such a serious and painful subject on which to cause a political controversy .
I believe that the French and among them , I am sure , the majority of the electors or members of the National Front , share this opinion .
However , today , the Members of the European Parliament are not being asked about the merits of the case .
They are being asked only if , in response to the request of the Munich public prosecutor , the parliamentary immunity of Jean-Marie Le Pen should be waived .
In this respect , it could be asked whether , in countries such as ours which support the freedom of expression , it is really the State 's role to bring proceedings against the author of certain words , even if we believe that these words are false and reprehensible .
These proceedings would contradict the very idea of the freedom of thought , which contributes to the strength of democracy .
Where would the abandonment of this principle lead us ?
The error must be eliminated by exposing the truth .
However , we are not setting a precedent which could be used in the future by public authorities to intervene in an authoritarian manner in other , as yet unknown , debates .
In order to combat a risk which , in my opinion , is non-existent - namely the risk of a revisionist contagion on the question of the gas chambers - we should not risk committing an abuse which is much more palpable , much more immediate and much more menacing in many ways - the abuse of muzzling the freedom of expression by an official line of thought .
Once again Jean-Marie Le Pen is trying to pass himself off as a victim , the scapegoat of a vast European political plot .
He likes this situation , because each time it helps to raise him to the rank of martyr .
By describing the gas chambers as a ' detail of history ' , Jean-Marie Le Pen is defiling the memory of those who lost their lives , or their loved ones , during this period .
By saying these words on German soil , he is consciously seeking to provoke the European democrats !
He has outraged the German people with his pardon for the victims of the Shoah !
Jean-Marie Le Pen intended to open Pandora 's box , in an attempt to let out the old demons of our common past ; but he has made an error which could cost him dear .
Whereas he tried to obtain a favourable electoral situation from the first two waivers of immunity , the third is likely to prove fatal to him !
This is why he has offered us a new set of words , in an attempt at pathos ...
But he has not moved me .
For the peace and solidarity of our people in Europe , I will therefore vote to waive his parliamentary immunity .
I voted today in favour of waiving the immunity of Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen , just as I voted some time ago in favour of waiving the immunity of Mr Bernard Tapie .
This is because I am personally in favour of abolishing parliamentary immunity , which is no longer justified .
The fact that I politically and morally condemn the theories and points of view expressed and defended by Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen does not enter into the equation .
Therefore , ignoring any political-media context , I would always vote in favour of a request to waive immunity , whatever the circumstances , the legal arguments and the Members concerned .
The principle of parliamentary immunity is nowadays outrageous .
It seems to me to be a privilege which is no longer justified .
The judiciary is now independent and the states making up the European Union all apply the rule of law and are all democratic , and within these states all citizens without exception must be equal before the law .
By this , I am defending a real equality , not a biased equality suited to the political or media circumstances . Crimes and judged offences must not be subject to the vagaries of fashion .
The vote to waive immunity must never prejudge the decision delivered in due course by the competent court on the merits of the case .
Since immunity will not be abolished , I hope that this can always be the case .
Nothing is more alien to the radical beliefs which I hold than the anti-Semitism and racism which are the very basis of the ideology of the extreme right .
All those involved in politics must understand the feelings of the survivors , of the families of victims and of all men free to listen to the despicable words of Mr Le Pen .
However , I will not vote to waive the immunity as requested , and my reasons for this are as follows .
In strictly legal terms , this request poses serious questions .
Together with Alain , the Radicals believe that democracy is not the power of the majority but the rule of law , and that even the most guilty have the right to the protection of the law .
In this case , the aim of parliamentary immunity is not to shelter the Members , but is one of the guarantees of the freedoms of our citizens .
It may be assumed that legal proceedings are always based on punishable offences . We should therefore , on this basis alone , grant all the waivers of immunity which are requested .
This is not the practice of our Parliament , and I believe that we have been right in the past to more often than not refuse the waivers requested , including those involving Mr Le Pen .
Our opinion must not therefore be based on the legal argument of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the weakness of which reveals other motivations .
Might these be political ?
There are several political methods of opposing the extreme right and its ideas .
If it were thought that these ideas constituted a real danger to democracy , it would not be necessary to fight tactically against the parties of the extreme right : they would simply be banned .
As this has not occurred , we must not pretend to be shocked when their leaders say obnoxious things inspired by the anti-Semitism and racism which are part and parcel of these parties .
However , would a ban on the extreme right not be an extraordinary acknowledgement of political weakness , in view of the ambiguous fascinations which it exerts over part of public opinion ?
For my part , I believe that an unsound idea is best combated by ideas , reasoning and confidence in the intelligence of our citizens .
I believe that the obnoxious words of Mr Le Pen do him much more harm than they do to democracy .
I also believe that , particularly in France , the extreme right profits from the intellectual and political bans which it provokes and which feed the paranoia of its leaders and its misled electors .
Is this a case of political morals ?
It is pointless to insist on a web of complicity between the extreme right and a large part of the right which today is assuming a position of condemnation .
There is no need to underline the objective use which a number of the parties of the left make of the neo-fascists in their respective national arenas .
Morals do not come into these choices .
Is morality really profiting when an assembly elected by universal suffrage is asked to pursue one of its own who is also elected ?
I do not think so , and I would invite my colleagues to reflect on the use which could be , which may be or which might be made , in another context , of this fearsome weapon .
In the end , talking about political philosophy with regard to Mr Le Pen honours him greatly .
I wish to do this , however , in order to remind you that the Radicals have a method - that of reason .
In this humanist and secular philosophy , there can be no revealed truths , carved in stone or catechised .
There is no truth with a capital letter , indisputable and revered without the help of critical reasoning .
Truth is humble , non-majestic and republican to a certain extent .
It constantly fights against lies and falsification and keeps away from acts of faith .
Are Mr Le Pen and his cronies denying the Holocaust ?
Are they quibbling about the total horror of this ?
Do they view the gas chambers as a ' detail ' ?
Let them speak so that the contemptible poverty of their thinking can be confounded , unmasked and revealed to everyone .
This is the best fighting option open to the truth .
This is also the only homage which politics can now pay to the victims of this barbarism .
Read recommendation ( A4-0337 / 98 )
We voted in favour of the report , since the telecommunications market requires a regime of the kind described .
We would stress , however , that the commercialisation of the telecommunications sector has brought severe administrative problems . There is now a danger that regions and consumers alike will receive differential treatment .
Difficulties will also be caused by the complex fiscal problems remaining to be solved .
It would have been far better to maintain the national monopolies , with proper structures for public supervision and mutual cooperation .
Hoppenstedt report ( A4-0332 / 98 )
The European Central Bank has just made a proposal to the Council for a regulation allowing the ECB to impose a system of minimum reserves on banks , which may help to regulate the liquidity of the market .
There can have been no doubt that the 15 governors of our central banks , meeting around a table , would end up producing this purely technical text .
However , we would actually be interested to know how this is all going to work , not from the point of view of the technical relations between the banks - we know that the bankers can sort this out themselves - but from the point of view of the economic , budgetary and social balances which must be preserved , even within the single currency .
Firstly , an important question must be asked between now and the end of 1998 relating to the convergence of the short-term interest rates which will be unified on 1 January 1999 .
The gaps are currently very wide , ranging from 3.2 % in Austria to 6.4 % in Ireland .
These reflect the different positions of the Member States in the stages of the economic cycle .
Should these gaps not now be gradually reduced ?
The end of December is only three months away , and it seems unthinkable to unify everything suddenly .
However , Mr Duisenberg , who is very proud of having finalised the rules on minimum reserves , is incapable of answering this basic question .
Similarly , nobody seems able to answer the question about the new mistrust of the markets which , in view of the varying impact of the Russian crisis , have reintroduced increasing gaps in the long-term debt ratios of the Member States .
Is it not the case that Austria has just withdrawn from issuing a government loan due to the fear of having to pay more for it than Belgium ?
Finally , also , nobody wishes to answer the question about the increase in budgetary deficits which is starting to be predicted for 1999 , the first year of the euro , and which is becoming very worrying in the case of Italy .
The Italian Prime Minister , Mr Prodi , has just proposed using the central bank reserves not transferred to the ECB in order to carry out a policy of major infrastructure projects which could revive the economy .
He seems to be ignoring the fact that these reserves are already , in the main , invested in the economy .
Germany will not be reassured by proposals of this kind .
All these unresolved questions simply underline the great lie of the single currency .
There has been an attempt to ignore the real differences between countries so as to improve the success of the monetary unification project , which is the springboard to federalism .
In other words , ideology has made governments blind , and reality will soon have its revenge .
The Danish Social Democrats today voted for the reports on minimum reserves ( Hoppenstedt ) , powers of sanction ( Katiforis ) and collection of statistical information ( Hendrick ) for the European Central Bank .
This should not be taken as a change of signal in the Social Democrats ' policy on Denmark 's reservation with regard to the third stage of EMU , but as a statement of our keen interest in what happens in this area .
The content of the Hoppenstedt and Katiforis reports will have no direct consequences for Denmark of any kind , since it only concerns countries which participate fully in EMU .
The Hendrick report will to a limited extent have implications for Denmark too .
The application of minimum reserves means that credit and financial institutions are required to maintain a certain liquidity reserve , which is sensible for a variety of monetary policy reasons , for example the money market interest rate is stabilised , and better control of the country 's money supply is achieved by restraining the creation of money by private banks .
The proposal for sanctions is to ensure a uniform procedure within the areas covered by the European Central Bank when fines are imposed on the individual Member States , on institutions and on firms .
The aim of the Hendrick proposal is to give the ECB the right , in cooperation with the national central banks , to collect relevant statistical information so that the European System of Central Banks ( ESCB ) can carry out its work .
The information collected will of course be treated as strictly confidential , in the same way as statistical information from Danmarks Statistik , the Danish Central Statistical Office .
Furthermore the proposal provides the possibility of imposing sanctions on countries or institutions which do not report on time , which is also wholly in line with the practice of Danmarks Statistik .
The Swedish Parliament decided that Sweden would not participate in the third phase of EMU , which will see the introduction of the euro as of 1 January 1999 .
The Centre Party is against Swedish membership of EMU and I therefore abstained in the vote on the three ECB reports : Mr Hoppenstedt 's on the application of minimum reserves , Mr Katiforis 's on powers to impose sanctions and Mr Hendrick 's on the collection of statistical information .
With regard to Mr Hoppenstedt 's report , the maximum rate of 10 % , with a practicable minimum of 0 % , represents a clear sign of flexibility in the use of this instrument .
Therefore , without prejudice to the use of other methods available to the European Central Bank , geared to pursuing monetary policy objectives and through which a 0 % reserve rate could be imposed , I agree on the need to remunerate sums lodged with the Central Bank in accordance with market rates , so as to avoid distortions of competition between different financial markets .
I approve of the report in its entirety .
Turning to the report by Mr Katiforis , I am in full agreement with the way in which the European Central Bank wishes to go about imposing sanctions on any public or private operator transacting business with the ECB .
The chosen solution guarantees two requirements which are vital to the functioning of the entire system : flexibility and freedom of action for companies , on the one hand , and the need to protect the public on the other .
I am likewise in favour of allowing national central banks to initiate sanctions , whilst giving the ECB alone the final say : greater controls at local level will be matched by more uniform treatment throughout the ESCB .
As far as the Hendrick report is concerned , although I think that it is essential to introduce a confidentiality regime covering statistical information provided by persons subject to reporting requirements , I do not see why this cannot be handled under the provisions of Council Regulation No 322 / 97 on Community statistics .
A lack of compliance with these requirements would mean that poor quality information would be obtained from suspect ' informers ' .
Finally , I agree on the need to tone down the provisions in the draft regulation imposing rigid , irrevocable sanctions on reporting agents who have not managed to furnish the statistical information by the deadline or in the required manner , or have done so only in part .
Sanctions should not be applied where reporting agents are unable to transmit the data for reasons beyond their control .
Katiforis report ( A4-0329 / 98 )
The draft Council regulation concerning the powers of the European Central Bank to impose sanctions will perhaps surprise even well-informed citizens who did not realise that , in 1992 , they gave such supranational powers to the new institution managing monetary union .
There is , however , a legal basis for this regulation even though it is not particularly obvious : the sixth paragraph of Article 106 of the Maastricht Treaty effectively gives the Council the right to ' adopt the provisions referred to in ...
Article 34-3 of the Statute of the ESCB . ' Article 34-3 of this Statute , which is not contained within the Treaty but in an annexed protocol , discretely states that ' the ECB shall be entitled to impose fines or periodic penalty payments on undertakings for failure to comply with obligations under its regulations and decisions . '
At the end of this legal trail , the ECB gains quite extraordinary powers . It will itself be able to decide on the sanctions to be imposed on undertakings which do not apply its own rules , and these sanctions will be directly applicable , without passing through the filter of national governments , national central banks or Community courts .
In order to properly appreciate the excessive nature of this , it should be remembered that the Commission - a largely supranational body - does not as a general rule have such an independent power of sanction . It should also be stressed that the ECB is not subject to any democratic control .
In other words , the powers granted to the ECB constitute , in their principle , a very worrying supranational and antidemocratic precedent .
What is more , the Bank is clearly determined to use these powers to the full .
It is quite revealing that the draft regulation deals only with sanctions and does not mention the obligations which these sanctions are supposed to guarantee .
Therefore , Article 2 fixes the ceilings for the fines and periodic penalty payments without any mention of the infringements to which these ceilings will apply .
This quite farcical situation at least has the merit of showing that the ECB is primarily concerned with the repressive side of its action .
The European Parliament 's rapporteur , Mr Katiforis , is enchanted by these provisions which he considers to be real finds , satisfying ' all the fundamental principles of the rule of law ' and avoiding ' any dictatorial tendency ' .
That is not our opinion .
We do not know what association of ideas led the rapporteur to the expression ' dictatorial tendency ' but , in any case , the question deserves to be asked .
The ECB recommendation we are debating , concerning a Council regulation on the powers of the ECB to impose sanctions , provides in Article 3 ( 8 ) that revenues derived from the imposition of fines belong to the ECB .
This proposal is justified by the ECB on the grounds that it is an expression of the ECB 's economic independence .
No amendments were tabled on this point , even though the destination of the product of the fines as income for the ECB might be questioned , given that it is not a direct but an indirect result of the ECB 's monetary function .
For my part , I voted for the proposal as it stood , considering that revenues from the imposition of fines represent only one aspect of the issue .
On this question , I would point to the European Parliament 's resolution before the Intergovernmental Conference - document A-0102 / 95 , paragraph 34 ( v ) - in which , amongst other things , we called for ' the ECB 's income ( income from seniorage ) to be considered as an own resource of the Community ' .
Subject to the constraints of what is provided for by the Treaty , it would be appropriate for the whole issue of ECB revenues to be more generally debated at some stage .
Hendrick report ( A4-0327 / 98 )
The proposal before us today would allow the European Central Bank to adopt rules for organising the collection of statistical information useful to its work , based on an arsenal of sanctions which it would be alone in deciding .
The aim is to provide comprehensive indicators of monetary development in the Member States ' which are viewed as one economic territory ' .
These provisions result logically from the principle of a single supranational currency , as adopted at Maastricht .
Leaving aside the question of the principle of the single currency , this text poses three major problems relating to confidentiality of information , equality of treatment and uncertainty as to its limits of application .
With regard to confidentiality , the ECB , which prepared the draft , seems to want to take its quest for independence to the extreme , even to the extent of absolving itself from Community rules on the preparation of statistics , as observed by Eurostat .
This behaviour is even more open to criticism as the Bank would like to be granted extensive discretionary powers . These would allow it to send its own agents directly into reporting undertakings and to examine the books and files of these , in order to verify the information reported or to carry out the compulsory collection of this .
We would ask that the ECB be subject to all the standard rules of confidentiality , in particular the Council Regulation of 17 February 1997 on Community statistics .
The second problem is that all the members of the Union would be subject to the statistical rules of the ECB , but only those participating in the euro zone would be subject to the sanctions .
This curious lack of symmetry may lead to doubts about the reliability of the future statistics . If the threat of sanctions is really essential to the quality of the statistics , what point is there in introducing obligations which are not backed up by sanctions for some members ?
' We are preparing for their future integration into the euro zone ' say ECB officials . The citizens of the countries concerned , who so far have refused the euro , will appreciate that .
Thirdly , how can the text be applied to national official authorities which themselves produce statistics or which define the conditions for the production of these statistics by other bodies ?
The draft regulation prudently avoids the problem , but leaves options open which could pave the way in the future to recalcitrant states having sanctions imposed on them by the ECB .
But this will be dealt with at a later stage .
It is obvious that , in the eyes of the Eurocrats , a draft as delicate as this one cannot be immediately put at risk .
d 'Ancona report ( A4-0211 / 98 )
Madam President , I voted against Mrs d 'Ancona 's final text because , although based on the best of intentions , it has been ruined through fear and hypocrisy .
Yet again this House is guilty of distasteful hypocrisy .
No one is prepared to admit that prohibition has been an utter failure , that 95 % of drugs are moving around freely , that 80 % of crime in our cities and towns is drug-related , and that over 50 % of our prison population is made up of drug addicts .
Once more , Parliament has chosen to close its eyes and believe that the response to all of this is empty words , the idle chatter of hypocritical prohibition .
It is an unpleasant episode for this House , which I hope will soon change its mind .
We have now reached the final stage in this report 's lengthy passage through the House .
The strongly liberalising stance taken in the original version has now been substantially altered after meeting a great deal of resistance in committee . I highlight this because of the fears expressed when the report was referred back to committee .
These fears have proved unfounded ; the referral decision was not a way of giving a pro-liberalisation report a second chance .
We have maintained our commitment to say ' no ' to any European-level harmonisation of narcotics policy .
We undertook from the outset to combat every single pro-drugs statement in the European Parliament and to press the case for an approach to drugs based on human respect and social concern . We argued for preventive action , rehabilitation for those who had fallen prey to addiction and compliance with international conventions .
This is an area where the Union has no competence to act . That should especially be borne in mind given the controversial nature of the subject , with dissension cutting across party lines and national frontiers .
Now the whole exercise has become somewhat irrelevant in any case . The idea was to take recommendations to the UN General Assembly 's extraordinary session on coordinating the international fight against drugs .
That session was held last June and the report is therefore being discussed three months after the event .
The amendments which we jointly tabled have met with a positive reception across party and national boundaries . We are calling for a drugs policy based on prevention , rehabilitation and respect for international conventions .
The European Parliament 's position on these amendments and its attitude towards the undermining of the wording of recommendations 10 and 11 were the criteria guiding our voting behaviour .
Whenever Parliament has been poised to send out what could be interpreted as a pro-drugs message , we have refused to play along . And we intend to maintain that stance in future .
The fact that this report and its predecessor have taken so long to produce surely demonstrates that the European Parliament is not a forum for the promotion of liberal drugs policies .
It is without doubt crucial that EU measures to combat drugs should not be restricted exclusively to repression , given that drug addiction is not merely a judicial or police matter .
For these very reasons , it would appear illogical to adopt the proposed attitude of damage limitation , including the decriminalisation of soft drugs such as cannabis and controlled administration of hard drugs .
A drug-free society , such as the one described by the UN General Assembly , cannot be built on a so-called ' pragmatic ' anti-prohibition policy .
Furthermore , delegating anti-drugs measures to local and regional authorities could create ' islands ' in Europe which depart from national regulations and , hence , from the democratic will of citizens in the Member States .
The reference in the explanatory statement of the d 'Ancona report to Article 129 of the Amsterdam Treaty would appear quite inappropriate to the report itself : that article confirms the Member States ' commitment to take action against drugs-related health damage , including through information and prevention .
This is in no way consistent with damage limitation , which consists in the possible - but far from proven - reduction of the damage , and not in fighting drugs as an escape route out of social difficulties .
Experiments conducted to date , for example in Switzerland , prove better than any report the negative effects of such experimentation , which has always led to huge upsurges in the consumption of drugs . The proponents of legalisation have then calculated that a smaller percentage of deaths from AIDS and overdoses has occurred .
Nor would an anti-prohibition policy solve the problem of new synthetic drugs , which would exert constant pressure for the legalisation and controlled administration of new substances .
The European Union must not adopt a policy which amounts to resigning itself to a society compelled to live with drugs , and merely trying to limit the damage they do .
On the contrary , it must step up its action and boost its resources , targeting them at prevention and assistance for welfare and health bodies , the rehabilitation of drug addicts , exchanges of information between Member States and the harmonisation of statistical and scientific reporting systems . Positive action should above all be focused on young people , so as to reduce the demand for drugs , improve social conditions , and combat marginalisation and unemployment .
For these reasons we ask you to vote against the d 'Ancona report .
Since the start of our parliamentary year , we have on many occasions considered the problems linked to the use of drugs .
Today we are dealing with an essential point : cooperation in the fight against drugs .
Experiments have been carried out for over 30 years , the results of which are well known .
These results must be widely circulated whenever possible or they must lead to additional experiments .
Currently , this cannot be sufficiently achieved or is not being sufficiently achieved .
The cooperation needed in this respect must be better planned .
We have an instrument for this in the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction .
It is up to us to intensify its research and monitoring work .
I can therefore approve the d 'Ancona report , given that it develops these aspects .
I must , however , indicate my disagreement with two other subjects contained in this report .
The d 'Ancona report cannot be blamed for wishing to link drug problems to poverty and unemployment .
However , a failure to take this analysis further would be rather simplistic .
Everyone knows that the levels of drug use do not necessarily go hand in hand with those of unemployment .
The other criticism I have of this report is the weakness of its arguments when repeating that we are overwhelmingly in favour of a drug-free society .
With the exception of the two reservations just mentioned , I consider that the d 'Ancona report is heading in the right direction : that of cooperation in order to solve one of the most crucial problems facing us at the end of this century .
There is a clear contradiction between parts A and B of the report .
The proposal for a recommendation B4-1238 / 96 is extremely dangerous .
It might have been written by a clever lobby of drug traffickers if it had not been different .
It is based on recital C , which indicates the failure of repressive policies .
This is not true .
The policy against drug trafficking , as conducted in Singapore , is apparently producing excellent results .
The report complains that the current policies restrict individual freedoms - on page 17 - although it is obvious that the repression of illegal trade is always going to restrict freedoms .
There must therefore be a balance between freedoms and the authority responsible for protecting human beings .
To forbid the freedom to kill someone by drugs is perfectly legal !
The policy of decriminalising and demarginalising the use of drugs and the ' controlled distribution of heroin ' would profit only the traffickers , as indicated by the former head of Interpol , Car Persson .
It is a disgrace to this Parliament that this report could have been put on the agenda of a plenary session .
Is there any point to Mrs d 'Ancona 's report on European cooperation in the framework of the UN General Assembly special session on drugs ?
This question may be asked on two counts , firstly because this text is an ambiguous compromise and secondly because the UN General Assembly special session on drugs took place last June and the idea , therefore , of adopting this report in October makes little sense .
The text before us actually says very little because attitudes on this subject are basically irreconcilable . This , incidentally , is what caused the first draft report to be returned to the committee .
While it is positive that the report asks the Member States to ' acknowledge that the aim of anti-drugs efforts is a drug-free society ' , it is to be regretted that the explanatory statement has little coherence with the actual text of the recommendation .
In fact , this explanatory statement is marked by the spirit of the first d 'Ancona report and is couched in terms which are definitely not neutral .
Thus it talks of a more restrictive or more repressive approach , involving policies which ban the sale and use of narcotic drugs , and of more pragmatic approaches , with policies of liberalising narcotic drugs .
The whole explanatory statement therefore tries , without saying as much , to push forward the idea that the future , imagination and realism recommend the liberalisation of the so-called soft drugs , whereas prohibition measures would be repressive and archaic .
These are the reasons why we cannot vote for this report , the ambiguity of which clearly has an ulterior motive .
Drugs are one of the main scourges which our societies must face today as they represent approximately 8 % of world trade .

The drugs problem must be tackled with a comprehensive approach , guaranteeing our efforts both in the context of prevention and also through medical treatment and social measures .
Mrs d 'Ancona stresses in her report that the decriminalisation of cannabis and the supply of drugs on medical prescription must not be identified , as the Council is doing , as the opposite of the repression of the illegal traffic in narcotic drugs .
The two approaches are not mutually exclusive !
Moreover , in this respect , the European Parliament approved a resolution three years ago which underlined that a policy of complete repression had not produced any tangible results .
Next June , during the UN General Assembly special session on drugs , we must be united .
Despite the rather different approaches of the European Union countries , the various national laws are gradually moving towards each other .
As underlined by the rapporteur , I am convinced that we must base our European drugs policy on the success of local experiments and that we must develop strategies of cooperation .
Having been referred back to committee , the d 'Ancona report on European drugs policy has emerged looking considerably more balanced .
We now have a set of recommendations on how to prevent drug abuse and the calls for liberalisation have gone .
The adoption of two of the rapporteur 's own amendments , however , means that there is no longer any reference to the aim of creating a drug-free society , nor are the Member States expressly called upon to comply with the UN conventions .
Two important elements from our point of view have been dropped and we therefore find ourselves obliged to vote against the report . Policy goals are not clearly stated and the wording in places lends itself to ambiguity .
I am pleased that this report by our colleague can finally be discussed in plenary sitting .
It has taken five months of patience and relentless consultations on the part of our rapporteur to arrive at this consensus resolution , which will hopefully gain the approval of the House .
I am unreservedly in favour of establishing and recognising experiments carried out locally , as in my commune we have been supporting for years the associations fighting against drug addiction and tackling the drugs phenomenon from the medical and social perspectives .
It is now accepted that a purely repressive policy has not brought any progress in the fight against drug addiction .
Let us therefore allow the people ' on the ground ' to put their ideas into practice , according to the local situations . And we should surely help them , in successful cases , to disseminate their methods .
This is the role which the European Union ought to play .
This is what our Member States should agree to support , at international level , by granting the European Commission a Community negotiating mandate for the United Nations Conference - with this mandate based on a pragmatic approach to the drugs problem - and , at national level , by implementing an urban policy able to assist the anti-drugs policies developed locally .
This is what Mrs d 'Ancona 's report demands , and that is why I voted for it without any qualms .
Illegal drugs are one of the scourges afflicting our societies and also one of the most tempting sources of illegal profits .
As stated by our rapporteur , this problem has many causes : pursuit of profit , social impoverishment and marginalisation , and also curiosity , prosperity and fashionable trends .
The fight against illegal drugs must therefore be undertaken within a comprehensive approach which combines sectors of action as diverse as the information and education of young people , the transformation of objective socio-economic conditions which contribute to the development of drug addiction in all its forms , assistance for drug addicts , the fight against traffickers and money laundering , and the economic and social development of the producing countries .
Everyone knows how crucial and burning this issue is , with the partisans of prohibition and the tenants of an ' alternative policy ' often poles apart .
We must now advance beyond this fruitless debate and concentrate on how to implement , as effectively as possible , the conclusions of the UN General Assembly special session on international cooperation in the fight against drugs which was held in June .
This is even more important now as it is clear to everyone that the eradication of illegal drugs - which must be our common aim - requires , more than anything else , close international cooperation , particularly in the areas which are wanting , highlighted by the UN special session : reduction of production and demand by 2003 and international legal cooperation in its various forms .
If we are at long last to talk meaningfully and realistically about one of our century 's worst scourges , drugs , we must first decide to remove the narcotic gag of hypocrisy , wishful thinking , embellishment and cover-up from the mouth of tragic truth .
Dilemmas such as whether or not to legalise hard and soft drugs are disorienting , dangerous and false , because reality is always harsh , both for drug users and for society , which always ends up paying the high price .
Thousands of people , most of them young , are dying each year as the result of drug abuse .
Every day , tens of thousands of people lose their dignity , personality and basic identity and fall victims to the cure-all ' fix ' that shields them from the problems they face .


It is those problems which are the first and greatest cause of drug dealing , and the ones to blame are those who bear a heavy responsibility for creating them , those who then shed crocodile tears about the extent of the problem and how difficult it is to deal with it ; the policies which create conditions of occupational , social and emotional insecurity and marginalisation , which have corrupted values and created decadent societies ; the modern capitalist societies you are so proud about that you amplify their main characteristics every day - the pursuit of profit , the prevalence of the laws of the jungle in the markets , the devaluation of man and the deification of money ; a system incapable of creating real and earthly paradises which leads to wretchedness , personal and social isolation and the quest for false avenues of escape and paradises via drugs .
The capitalist system will never solve the drugs problem , not just because it is the inherent cause of its existence , but mainly because it is both served and nourished by the problem .
It numbs the conscience , reactions and resistance , it absorbs the emotional , existential shocks and dreams of certain specific social groups , mainly the young . ' Escape ' gives life to the establishment and is the best possible safety valve for the smooth and untroubled operation of its markets .
Let us not deceive ourselves : apart from anything else , the drug market deals in vast sums of money , supports governments and ' adjusts ' markets .
We cannot , however , remain indifferent and inactive to this gangrene , nor to the ineffectiveness of our policies so far .
Large-scale organised crime must be attacked , and we must expose the links between the various forms of authority which provide what is drug trafficking in name alone with all the protection it needs for the transfer and ' laundering ' of the huge sums of dirty money it deals in .
The most substantive approach to preventing and dealing with the problem is the struggle to create a different society , one centred upon man , in which man 's values and dreams will not be subject to the fluctuations and crises of the money markets - a society to which people have access and in which they can participate , and one which respects personalities and creativity .
I voted for this report as did most Labour MEPs because I feel that in this highly charged and controversial area , the rapporteur has achieved in her resolution a good , balanced approach .
It proposes greater coordination and cooperation between Member States in dealing with the serious problem of the escalating use of illegal drugs , whilst recognizing that - with the current divergences of view in the policies adopted by different countries - full harmonization is not practicable at the present time .
There are many good , sensible proposals contained in the resolution for expanding education about and awareness of the dangers of drug taking - especially amongst young people - and on the health treatment and care of addicts .
Also practical suggestions for improving EU cooperation in apprehending and prosecuting drug dealers and for seeking support from the authorities and people of those countries which are the main sources of illegal drugs .
This resolution is certainly not soft on drugs .
It embodies tough - but practical and realistic - proposals for tackling this worrying problem .
The tenor of the drugs debate in the European Parliament clearly demonstrates that harmonised legislation is not feasible .
Nor do we consider it desirable .
Amendment No 3 , which calls upon the Council to confirm that drugs legislation should be handled at national level , therefore determined our decision on the final vote .
I welcome this report from the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs of the European Parliament which highlights the dangers of synthetic drugs in society and the need to fight organised crime in drug trafficking .
Synthetic drugs such as ecstasy , LSD and amphetamines are dangers to the public health of the people of the EU and I am happy to see that the vast majority of Members in the European Parliament recognises this fact .
Our young people simply do not know the long-term physical and psychological effects of the use of these dangerous and addictive drugs and more research is required into the effects of the use of such substances .
Some members of the Green group of the European Parliament had previously tabled draft amendments defining users of synthetic drugs as only consumers and endeavouring to have the use of synthetic drugs regulated and legalised .
We must remember that the UN Convention against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs prohibits the use , manufacture and distribution of ecstasy , LSD and amphetamines and that is the way it should remain .
While most European governments including the Irish Government are trying to implement policies which have the objective of reducing drug use , some members of the Green group of the European Parliament are promoting policies which clearly have the effect of increasing drug use with its resulting social problems .
I would like to welcome the fact that the Irish Government has set up a young people 's facilities and services fund at a cost of £ 30 million which was put in place earlier this year .
The purpose of this fund is to develop youth facilities including sport and recreational facilities and services in disadvantaged areas where significant drug problems exist .
The Irish Government is also correct to take a tough line with those people who try to sell drugs in Ireland .
I fully support the provisions of the Criminal Justice Bill 1997 which introduces mandatory prison sentences for those caught in possession of controlled drugs valued at £ 10 000 or more .
We find it rather strange that Parliament should reject Amendment No 4 , which argues that the development of new strategies to combat drugs should be in line with the UN 's drugs conventions of 1961 , 1971 and 1988 .
The European Parliament has also said no to cooperating with UNDCP and the Member States in establishing evaluation indicators . The view seems to be that EMCDDA and other European bodies are sufficient .
We have sadly come to doubt the European Parliament 's willingness to cooperate within the spirit of the UN and to work with its institutions .
It is both shocking and distressing that a sizeable majority should have voted against Amendment No 3 , which sought assurances that no Treaty provisions would be used to force Member States to harmonise their drugs legislation .
Given the way it voted on Amendment No 10 , it is also clear that Parliament has no interest in learning from those countries that have been implementing restrictive policies . Priority is instead given to preventive action .
For some inexplicable reason , the principle that the goal of treatment and care should be to promote a drug-free life was also rejected .
This is particularly lamentable and we look ahead with concern and trepidation to Mrs d 'Ancona 's next report , which will deal with the EU 's drugs policy for the years 2000-2006 .
For these reasons we voted against the report .
I would like to begin my comments by commending the Irish police and all the Irish state agencies involved in their unenviable task of defeating illegal drug circulation in Ireland as well as assisting drug users in rehabilitation programmes .
There is a drugs problem in Ireland .
While the main drug circulated in Ireland is cannabis , the most serious problems relating to drug abuse are associated with heroin , ecstasy and other drugs such as LSD .
In fact the use of ecstasy is very much on the increase .
In Ireland , in 1991 , there were 429 ecstasy tablets seized compared to 17 516 tablets in 1997 .
The 1997 Annual Report on the state of the drugs problem in the European Union , published by the European Monitoring Centre for drugs and drug addiction , points out that the upward trend in the number of drug-related deaths has continued in Ireland .
In fact , the report indicates that 4 out of 10 Irish school-going teenagers admit that they have used cannabis , which is twice the average in most EU states .
I would like to briefly turn to comment on a few of the measures which the Irish Government is taking to address the rising drug problem in Ireland .
A multi-agency approach , involving the Department of Health and Children , Justice , Equality and Law Reform , Environment and Local Government and Education and Science and their respective agencies have been identified by the government as providing the best possible framework to deal with the drugs problem in Ireland .
I fully agree with this strategy because the need for a coordinated approach is especially apparent to those charged with law enforcement .
The connection between drug dealing , drug addiction and crime is well established .
Measures to improve the EU response to the drugs problem have continued through the activities of the Horizontal Drugs Group .
A key part of this work has been the development of a post-1999 EU drugs strategy and the elaboration of priorities for the period 1998 / 1999 .
The Treaty of Amsterdam is another important element in the EU 's fight against drug trafficking and organised crime .
It sets out a more specific mandate for closer cooperation between police forces , customs authorities and other law enforcement agencies within the European Union , which is also to be welcomed .
The Danish Social Democrats today voted for the d 'Ancona report on European cooperation in the framework of the UN General Assembly special session on drugs .
Legislation on drugs varies considerably from one Member State to another .
We should therefore not under any circumstances try to harmonise the Member States ' legislation in this field .
At Community level we must have practical cooperation under which effective action can be taken against organised crime , which is smuggling and selling drugs across frontiers on a grand scale .
Beyond that it is up to the Member States to lay down national policy on drugs .
That should of course not prevent us learning from each other 's experiences , both good and bad .
Common drugs legislation at EU level is neither appropriate nor desirable .
The report on drugs contains many positive and good elements .
It is important in gaining an understanding of and in any work on drug addiction to focus on the individual 's social conditions and marginalisation in society .
To believe that it is possible to achieve a completely drug-free society is utopian .
It is therefore crucial to focus efforts on prevention and treatment .
However , we think that drugs legislation is a national matter ; it is thus not desirable , let alone possible , to force the Member States to harmonise their drugs policies .
We cannot therefore vote for the final report , since it does not accommodate this view .
The d 'Ancona report makes a large number of positive recommendations which would be of enormous use in the fight against drugs .
I strongly support the emphasis on prevention and on providing better treatment facilities for addicts .
I also welcome the fact that a recommendation in an earlier draft , suggesting that more consideration be given to legalisation of some drugs , has been dropped .
The main thrust of the recommendations has received qualified support from organisations in Dublin working on the drugs problem .
Europe must work towards trying to achieve a drug-free society .
Too many people are consigned to a lifetime of drug use - even if prescribed and under supervision .
Methadone , according to recent research , is not the panacea for controlling or treating the problem .
A higher profile should be given to drug-free lifestyles and to treatments and rehabilitation programmes that work towards this aim .
I also want to see the EU acknowledging and directly supporting the role of local communities in combating the drugs problem , particularly in relation to community and family support systems to cope with the consequences of drug addiction on the health of the family as well as on the individual .
Europe must also actively support treatment and rehabilitation programmes relevant to community needs .
This is a unequal struggle .
In comparison to the astronomical profits of drug traffickers , the funds available to those who seek to oppose them are laughable .
The uncontrolled expansion of synthetic drugs , which are manufactured close to consumers , has further complicated the task .
Police and judicial resources may be increased ; Legislation may be harmonised ; People may have illusions about the liberalisation of consumption ; Any number of conventions may be signed ; Money laundering may be more heavily sanctioned ; Drug plantations may be bombed ; Armies may be mobilised ; All this may be done !
But the frontline of the fight against drug trafficking and drug addiction is called PREVENTION , and the FAMILY , SCHOOLS and LOCAL COMMUNITIES are the ones who implement it .
Education within the family and at school are essential .
A family that is well-informed and a school that provides information are half the battle in preparing young people for their first inevitable contact with drugs and in helping them to resist the attraction of instant pleasure and easy profit .
For this reason we strongly support recommendations 15 and 17 of this proposal .
But we also believe that , where prevention is concerned , the strategic field of battle lies in each municipality , in each local community .
Who is more familiar with the tragic dimension of the problems caused by drug addiction than family and neighbours ?
Who is better placed to notice the sudden affluence of some and the physical and moral degeneration of others ?
The local COUNCILS , in direct partnership with FAMILIES and SCHOOLS , have a decisive role and should receive ample financial and technical support from the European Union and the Member States .
MUNICIPAL PLANS TO PREVENT DRUG ADDICTION must be drawn up . Information must be disseminated ; help must be provided for those who need it ; the phenomenon must be studied in the context of each community ; young people must be given leisure and activity facilities ; rehabilitation and social and professional reintegration centres must be built for drug addicts .
Another aspect that should be dealt with in this proposal relates to cooperation with the management of night entertainment centres to implement joint prevention and suppression measures . They have no interest in a low-income clientele of drug addicts who spend their money on drugs and merely parade the effects of their addiction .
Drug dependence is the direct cause of much of the unhappiness which torments our families , feeding insecurity and violence , dragging human dignity down to unimaginable depths .
It is our duty as citizens and as people with political responsibility to take an active part in this struggle .
The danger is upon us .
We hope that the Council is equal to assuming its responsibility because , as the Portuguese anti-drug campaign states , ' drugs are the end ' .
The series of recommendations contained in the d 'Ancona report certainly demonstrate a very positive endeavour to seek consensus on the issue of combating drugs .
Indeed , the connection between the drug addiction phenomenon and the social causes which are largely to blame , be they unemployment , poverty or social exclusion , is an important aspect of this report .
So is the need to tackle dependence as a public health issue and to deal with the whole question of prevention , treatment and recovery , while simultaneously warning of the need to increase the budget of the Community and of Member States to deal with these matters .
Other positive recommendations are those which warn against concentrating on the role of the police in combating drug addiction , and those which advocate a greater focus on the aspects of education and prevention , on awareness-raising and information campaigns and on the need to enhance cooperation between the Member States and within international organisation s with a view to coordinating activities , carrying out research , harmonizing statistics and making them compatible .
However , the report falls far short of what would be desirable and possible in the area of combating drug trafficking and money laundering .
Only one of the 27 recommendations deals with this important ( and decisive ) dimension of the fight against drugs .
No explicit mention whatsoever is made of tax havens ; no explicit mention is made of financial havens ; no mention is made of the need to consider , therefore , the possibility of lifting banking secrecy ; nothing is said about the ramifications of the euro in facilitating money laundering .
It was because of these fundamental shortcomings , which mean that the report fails to deal with a decisive element in the fight against drugs , that we abstained .
However useful the repressive , therapeutic , economic and social approaches adopted by my colleagues may be in the fight against the drugs problem , they are inadequate and do not tackle the crux of the matter .
Indeed , for several decades - hence the crisis of 1968 , 30 years ago - the adult generation , parents primarily , but also teachers , journalists and members of parliament , has not been passing on the intellectual and spiritual elements needed by young people to dynamically and courageously face the various tests in life , or to take on family or political responsibilities , for example .
The search for artificial havens demonstrates their need for absolutes ; however , neither work , nor science , art , sport , ecology or politics , whether at national or European level , are such absolutes .
It is as if you have forgotten that human beings , particularly when young and therefore not yet hardened by conformism and compromise , need their parents and adults in general to talk to them about the reasons for living and not just the means of living .
The belittling of literary culture and culture in general can be seen in our various countries , and yet the works of literature consider the main questions about the human condition - love , suffering , death and God - which are essential for spiritual maturity .
Young people are no longer nourished by the extremely rich sources of European humanism which for over 2000 years have fed the extraordinary cultural and spiritual heritage of our continent .
The repeated but purely abstract allusions to the ' European social model ' in the Amsterdam Treaty cannot fill the gap , intellectually and morally , faced with the terrible confusion of youth .
Fortunately , the World Youth Days which took place in Paris last year brought a real ray of hope for many European youngsters .
Yesterday 's debate and today 's vote on Mrs d 'Ancona 's report on drugs is a victory for common sense .
United , this House can achieve a very great deal ; divided , it is without influence .
On a subject as sensitive as drugs abuse , where very different points of view exist , not everybody could have their way .
What has resulted is a sensible , human and positive report .
We have emphasised the importance of cooperation at all levels .
We have stressed the need to learn from one another .
We have asked that both the European Drugs Monitoring Centre in Lisbon and Europol should be made full use of , and that Member States must fully cooperate in providing adequate and meaningful information .
We are happy that Parliament has been able to vote clearly for helping youngsters to lead a drug-free life and that we have supported the upholding of the United Nations drugs conventions .
Both are essential if we are to have effective policies for helping young people to stay off drugs and for tackling drugs traffickers and their accomplices .
In conclusion , I am glad that my Group has been able to support this report .
The erratic course of the Ancona report which is once more before the House , in a more coherent but much weaker version , reveals the disorientation in the minds of politicians which in turn accounts for the disparities between national drugs policies .
And the problem is that as long as the battle to achieve harmonisation of national legislation based on common indicators is not won within the European Union , traffickers will continue to grow rich and the toll of young victims will continue to increase .
Combating drugs relies , primarily , on three types of positive measures : information / prevention ( for the general public ) , reduction of risks and recovery ( for drug addicts ) and support for producer countries ( to grow alternative crops ) .
Police clampdowns are just a marginal aspect in comparison to the main issue and , have hitherto served merely as an ' aspirin ' which relieves the problem but does not solve it .
Such clampdowns attack traffickers but do not eliminate them , and indeed goad them to outdo themselves , as is apparent in the growing volume of business , the low prices of products and the appearance of new drugs that are now produced on our doorstep .
Unfortunately , we now have sufficient evidence that implementing United Nations conventions is actually counterproductive .
And sufficient experience exists in a number of Member States to show that the only course is to change priorities in combating drugs .
The need now is to change policy and to boost or , rather , to rechannel and concentrate resources .
It would appear that fairer winds are now blowing in Portugal , judging by the report that was submitted this week to the government .
On a number of previous occasions , Portugal has pioneered new legislation , having been the first to abolish capital punishment and , more recently , with its ' family laws ' . It is my hope now that my government will heed these winds and set a course in the right direction .
I regret that I must abstain from voting on this very important topic , but I consider that the Parliament has not succeeded in reflecting the urgency of the situation in its text .
What will it take to wake Europe up ?
Bontempi report ( A4-0285 / 98 )
Corruption must be fought tooth and nail , but there are limits to how far one should go when it comes to choosing the way to do it , for we run the risk of giving the EU more tools to extend its powers than it already has at present .
The Bontempi report on corruption has some good things to say on such aspects as openness and the damage corruption does to the public .
At the same time it talks of ' centralised registers ' and ' specialised units ' to be set up in the Commission 's Directorates-General , and it calls on the Commission ' ... once the Treaty of Amsterdam enters into force - to make immediate use of its right of initiative in the field of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters ... ' .
The Danish June Movement will not be party to the writing of such a blank cheque for centralisation .
Among the good things in the report , Parliament draws attention to the need for the EU to combat corruption within its own system .
It refers in particular to the Commission and points out that the rules which are there to ensure openness are insufficient .
The report rightly points out that there is a problem for the individual citizen when corruption takes place .
Every time , for example in a tendering procedure to decide which firm should get a contract , that a firm is selected on the basis of corruption rather than on a factual assessment of the firm 's tender , our citizens are damaged .
In such cases , taxpayers ' money is not used to obtain the best quality , safeguard environmental interests in the best possible way and get the work done at least cost , instead it disappears into the pocket of the staff member who has been bribed by a firm to ensure that the order is placed with that firm .
It is a situation which should be avoided .
But it is also a situation that can arise more easily when the office authorised to place contracts or select firms submitting tenders is part of a large , impenetrable and bureaucratic system .
The EU is just such a system .
Rather than react to the problems by introducing further centralisation , some of these contracting and selection procedures should revert to the countries themselves .
A single language and press and the fact that each country in isolation makes up a smaller unit than the EU will make it easier to maintain democratic control over money that is used on the citizen 's behalf .
Our colleague Rinaldo Bontempi has undisputedly become an expert on the fight against organised crime and the anti-corruption policy of the European Union .
Current events have unfortunately just reminded us that the problem of corruption and unacceptable behaviour reaches even into the European institutions , particularly the Commission .
This is why Mr Bontempi 's report has appeared at exactly the right time to invite the Commission ' to devise a comprehensive anti-corruption plan ' and to call for ' specific proposals aimed at combating more effectively corruption within the EU institutions ' .
It is right and proper that this report insists on the need for more transparency in decision-making processes , for more clarity in the rules on tenders and for more effectiveness in internal controls . It also raises the difficult problem of the policy of cooperation with third countries .
It is to be welcomed that the rapporteur says in the explanatory statement that it ' would be wrong to take a fatalistic view of corruption ' because it has always happened ; his reminder that ' the word ' corruption ' originally meant physical or moral disintegration ' is also positive .
The fight against organised crime and corruption , the latter being one of the manifestations of the former , is a typical area in which European cooperation is helpful and should make national policies more effective .
The European Union is ' an asset ' in this case , since it reinforces the action of the Member States .
Emphasis must be placed on the fact that it would be advisable , when a scandal affects the Commission 's services , for the Commission to practise the transparency it so often recommends to others and not to block our parliamentary fact-finding with delaying tactics .
To conclude , Mr Bontempi 's report contains sound principles and advocates realistic cooperation .
That is the reason why our group voted for it .
If there is an area where the sensitivity of European citizens is particularly acute , it is corruption .
Together with expectations which are never met of social Europe , tax harmonisation and democratisation of the Union , the revelation of cases of corruption - with those occurring within the European institutions being at the top of the list - causes feelings of rejection which are extremely damaging to European integration and from which the extreme right profits .
The Bontempi report has the merit of establishing the broad outlines of a comprehensive anti-corruption policy , and I congratulate its author for having attempted this integrated and coherent approach which is the only one likely to succeed .
However , at the same time as implementing measures aimed at reducing corruption at international level , both inside and outside the frontiers of the Union , I feel it is both useful and imperative that , as a priority , Europe reinforces the fight against corruption within its own institutions by using firm and visible measures encompassing prevention , detection through increased controls and sanctions for all forms of corruption committed by natural or legal persons .
This is of prime importance .
On the one hand , how can we give lessons to others and be credible without first washing our own dirty linen in public ?
And on the other , for about ten years , too many allegations have been repeatedly made without the Commission reacting in a convincing way .
In this area of the fight against corruption , citizens keen on democracy demand transparency .
Setting up a central office for fighting corruption , as the report requests , is not enough ; it should also be insisted that cases of corruption are brought out into the open - for example by means of communications to the European Parliament - as well as the administrative , civil and disciplinary sanctions arising from these cases .
As with all European texts , this transparency must apply to the decision-making processes , to the simplification of the law and also to the financial situation of anyone - including MEPs - who occupies a post open to corruption .
It is also essential for these people , officials in particular , to undertake special training enabling them to be fully informed about the different types of corruption and the means to effectively combat these .
Furthermore , a close link must be established between the report before us and the Bösch report which we are also considering at this part-session .
The latter concerns the independence , role and status of the Unit for the Coordination of Fraud Prevention , UCLAF .
This report requests the replacement of UCLAF with an anti-fraud office - OLAF - whose jurisdiction would extend to all the European institutions and which would be supervised by a supervisory body appointed by the European Parliament in agreement with the other institutions .
These two reports closely complement each other even though certain points should be dealt with in more depth , such as what is meant by the ' independence ' of OLAF .
In my opinion , this body cannot become a new Community institution , which would involve a revision of the Treaties .
While remaining within the Commission , OLAF should enjoy broader independence , guaranteed initially by the choice of its supervisory body .
Tax fraud , money laundering , organised crime and international crime have found extraordinary scope for development in the liberalisation of trade and the globalisation of economic activity .
For those engaging in these activities , which are as lucrative as they are criminal , corruption is clearly one of the favoured means of action , both in the public and the private sector .
Recent events have shown how our countries and our institutions are also to a greater or lesser extent affected by this world phenomenon .
The need is clear for the Commission to follow a decisive initiative , within its terms of reference , in the fight against corruption .
The challenge is a fundamental one .
We should make no mistake about it : democracy , the rule of law and corruption are incompatible .
The development of one necessarily leads to the perversion and then the destruction of the others .
The fight against corruption must therefore be one of the priorities of the European institutions and of our states .
Legal and cultural differences are clearly so important in this respect that it would for the moment be unrealistic to set the objective of achieving legislation which is identical in all points in all the Member States .
It is therefore right that the Commission is proposing to proceed gradually and to concentrate for now on simplifying the concepts and approximating the laws of the Member States .
In making this joint effort , it is also the responsibility of the Member States to eliminate , as quickly as possible , the most shocking aspects of their laws , particularly those which tolerate or encourage corrupt acts in other states , and to rapidly formalise the undertakings to which they have already agreed .
The Commission cannot wage the battle against corruption on its own , or assisted by an internal structure such as UCLAF .
If we are to prevent corruption and fight fraud , one necessary condition is that every citizen and every journalist should be in a position to find out what is going on within the Commission and the other EU institutions .
We therefore need a fully-fledged system of open government in order to halt corruption .
The risk of internal fraud will be drastically reduced once EU officials know that their activities can be investigated by anyone , and not just by a handful of colleagues from their own institutions .
The ECHO case illustrates the need for measures to combat the kind of fraudulent practices that are patently rife inside the EU system .
The manner in which the Commission has tried to put a lid on the issue , refusing to come forward with information on what has been happening , demonstrates that it has confidence neither in the competent supervisory authorities , i.e. the European Parliament and its Committee on Budgetary Control , nor in the public at large .
A sorry pass has been reached when an organisation indulges in self-protection of this kind .
The report talks about ' debureaucratisation ' , but it is not clear what is meant by this .
If we are truly to cut red tape , we must set about it in the right way .
There has to be a proper system of record-keeping in place when taxpayers ' money is at stake , or when public calls for tender are launched , so as to avoid the ' disappearance ' of sensitive documents .
On the other hand , in-house monitoring - checking to whom officials say what - is indeed unnecessary bureaucracy .
Employer-employee solidarity is not achieved by means of submission and obedience , but through an open debate about what needs to be changed .
The Bontempi report covers a very relevant and serious subject which is a scourge the world over , namely corruption .
The problem of corruption is , as the Bontempi report points out , one that also affects the EU 's Member States and , not least , the EU 's institutions .
The question is then how that scourge is to be combated .
There is no doubt that , with the globalisation of economies , the problem is spreading its tentacles across national frontiers .
But the view taken by the Bontempi report that the first duty of the individual Member States and the individual EU institutions is to put their own house in order when it comes to combating corruption in their own ranks is entirely correct .
If the EU Member States and the EU 's institutions do not take their responsibility absolutely seriously and honour the range of initiatives and conventions that have been adopted in the field internationally over the years , even the best declarations at EU level have no value .
A combined strategy for the EU to combat corruption is not relevant in my view as long as the Member States fail to honour the commitments they have already entered into .
The arguments of the Bontempi report for more centralised arrangements at EU level to combat corruption , including a central body for the purpose , mean that I cannot support the report , despite the good elements it contains .
The political and technical anti-fraud measures proposed here are sound , and I therefore voted in favour of the report .
The introduction of a system of open government , with protection for those providing information , would however constitute the single most significant step towards combating fraud .
If all EU documents were to be made public as a matter of principle , and the right to inform the media were properly enshrined , then instances of corruption and deception would be more easily uncovered and we would have less of a problem .
Langen report ( A4-0304 / 98 )
The European Commission has just published a communication pompously entitled ' Impact of the changeover to the euro on Community policies , institutions and legislation ' .
Contrary to the impression given by the title , the communication contains no comprehensive analysis of the impact of the euro on the development of European integration , but only a list of the legal amendments required in various technical areas such as the budget , agricultural policy or administrative expenditure .
The Commission and the European Parliament are taking this opportunity to congratulate themselves on the ' considerable simplification ' which the euro should bring .
Certainly , everyone is firmly persuaded that monetary union may make the management of Community finances , or subsidies , simpler than with 15 national currencies .
However , the real question is not whether the euro will facilitate the life of European officials , but whether this will facilitate the life of the citizens of the Member States .
Viewed from this essential angle , we have extremely serious misgivings .
Leaving aside the question of the transition and adaptation problems , I would simply point out that the imposition of a single currency on countries in different situations will cause major lasting problems of conciliation , generating incessant conflicts and likely in the end to divide Europe .
The President of the European Central Bank , Mr Wim Duisenberg , confessed to us , at the meeting of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy of 22 September , that the establishment of a monetary strategy was proving to be more complex than he had previously anticipated .
And this is the real crux of the matter : in simplifying internal exchanges , the euro will complicate all other exchanges and even make them matters of conflict .
In the end , Europe will have been the victim of an optical illusion which will have led it down the road to ruin .
The introduction of the euro will have overall positive effects for the whole zone .
Nevertheless , it is interesting to look in more detail at more specific sectors in order to assess its effects .
The Langen report , therefore , following the example of the communication from the Commission , targets three sectors in particular : the Community budget , the agrimonetary arrangements and administrative expenditure .
With regard to the Community budget , the introduction of the euro will result in considerable simplification .
In fact , the Member States ' contributions are currently paid in national currency and then have to be converted into ECU .
Part of the Community expenditure uses national currency , in particular agricultural expenditure which constitutes the largest part of the expenditure of the European Union .
The rest of the expenditure is in ECU .
The departments responsible for finance must therefore buy ECU on the free market , with all the inherent exchange-rate risks .
It is clear that , with the euro , the exchange-rate risk will be eliminated as expenditure and income will be in a single currency without any conversion being necessary .
In respect of the CAP , agricultural prices are set in a unit of account which is based on the ECU .
This means that , in the event of a devaluation or revaluation , agricultural prices are directly affected , leading to considerable variations in the agricultural income of the Member States affected by these exchange-rate fluctuations .
In order to cancel out these effects , agricultural prices must be converted through the EAGGF .
With the introduction of the euro , these problems will disappear as prices and amounts will no longer have to be converted , and the fear of trade distortion will automatically disappear .
On the other hand , the problem will remain for the four Member States outside the euro zone , which will then be obliged to convert prices and amounts into the euro , under the scheme established by the CAP .
The introduction of the euro will also positively affect the sector of administrative expenditure .
This expenditure is at present incurred in national currency .
The salaries of officials , calculated in ECU but paid in national currency , obviously must remain constant .
This involves adjustments and sometimes greater costs due to the exchange-rate variations .
In fact , the budget expenditure in ECU varies every month . With the euro , these variations will disappear .
Since Mr Langen 's report gives a good assessment of the impact of the introduction of the euro on these various sectors , I have voted in favour of it today .
The Danish Social Democrats voted for the Langen report today .
This should not be taken as signal indicating a change in the Social Democrats ' policy of reserving our position with regard to the third stage of EMU , but as a statement of our keen interest in what happens in this area , despite the fact that we are not participating in the third stage .
It should of course be borne in mind that the countries which are not participating in the third stage of EMU will still need exchange rates .
The euro will have consequences , primarily on Community legislation : 4 000 Community acts will have to be amended to take account of the change in unit .
When you consider that , in the laws of the Member States , all the monetary references in tax , criminal , commercial , social and other codes will also have to be altered , the extent of the administrative and other costs involved in carrying out these simple legislative adjustments can be appreciated .
Certainly , for the European institutions , the euro may lead to a reduction of the costs of budget management , since 56 % of Community payments which are currently converted into national currency will remain in the euro , hence the disappearance of the exchange-rate risk .
The euro may also give an advantage in the agricultural sector by allowing the agrimonetary conversion arrangements to be abolished .
These each year cost between ECU 1 000 and 1 500 million .
We also believe that the payment of the salaries of 30 000 officials , of which 90 % work in Brussels and Luxembourg , will be simplified .
There will be no more payments in the national currency of the country of employment , which is currently the case for 76 % of the ECU 2 700 million in administrative expenditure .
In respect of salaries and pensions , the administrative burden will be partly lifted .
But this is not the most important point .
In addition to the IT and administrative costs , the euro will accelerate competition between the 11 participating economies .
In order to adapt to this , undertakings must therefore cut their costs , leading to a reduction in pay , social protection and jobs .
This will lead to euro-unemployment , euro-rationing of investments and welfare and also euro-inflation , because traders will round prices upwards .
But there is even worse to come .
In a Europe with a large population of senior citizens spread over several generations , everyone over 65 years of age will have their internal money clocks disrupted .
The oldest and weakest in our societies will fall victim to increased fraud , due to pensions , for example , being paid in a currency unit which the majority of the elderly may no longer be able to take on board .
It would have been so much simpler to have an intelligent euro by making this a reasonable common currency instead of this single dogmatic currency .
It is not even certain that , at the end of day , the euro will be as effective as expected in a globalised market whose finances are destabilised .
Even before being introduced , the euro has been shown not to be up to the basic problem : the limitations of the IMF , the international financial chaos and the money dumping carried out by the dollar .
As with federal Europe itself , the single European currency is perhaps the light of a star which has already faded , given that globalisation and internationalisation have happened so quickly - more quickly anyway than the construction of a federal Europe .
So much so that , in the final analysis , the nation states themselves are revealed to be the only ones able to protect the people and their freedoms as required .
I share the optimism concerning the introduction of the euro as a single currency in Europe : its entry into the marketplace will facilitate the implementation of Community policies and help the European institutions to operate more efficiently and effectively .
The advantages of the euro for agricultural policy are also obvious : its introduction from 1 January 1999 will facilitate trade in all products , including agricultural ones .
Indeed , the advent of the euro will coincide in that sector with a new , radically simplified agrimonetary regime , whereby the ' green rates ' - used to convert agricultural aid and prices established in ECU into national currency - will disappear altogether .
Here , however , transitional measures are required to soften the adverse impact of the new agro-monetary system , in that farmers will no longer be compensated for the negative effects of exchange rates .
Finally , I too am optimistic that the euro will have a positive effect on the drawing-up of the Community budget , as well as on Community staff management . Salaries and pensions will be calculated on a constant basis , no longer subject to the vagaries of exchange rates .
That concludes the votes .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.28 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

UCLAF
The next item is the report ( A4-0297 / 98 ) by Mr Bösch , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on UCLAF 's independence ; sound financial management and administration ; opposing irregularities , fraud , corruption ( Court of Auditors ' Special Report 8 / 98 ) ( C4-0483 / 98 ) .
I should like to welcome the President of the Commission , Mr Santer , together with Commissioners Liikanen and Gradin , and first give the floor to the rapporteur , Mr Bösch .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate on this report on the future of UCLAF was on the agenda back in September .
At the last minute , and in spite of the protests from our committee , it was postponed .
At the end of the day , however , that postponement might well have been beneficial ; first of all , it enabled us in the Committee on Budgetary Control to push through the procedure we are applying here .
Article 206 of the EC Treaty , on which our approach is based , had even been forgotten by one or two of the officials in our own administration .
We took the opportunity to call back to mind the extensive powers of control vested in Parliament in connection with the granting of discharge .
Secondly , the headlines of the past few days are a sharp reminder of the importance of this subject in terms of the credibility , and hence the future , of the European Union .
I hope that through this report we can help to consolidate , or even recover , some of that credibility .
Let me say from the outset that the fight against fraud in the European Union will never be anything other than a difficult undertaking .
We should have no illusions about that ; it is inherent in the structure of Union expenditure .
The allocation for administrative expenses is decidedly paltry at a mere 5 % .
Conversely , the amount earmarked for support funds is very high .
That should not change , but we must be aware that , wherever subsidies flow , covetousness rears its menacing head .
We must keep it under control .
That is easier said than done , as the money is not centrally disbursed .
Eighty per cent of these funds are channelled through the administrations of the Member States .
In some cases non-governmental organisations are also involved somewhere along the line .
That can cause problems , as the ECHO case illustrates .
Problems are particularly liable to occur if the rules of the game are not entirely clear or if the various players , sometimes at the highest levels , agree with a nod and a wink not to take the rules too seriously .
Once that happens , there is no turning back .
What begins as an irregularity ends with corruption and fraud .
What the Commission is lacking in many areas was described by the Court of Auditors - and let me emphasise that it was the Court of Auditors , not the European Parliament - in its special report as a ' zero-tolerance policy ' .
I do not intend to quote numerous excerpts from the report here .
I shall only quote point 2.33 , in which the Court of Auditors writes , ' Well-known cases exist ( for example in the tourism sector ) where dossiers have been withheld from UCLAF investigators and where incriminating documents have been systematically destroyed ' . How we assess that from a political point of view is something we can surely discuss further today .
It must be demonstrated , the Court of Auditors states in point 6.9 of its report , and I quote , ' that any cases of suspected internal fraud , corruption , breach of discipline or mismanagement will be investigated in a professional manner and , if proved , that the appropriate disciplinary measures will be instigated with rigour and transparency ' .
If such a policy is to be enforced , the first thing that is needed is genuine political will .
The Commission , sadly , seems to have been lacking the necessary resoluteness .
Anyone who seeks to pursue such a policy must also arm himself with the necessary resources and instruments .
The first implication of this is that we must increase staffing levels in the Commission departments which are involved in the distribution of aid and support funds .
From the domain of development aid , we know that national governments may employ twice to three times as many staff as the Commission to administer and control comparable amounts .
We do not seek to advocate the creation of a bloated bureaucracy , but there is some catching up to be done in this area .
Otherwise , I fear , we shall keep discovering fresh instances in which the administration of funds has been organised on the very edge of legality or beyond with the aid of dubious companies .
And so to UCLAF itself .
I believe it will be quite clear to anyone who has read the special report by the Court of Auditors that things cannot go on like this .
Only the Commission itself , it would seem , has so far failed to recognise that .
I shall only refer to the most serious findings . First of all , the UCLAF caseload is growing and is becoming too much , sometimes obviously so , for the staff there to handle .
According to the findings of the Court of Auditors , as many as 1400 files were opened over the past year , though in a good few instances two or three of them related to one and the same case .
On the other hand there are evidently files that lie around for months without anything being done to expedite the treatment of those cases .
UCLAF 's electronic databases , an indispensable resource in the fight against fraud , are still in their infancy .
The data they contain are incomplete and cannot be systematically processed .
This means that a reliable risk analysis is scarcely possible .
The files that are opened on the various cases are not drawn up in accordance with uniform rules and often fail to meet the minimum requirements laid down for documentary evidence by the judicial authorities of the Member States .
A lack of discipline in the treatment of the files makes it possible to manipulate them by adding or removing documents .
The black list for agricultural expenditure is not yet operating satisfactorily . The early-warning system in the realm of direct expenditure is only now being established .
The flow of information between UCLAF and the competent authorities in the Member States and the coordination of approaches reveal considerable shortcomings on both sides .
Anyone who reads the Court of Auditors ' report is left with the impression that the EU must first put its own house in order before the problem can be solved , hence the great importance attached by our committee to the issue of internal fraud and corruption within the EU institutions .
An intensive discussion of this issue was kick-started more than a year ago by Mrs Wemheuer 's report on fraud in the tourism sector and Mr Fabra Vallés 's report on the MED affair .
Many parties to this discussion process initially took the view that fraud could only be effectively combated if UCLAF became independent and were reconstituted outside the Commission framework .
That would certainly solve the problem of the Commission having to investigate itself , as it were , as long as UCLAF is within the Commission framework and is thus a part of the Commission .
Would it not be best to draw a clear dividing- line here ?
What is right and proper in principle could prove to be wrong and disastrous in practice .
As long as there is no European judicial authority and no European public prosecution agency to protect the financial interests of the Union , it would be a mistake to detach UCLAF completely from the Commission and to establish it somewhere on the outside as a sort of satellite .
UCLAF would then literally be left hovering in a vacuum without access to important internal information and without the inspection rights it enjoys today as part of the Commission , particularly its hard-won right to conduct site inspections on its own initiative .
On the other hand , it would be equally disastrous to leave the present structures as they are and merely to increase the staffing of UCLAF above the present level of 126 officials .
Of course UCLAF needs more staff , but what it needs most of all is to be independent of instructions from above on which suspected cases it should investigate and the way in which it should investigate them .
UCLAF , in other words , needs operational autonomy .
So what it boils down to is that we are not seeking a tabula rasa .
We neither wish nor require to start again from scratch .
We do want a new beginning , but not one in which tried and tested methods are thrown overboard .
This new beginning should be reflected in the name of the organisation itself .
UCLAF should give way to OLAF , the Fraud Prevention Office , which , while continuing to have a coordinating role in cooperation with the Member States , could shift the main focus of its activities to its own investigations .
As we see it , OLAF would remain inside the Commission framework but would have the greatest degree of independence that is possible within that framework .
This would have to be governed by special rules and regulations , which are described in detail in my report .
Allow me to highlight one more point . We are proposing that , in addition to the Commission , the other institutions of the Union should participate in OLAF if they so wish .
In my report we invite them to engage in such interinstitutional cooperation , an invitation that is expressly extended to the Council , which in its opinion on last year 's discharge drew attention to the fact that all institutions of the Union should have instruments at their disposal with which they can combat internal fraud .
The proposal that , to this end , OLAF be created by a joint decision of the participating institutions has been misunderstood in some quarters .
It is not a matter of creating a new institution in addition to those that already exist , nor is it a matter of jumbling together the powers of the various institutions .
All the institutions of the Union have a duty to act against corruption and fraud within their own ranks , and they are all entitled to undertake this sort of task jointly .
So let us not conjure up any legal problems where none exist .
We shall ensure that all necessary decisions are taken and that the way is clear for the establishment of OLAF when we face the voters in a few months ' time .
Unless we signal a new beginning in this way , we shall ultimately lose all our credibility .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wished to speak today , during the debate on the Bösch report , because this raises questions which are very important to the Commission .
I wanted to do this so that there could be a calm and constructive debate on reinforcing the fight against fraud and corruption .
I believe that the lack of calmness in the current debate is in fact leading to certain generalisations .
This worries me , and this is why I want us to have this discussion today .
Since I came into office , my aim has been to ensure sound and efficient management .
I have always made this a priority .
That is why , at the beginning of my term of office , together with Erkki Liikanen and Anita Gradin , I launched the SEM 2000 initiative to considerably reinforce the management and supervision of the use of public funds .
SEM 2000 is the embodiment of a real political will among all the Members of the Commission , and its implementation is progressing successfully .
This is an ambitious reform which should result in more efficient and more transparent management .
Today , before the House , I should first of all like to clarify the situation and then to make some constructive proposals , with an eye to the future , which take up many of the points made in the Bösch report .
However , I propose to go further with the conclusions which must be drawn .
Before considering the heart of the matter , I know that there is one point which concerns you in particular : the forwarding of information on investigations in cases of internal fraud .
I am aware of this , and I agree with the wider and more complete forwarding of information in order to ensure that Parliament is fully able to carry out its task of budgetary control .
However , you will agree with me that this improvement of the forwarding of information must take place in accordance with the law and must take account of the presumption of innocence and the secrecy of the inquiry .
To this end , I will very shortly make some specific proposals to the President of Parliament .
I shall now turn to the Bösch report and will firstly make some comments on this .
My first comment is that a sweeping criticism of the results obtained by the Commission hitherto in combating internal fraud committed against the Community budget leads to inaccuracies which thus result in generalisations .
The first of these inaccuracies relates to what UCLAF actually does .
Firstly , UCLAF coordinates the work of combating fraud in the Member States .
In this respect , approximately 5 000 cases were dealt with in 1997 involving ECU 1 400 million .
Secondly , UCLAF conducts direct investigations using its own resources . This was not its main task on its creation , but there are currently 950 cases subject to this type of investigation .
Thirdly , among these investigations , there are some which may obviously implicate officials .
This applies to about 20 cases .
UCLAF must be judged on its work in its three areas of competence .
The function of coordination with the Member States has been proven and is appreciated .
As for the investigation function using its own resources , significant results have been achieved , to which I will return .
I am prepared to consider with you the best ways of further enhancing this area of activity of UCLAF .
My second comment relates to the internal investigations .
If I may be frank , your report contains an intolerable insinuation to the effect that the Commission ' ... in cases of corruption within its own ranks ... has a tendency to cover up such cases ... '
You must realise that I take this as a personal attack which I vigorously reject and which the facts prove to be unjustified .
What are the facts ?
It was this Commission which , thanks to the work of UCLAF , itself revealed the case of fraud detected in the context of ECHO and which , after an in-depth investigation by UCLAF , forwarded the file to the judicial authority .
It was this Commission which , last November , approved the guidelines for improving the action against incompetence , financial irregularities , fraud and corruption .
This Commission also sought to reinforce the independence of UCLAF by upgrading its status to that of a task force .
We also adopted a new internal structure which was actually welcomed by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
It was this Commission which , on 14 July , laid down the principles applicable to the conduct of internal investigations , in order to give UCLAF inspectors a clear and solid basis for their work while fully respecting the guarantees of personal rights .
It is this Commission which , since 1995 , has referred nine matters to the judicial authorities in cases where officials have been under suspicion . Since 1995 , this Commission has dealt with 49 disciplinary procedures , not all involving cases of fraud but also reprehensible behaviour .
As a result of these procedures , the Commission has decided on eight dismissals , two demotions , four downgradings in step , 11 reprimands and four warnings .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us now turn to the concept of ' zero tolerance ' .
The European Parliament denounces the absence of a clear policy on the part of the Commission with regard to corruption .
I totally , steadfastly and resolutely reject this attitude .
No one can say that the President of this Commission has ever tolerated or covered up any corruption .
However , I do agree with you that , in all the institutions , the grey area of favouritism and conflict of interests must also be tackled .
Let us therefore jointly agree on an action to comprehensively raise moral standards in all the institutions , so as to remove any ambiguity .
The only way to achieve this is through transparency .
However , I would stress that I am not prepared , under the pressure of more or less orchestrated leaks to the public and quotations taken out of context , to take part in an indiscriminate and unfounded witch hunt .
Nor am I prepared to disregard the most basic personal rights , primarily the respect for the presumption of innocence .
Finally , I am not prepared to sit back and allow the sullying of the image of excellence which the humanitarian work of the Union has acquired throughout the world , through the daily work of ECHO on the ground , in very difficult conditions and in collaboration with the United Nations , the Red Cross and a large number of non-governmental organisations .
This brings me to my third comment .
Fraud and administrative irregularities should not be regarded as being on the same footing .
The latter relate to non-compliance with the Financial Regulation and the budget as approved by the budget authority , which must not be confused with fraud , which is a concept under criminal law involving the wrongful collection or retention or embezzlement of public funds .
And I will be very clear about this : I obviously do not approve of administrative irregularities , but you should consider the reasons why departments have been forced to look for a certain administrative flexibility , sometimes resulting , it is true , in real acrobatics .
New and heavy responsibilities were entrusted to the Commission by the Council and by yourselves at the beginning of the 1990s .
The urgency of these often external tasks and the inadequacy of the resources immediately available were at the root of these administrative acrobatics which had to be eliminated .
It would not be proper to impose individual sanctions on officials who committed these irregularities for the sole purpose of keeping departments going .
It is precisely for this reason that the Commission , with the agreement of the budgetary authority , decided in 1992 to end these administrative irregularities .
The European Parliament helped to eliminate the irregular mini-budgets by converting appropriations into over 1 800 posts .
Parliament should be congratulated for this .
I therefore understand the irritation on the part of some of you who , having made a personal effort in this respect , see that certain practices continued for some time and are now wondering whether these practices have in fact totally disappeared .
I would say to you very clearly : we must achieve total transparency .
With regard to ECHO , the practice of mini-budgets ended in June 1995 .
For all the other departments , I have asked that a check be carried out by each Director-General , under their responsibility , so that any similar practices which may remain are fully identified .
I will inform Parliament , in all transparency , of the results of this check .
If problems do remain for the Commission , the budgetary authority will be clearly told of this so that we can find solutions together .
I now come to my fourth comment . I cannot accept the connection made , in the Bösch report , between the alleged lack of independence of UCLAF and its subordination to the Secretariat-General of the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I know of no case where the hierarchy might have prevented UCLAF from carrying out its investigations .
I would also point out that , according to our rules , UCLAF can open internal investigations at any time on its own initiative .
Having set the record straint on these points , I will now turn to the proposals made in the Bösch report .
First of all , I said at the beginning of my speech that there are many elements in this report with which I agree : the concern to standardise and clarify the rules according to which investigations are conducted ; the demand for a clearer and more uniform definition of the rules for handling confidential information , and an identical and consistent handling of files .
We started this work last July and this is still currently ongoing .
As for staff numbers , this question must be reviewed in the light of the future structure and objectives .
But I will go further .
I believe that , in the light of the experience gained , the external and internal inquiry function of UCLAF would profit from being reviewed and reinforced .
Why ?
As I said previously , I very firmly reject the statement that UCLAF is not functioning independently at the moment , but I will say quite honestly that if , due to the presence of UCLAF in our structure , the fraud prevention efforts of the Commission are being called into question or denigrated , I would prefer the externalisation of the inquiry function .
I therefore propose that we move towards the creation of an external and internal Anti-Fraud Office which is totally independent and not subordinated in any way to the Commission .
This would provide another advantage : it would allow this future Office to more easily extend its inquiries to all the institutions and to all the other Community bodies .
The other functions performed by UCLAF - the proposing of legislation and coordination with the Member States in combating fraud against the interests of the Union - will continue to be performed , in accordance with the Treaty , by the Commission in close liaison with the Office .
It would currently be premature to say exactly what the structure and working method of such an Office should be .
However , it is clear that there must be independent supervision of the work of this future Office .
I do not believe that the three-tier structure of director , board of directors and , supervisory body proposed by the Bösch report is a suitable one .
It is too complex and cumbersome .
The responsibilities must therefore be clarified and the Office given well-defined rules , in order to guarantee maximum efficiency in accordance with respect for and protection of individual rights .
This new structure must be based on mutual confidence between the institutions .
This implies that these institutions must have the same rights and obligations when participating in a supervisory body , in proposals for appointments and in relations with the Office .
With regard to the steps which the Commission is ready to take towards creating the Office , I can specifically tell you that I would be prepared to entrust a senior Commission official very shortly - if this is what the other institutions want - with the task of preparing a proposal for a joint decision on the basis of the principles which I have just indicated .
Furthermore , a joint report of the institutions involved should be prepared as soon as possible .
This report should list the measures to be taken , before and after the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty , together with a timetable for their implementation and , in particular , proposals for amending the relevant Council regulations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , those are my thoughts .
I hope that the confidence between our institutions can be restored , that tempers can be calmed and that the necessary clarifications can occur without the pressure of leaks and a general climate of suspicion .
It in this spirit that Mrs Gradin , Mr Liikanen and I myself will reply to the specific questions which you may wish to ask us during the debate .
Mr President , we must not lose sight of the fact that we are concerned today not specifically with the Commission 's position on ECHO , on tourism , on instances of corruption inside the Commission or other European institutions in general .
The purpose of this debate is to consider the report of the Court of Auditors which highlights a number of serious shortcomings in the functioning of UCLAF .
But at the same time , the Court of Auditors ' report makes the point that over 80 % of European Union money is spent in the Member States and that scrutiny of that spending depends very largely on the willingness of Member States to cooperate with UCLAF .
So far it has gone well , so we must not throw out things which are working well just because we have no better alternatives .
Mr Bösch has just presented his report and I think we are totally in agreement on a number of essential points .
The Socialist Group too is resolutely opposed to fraud and corruption both in general and in the institutions - where there is much room for improvement .
We agree too that for a number of reasons UCLAF is not adequately equipped to do its work , that one of the shortcomings is that it is not sufficiently autonomous .
UCLAF must be given greater independence .
But there are differing views on that , namely on how this should be achieved .
My group applies a number of principles in considering how we can counter fraud more effectively and make UCLAF more independent .
I think it is a pity that the Commission President skated round this a little .
First of all the Commission is the guardian of the Treaties .
That task is conferred on it by the Treaties and it has a duty to fulfil it .
The Commission also has responsibility for implementing the budget .
The European Parliament 's role is nothing less than to exercise scrutiny of the Commission and it can rap the Commission over the knuckles , as we are doing now , if it fails to discharge its responsibilities .
I believe that a new institution , separate from the Commission , requires a Treaty amendment , the procedures for which are set out in the Treaties themselves .
Also , there are a number of institutional issues which arise over the combating of fraud and corruption .
The combating of fraud and corruption is only partly a Community matter .
Most of the law-making and action in this area is decided on in intergovernmental cooperation under the third pillar .
And in the short term it is unlikely that Member States will be willing - I find it regrettable , but they are not - to set up a European Public Prosecution Service or a European criminal law area .
So we cannot expect an institution or unit responsible at European level for anti-fraud measures - to the extent that such powers exist at that level - to be able to do much more than collect and analyse information and cooperate with national authorities in the detection of fraud .
Because of these principles and the complications I must , on behalf of my group , reject Mr Bösch 's proposed solution of a new institution , separate from the Commission or semi-linked to the Commission , because any new institution of this kind will necessitate a Treaty amendment or a treaty under the third pillar .
Amending the Treaties is not an option , Mr President .
A treaty under the third pillar invites the question , to whom is that institution to be politically accountable ?
Even after Amsterdam , the European Parliament has no powers in this area .
A treaty under the third pillar would also have the drawback of inadequate legal safeguards for individuals , given that the powers of the Court are limited .
In short , there would be the danger of a legal and / or a political vacuum .
But a fully independent OLAF or Anti-Fraud Office , semi-linked to the Commission , is not the answer either .
It is a contradiction in terms , or at any rate would be a total abrogation by the Commission of its responsibilities in this field , responsibilities which the Commission as guardian of the Treaties cannot delegate .
Could the Commission be held liable in such a case for the functioning of OLAF ?
Or who should be ?
All Parliament can do is make the Commission mindful of its responsibilities and grant the Commission a discharge - or not , as the case may be - or in the last analysis dismiss the Commission .
As President Santer rightly said , a board of directors is not the answer .
It means that the Commission would be subject to direct scrutiny of its internal workings , which is contrary to the Treaties , and it would mean a total intertwining of the responsibilities and powers which are separately defined in the Treaties .
So it is not possible , Mr President .
So , ultimately , I have to reject the solutions which Mr Bösch offers and I hope the Commission will come up with a meaningful proposal which will give real and considerably greater independence to UCLAF .
Mr President , I must point out that the Bösch report is being presented to the plenary at the behest of Parliament 's resolution of 22 October 1997 , which required Parliament and the Committee on Budgetary Control to submit the report .

I must also say that I am very pleased about the proposals we have heard from the President of the Commission , Mr Santer , which largely adopt the thinking and general lines of approach which Mr Bösch has set out in his report , and I must tell you that the Group of the European People 's Party will support Mr Bösch 's report , because we think it is correctly based .
I gather that the Commission feels the same , in other words that there is an element of deceit in relation to the management of the Community 's budget and the Union 's Member States , while on the other hand there is an internal issue regarding what is going on in the Community 's various institutions and whether those Community institutions and their services are functioning as they should do .
I think we are quite right to go ahead with the creation of OLAF , and I personally agree that it should be clearly separate and that UCLAF will have to remain in place to scrutinise relations between the Member States and the Community 's bodies .
On that subject you must know , Mr President of the Commission , and the Commissioners too , that in recent times we have been bombarded by reports from the Court of Auditors .
But nothing has happened to change us into detectives .
We are obliged to respond to and verify what the Court of Auditors says .
And you will agree with us that we cannot cover up anything , but on the contrary , we must respond to the Court of Auditors ' indications with the greatest transparency and sincerity .
The issues of ECHO , tourism and MEDA have their origins in initiatives and special reports by the Court of Auditors .
The same has happened concerning many other subjects which you will be hearing about as the days go by and which perhaps will also influence Parliament 's attitude towards the Commission 's discharge in respect of the implementation of the 1996 / 97 budget .
At this point , I should also like to say that in our cooperation with UCLAF over the past two years , there were occasions when UCLAF came along , we asked for information , and we were told that the information could not be given because the upper echelons of UCLAF would not allow UCLAF to give us information .
That is one of the things you too pointed out , and I hope that it will be cleared up soon .
You will understand that the issue is a very serious one , and I am glad that this evening you have told us you are looking into it , and that you will be coming back with specific proposals .
Mr President , I will start by congratulating Mr Bösch on this report .
I am glad that it has finally been put on the agenda so that we can have a debate on this important subject .
I very much agree that there is a need to strengthen UCLAF .
The many cases convey an unmistakable message but , most important , the investigation of the Court of Auditors contains clear criticism of the present situation and gives concrete indications of what can be done .
The situation is quite unacceptable , and that is why it is so important for us to strengthen the role of UCLAF and give it more powers and better tools to get to grips with fraud and corruption .
As regards Mr Santer 's answer today , I have to say that it is no use chiding us for criticising the Commission and complaining that things are moving at a very slow pace .
If Mr Santer had sat with us hour after hour in the Committee on Budgetary Control just trying to get the key information out of the Commission , he would understand our urgent desire to see real action and to see a change in the present procedures .
There is quite simply a need for a more independent office .
After all we have received a clear answer from the Commission to the effect that the proposal Mr Bösch has brought before us does not require a Treaty amendment , which means in other words that it is a viable way forward .
So , Mr Santer , what we need is something more concrete from the Commission on what the Commission really intends to do in this area .
But is the true position not that an external office will in fact require a Treaty amendment and that the Commission has in this convenient way again secured a postponement of the decisions long into the future ?
It is so crucial to people 's confidence in the EU system that more decisive action be taken on corruption and fraud .
And once again it is the European Parliament that comes up with a concrete initiative on what should happen and on how we can get better procedures .
It may well be that it is not a final or a complete proposal , but at least the debate has got underway .
I am glad that Mr Bösch 's report on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control has enabled us finally to get a reaction and initiate a discussion on what additional arrangements are really needed in order to make it possible to combat fraud and corruption more effectively .
Mr President , President of the Commission , I still think that controls mean controls and that they actually serve a useful purpose .
You gave us a list of reasons why such controls are absent , which I accept .
But I also know that fraud and corruption are combated both upstream and downstream of where they occur .
The fact is that the whole system of projects and programmes in the Commission functions in such a way as to give officials responsibility for very substantial sums of money which they frequently cannot themselves control adequately .
Hence , what is missing is a prevention policy which , as in firefighting , is the best way to combat such occurrences .
Fight the fire in the winter and not in the summer , when it is already raging .
Consequently , the whole system must be changed , in such a way as to make Commission officials and Commissioners themselves more responsible for the programmes they administer within the Community and indeed beyond .
We know that the ECHO issue is extremely disagreeable : a billion ecus are at stake .
We also know that today , in ' Le Monde ' , UCLAF said that the control carried out was of a metaphysical nature .
Making allowance for UCLAF 's irony , it is obvious that it feels in considerable difficulties .
So , we know that controls are necessary .
But controls are not just to catch prevaricators .
To control is to prevent , and that is why I stress that prevention is essential .
But if prevention is to exist , the will must also exist on the part of Parliament and the Member States . We all know that although the Committee on Budgetary Control has issued this report , the Committee on Budgets vetoed it and voted against the purchase of scanners which would make it possible to take preventive action against fraud in European ports .
And the fact is that there are certain European ports which are genuine havens for those who wish to smuggle contraband or to avoid paying taxes , be it VAT or consumer taxes .
We also know that criminal legislation has not been harmonised .
And we know that the Member States themselves hamper UCLAF 's work by frequently failing to make available material which could be provided if they really wanted to combat fraud in their territory .
Of course , I am not blaming the Commission for all this .
Let nobody think so for a moment , since it is in fact the Member States that are largely responsible for what is happening .
It is up to the Commission to make people aware of this , it is up to the Commission not to condone , by its silence , what is happening in the Member States .
Without giving up their individual powers they must join forces to combat organised crime , to ensure that the Community is not somewhere where crime pays and where people get rich quickly by breaking the law and engaging in every manner of cheating at the expense of Community funds .
It would also be advisable to persuade the Member States that Community money is not national money , it is Community money , and they have an obligation to defend it .
My group will vote for prevention , and for increased resources and protection for UCLAF .
Mr President , there are hundreds of cases of fraud against the Community budget every year , involving large amounts .
And yet these are only the declared or detected offences .
The real figures are no doubt much higher .
The Bösch report indicates that UCLAF has only a limited capacity for action .
The feelings aroused by certain current events therefore demand greater vigilance .
The Commission frequently cites the responsibility of the Member States which manage 80 % of the expenditure .
It is demanding of them , so it should also be demanding of itself .
Parliament is rightly asking for explanations and measures to put an end to the current cases of embezzlement and to impose sanctions on the guilty parties .
The transparency mentioned by the President of the Commission must become a permanent reality .
In this respect , I would highlight the importance of the proposal aimed at creating a body to combat fraud which is independent of the Commission and which has resources allowing it to successfully carry out its task .
The fact that it is not possible to be both judge and judged is a basic principle .
A colleague has asked that UCLAF should be a little more independent .
Surely it can be either independent or not independent - degrees of independence are impossible .
However , the fight against fraud cannot be discussed without noting that total freedom in the circulation of goods and capital - that is , the absence of any controls - favours fraud and trafficking on a large scale .
Commissioner Gradin therefore underlined last May that fraud against the Community budget is increasingly due to international criminal groups , namely the Mafia .
This situation definitely requires attention and measures at the highest level .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , what we are discussing here today is not only the question of the independence of UCLAF but the question of the independent investigation of fraud , corruption , nepotism and mismanagement in the Commission itself .
We are not discussing specific cases such as ECHO , MED , BSE , tourism or the security service , affairs which have accumulated into an almighty crisis among the European institutions .
What we are discussing here today is how the Commission can escape the threat of non-discharge as well as - and this , ladies and gentlemen , is the key issue - the question of political responsibility .
The ECHO case is only a symptom of a deeper malaise .
I should like to emphasise that we are not talking about normal minibudgets .
Falsified contracts , imaginary reports and disappearing documents are apparently regarded by the Commission as high-spirited pranks .
But I have now learned a new expression from you , Mr Santer .
From now on we shall call these things ' administrative acrobatics ' .
The bottom line is that this attitude has prevented the adoption of any disciplinary measures .
Anyone who believes , like Mrs Bonino , that it is possible to gloss over the whole thing quietly by simply saying , ' Oh yes , the Commission will naturally assume responsibility ' has , if you will forgive my saying so , failed to understand what political responsibility really means .
Responsibility is not just an empty word that can be used at will to terminate a debate and hasten on to the next item .
Responsibility means being prepared to answer for those things for which one is individually accountable .
The ECHO case , I believe , is a prime example .
When Commissioner Marín found out in February 1994 about the illegal practices that were taking place in his sphere of responsibility and was unable , for whatever good reason , to put an immediate stop to it , who but he should have accepted responsibility for it and therefore tendered his resignation ?
The collegiate nature of his institution does not enter into the equation .
This , Mr Santer , comes right back to you .
What does the President of the Commission do in such a case ?
Regrettably , you have kept silent thus far .
The people of Europe must see responsibility being borne ; that applies to ECHO and to all other cases .
If there are no consequences other than the punishment of the actual fraudsters - and I am certainly capable of distinguishing between frauds and irregularities - that would only enshrine the principle of the end justifying the means .
That , however , is untenable , not only in this case , in which , after all , aid funds amounting to ECU 2.4 million were misappropriated - not embezzled in the legal sense , but nevertheless channelled into other directions .
What is far worse is that it discredits all the good work done by the administration - and the great bulk of their work , I may say , is good .
That , Mr Santer , cannot be what you want either .
The Staff Regulations provide for various disciplinary measures , but the powers that be within the Commission are apparently reluctant to apply them .
What exactly has to happen before the flagrant circumvention - that is what Commissioner Van Miert called it - before the flagrant circumvention of rules is punished ?
In the talks I have attended , I have even had the impression that people were afraid to take action .
If things have come to that pass , something has to change drastically !
Do you not agree , Mr Santer ?
You are accountable for a huge conflict of loyalties among the staff of the Commission .
How many of them long for certain abuses to be rooted out and for some straight talking to be done at long last !
It is time you took action , not least for the sake of your honest and committed employees .
The Commission lives in an ivory tower .
The lack of communication between Parliament and the Commission is primarily due to the fact that our quest for information and supervisory powers is systematically interpreted as distrust , because the principle that good administration must , with few exceptions , be publicly accessible has been inverted by the Commission , at least in those areas in which criticism is voiced and in which Parliament exercises its supervisory powers .
My speaking time is up .
I also intended to speak about the culture of distrust , about the right to apply Article 206 and about the fact that the Commission must expect discharge to be refused if it does not give a clear and appropriate signal .
Those who wish can read the full text of my speech , including you , Mr Santer .
I shall have a copy sent to you shortly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Bösch 's report deserves our full support .
Parliament pressed 14 years ago for a flying squad to carry out random checks in the Member States and act against fraud and corruption .
UCLAF was not set up until 1989 and went through many teething troubles .
In the meantime , I have had occasion to observe a number of cross-border scandals at very close quarters .
I am thinking of the Transnuklear affair and the scam over the smuggling of nuclear waste .
There was the matter of illegal growth-promoter hormones in stock breeding .
In my own country that led to intimidation , threats and even the murder of a veterinary inspector .
There were all the dirty tricks over meat , organised by mafia-type groups , entailing fraud to the tune of millions over VAT , import duties and export refunds .
Parliament set up a Committee of Inquiry into the Community Transit System which looked particularly at the illicit trade in cigarettes .
Just recently there were corruption scandals and cases in the tourism sector and an investigation is currently under way into ECHO .
The European Court of Auditors has audited the work of UCLAF and the findings are rather discouraging .
I see that electronic databases are still at an early stage , that there is no uniform system for opening , pursuing and concluding dossiers , that there are numerous shortcomings in coordination and transparency of cooperation with Member States , and that even where obvious misdemeanours are detected , in many cases no disciplinary proceedings are initiated .
The rapporteur is right in suggesting that UCLAF should be revamped as an Anti-Fraud Office , ' OLAF ' , operating independently of the Commission and having responsibility for all the European institutions , moreover .
The staff would naturally have to be increased to 300 specialists able to work effectively with the national judicial authorities .
Magistrates who have to deal with international fraud and corruption inquiries on a daily basis are on a hiding to nothing .
They waste an incredible amount of time , energy and money coping with the obstacles created by 15 national borders , and the report does not make enough of this fact in our Europe without frontiers .
UCLAF or OLAF should be a unit with quasi-legal powers , enabling international corruption and fraud dossiers to be tackled properly by the national courts .
It is precisely this approach which has achieved visible results .
As far as we are concerned , the proposal is very important in seeking to regulate cooperation between OLAF and the national judicial authorities via legislation in the shape of new regulations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is my last address to a plenary .
On 15 October I shall be leaving the European Parliament of which I have been a member since February 1981 .
Then we had just 434 members .
I have seen six new Member States join the Community and I have seen a systematic and welcome increase in Parliament 's powers .
I am very much a European and at the same time I am a regionalist because our democracy means living in small circles .
This Parliament is the biggest of those circles .
All of us have a duty to ensure that our citizens continue to believe in Europe as manifestly a good thing .
A Europe which needs to be more transparent , more open and less controversial .
I think that in approving this report we can do a lot to further that aspiration .
May I end by expressly thanking the people I have dealt with here over so many years ; I am grateful , irrespective of party political affiliations , for the comradely cooperation , the openness and manifest correctness of behaviour which all of you have shown .
Lastly , my sincere thanks to the administration and also to the interpreters and translators .
Thank you very much for that speech , Mr Vandemeulebroucke , and thank you also for your many years of hard work here in Parliament .
The House has shown its gratitude to you by its applause , and I should like to thank you once again .
Mr President , I should like to thank our colleague Jaak Vandemeulebroucke for 17 years of acquaintance and friendship .
I hope we shall meet on numerous occasions when you have left Parliament .
You have done a great deal to combat hormone fraud in Belgium .
You have always had a great social heart .
I hope we shall meet again .
In the municipality I live in , no taxpayer would accept that 10 % of the local authority 's budget should be lost in fraud .
Nor would it be accepted in my country as a whole .
I think it is the same for everyone in this Chamber .
How can we allow 10 % of the budget to be lost in fraud , just because the money is sent via Brussels ?
In my view the explanation lies in the distance from the voters , the distance from those who have to pay .
The decision-making processes in the EU make it possible to adopt support arrangements that no country would adopt if it had to foot the bill itself .
The solution therefore is no more Brussels , with more staff , more grants , common criminal justice and police .
The solution is to do away with most of the support arrangements , to focus on something less in cross-frontier matters , and to do the work better .
The cheapest and best way of dealing with fraud is to ensure complete openness on appropriations .
Anyone who receives support from the EU must accept that the voters and taxpayers should be able to see what has been appropriated and what has been spent on what .
That way journalists and a critical public would enforce the necessary self-accountability .
Post the budget records on the Internet , and the rest follows of itself .
We prefer full openness to a new bureaucracy in Brussels , a leaner and more transparent EU instead of fat times for yet more fraudsters .
Mr President , the persistent increase in fraud perpetrated at the expense of the Community budget requires an immediate solution , especially since the phenomenon appears to have spread to the institutions themselves in recent months .
We do not need to recall here the ugly episode concerning ECHO and irregularities in the former Yugoslavia and in the Great Lakes region - still to be proved - nor the much-discussed anomalies in the research sector , on which the Committee on Budgetary Control is awaiting clarification .
However , we certainly cannot say that we are satisfied with the results we have been able to obtain regarding either the detection of irregularities and fraud or - above all - the lack of effective judicial action at EU level .
I would recall that some time ago the Committee on Budgetary Control , thanks in particular to the efforts of its chairman , Mrs Theato , called for the insertion into the Treaty of a legal base making it possible to introduce anti-fraud regulations , perhaps under the codecision procedure , and to draw up legislation obliging Member States to protect Community funds as they do their own .
The rules must be harmonised at administrative level , by centralising sanctions and controls , but also in legislative terms through the ratification of the 1995 Convention on the protection of the Union 's financial interests , which has remained a dead letter until now .
This convention is accompanied by two protocols , which are without doubt important but have aroused the suspicions of the Member States and made it unlikely that they will ratify it directly .
We too are of the opinion that the judicial authorities , and not UCLAF , should be empowered to intervene in the private affairs of suspects . However we wonder why , even when UCLAF or Financial Control amasses sufficient proof of serious violations , the Commission only very rarely institutes disciplinary proceedings .
The creation of an anti-corruption unit , responsible for fighting corruption and fraud within the EU institutions , should be backed by assistance from the institutions concerned .
I would refer for example to the possibility of securing rapid access to documents and where appropriate seizing such documents , but leaving the task of verifying and punishing corruption to the judicial authorities , which possess judicial and police powers that the anti-fraud unit cannot and should not have .
Mr President , may I thank President Santer for his words to us .
Allow me , however , to confess to a certain doubt and to express it in the following words : ' I hear the words , but I lack faith ' . In a similar vein , I should like to say to you , ' Help us to believe ' , so that we can make up these deficits together .
I should like to come back now to the Bösch report on today 's agenda and to begin by expressing my thanks and appreciation to Mr Bösch for having overcome a good many difficulties to put the report on the table today .
As is clear from the title and substance of the report , it is based on special report No 8 / 98 of the Court of Auditors and hence on Article 206 of the Treaty .
Our Committee on Budgetary Control has never subscribed to the misinterpretation of this legal basis .
Such misinterpretations , however , have delayed the presentation of the report to a plenary sitting of Parliament .
This is regrettable because , in view of the revelations of alleged abuses in the European Community Humanitarian Office , a rapid response by Parliament in the form of proposed remedies would have been useful .
The ECHO case has subsequently received exhaustive coverage in the media .
We could certainly have done with quicker and more comprehensive information from the Commission .
Once again , this case illustrates the way in which the EU still has to struggle to win the fight against the misuse of its resources with one hand tied behind its back .
Long-familiar cases , such as the MED , transit and tobacco frauds - I could name more - still await full investigation and prosecutions .
The special report by the Court of Auditors proves that Parliament is right to be dissatisfied with the present structural competence of UCLAF , especially when it comes to internal Commission investigations .
This is not the fault of UCLAF 's officials or its excessive reliance on temporary employees , but rather on the unsystematic manner in which it processes its cases .
The Court of Auditors mentions more than 1300 pending cases , not including those opened after April 1997 , a point to which Mr Bösch also referred .
An inadequate flow of information and poor coordination are another point .
In the event of suspected corruption within the Commission , the Court of Auditors notes , powers and procedures are not clearly regulated , nor is there even a requirement to inform the prosecuting authorities .
It is to be feared that the introduction of the euro and the enlargement of the EU will create further scope for fraudulent operations .
These are only some of the reasons for the demand that the function , structure and powers of UCLAF be given more incisive and independent shape in the form of a Fraud Prevention Office .
That is what Mr Bösch has put on the table .
Today , however , we are not taking the ultimate step by approving OLAF .
But this Parliament , as a controlling authority , has to do something that will enable us to devise jointly a means of tackling the new challenges that confront us .
For that reason , we are not making a legally based proposal but are marking out the basic shape of our ideas .
We beg the Commission earnestly to take serious note of these markers and to include them in its deliberations .
Otherwise , I fear , we shall have a rather lengthy discussion ahead of us before we find another efficient way to combat fraud .
Mr President , it is clear it is an urgent problem .
Let me begin by declaring a personal interest : as a former Director-General at the Commission I know the difficulties of a staff situation and of new tasks .
But we must make swift decisions .
The Bösch report gives a clear political signal and we must heed it .
Personally , I am still doubtful about what we should do in concrete situations .
I wish to exemplify this by a few specific points .
Mr Bösch rightly said that the present situation cannot continue .
Institutionally , I have doubts as to whether his position of having a structure which is half inside and half outside the Commission is the right one .
A board of directors from five institutions means that the director of UCLAF or OLAF will have five bosses , and someone who has five bosses has no boss .
That point must be addressed .
In view of the very short time available , I wish to address myself to the President of the Commission .
The President of the Commission said that we must have an external inquiry function , and I understand that .
But my question to the President is : does that not mean that the Commission ultimately will lose its own final responsibility in the whole fight against fraud ?
That is a very important point .
This Parliament only has the institution responsible for the budget as the institution with which it dialogues .
If that situation is lost , to whom is this external inquiry office responsible ?
To begin with I would like to see a strengthened UCLAF within the Commission , but with full independence .
Perhaps the director should be nominated by the Court of Auditors or the Court of Justice and with an institutional agreement to work together with other institutions .
But I wonder whether an external inquiry at this stage is the right solution if we do not know to whom that external inquiry will be responsible .
Are we then not in a worse situation ?
I hope we can come to a positive reply .
There should be something happening so that Mr Bösch will not be voted down but I do not think that this is the end of the debate .
As Mrs Theato said , it is the beginning of the debate , but there is great urgency to respond .
Mr President , the investigation by the Court of Auditors into the issue under discussion certainly went to the heart of the matter .
Neither the minimum necessary resources nor the basic conditions exist to combat fraud and corruption which , for their part , certainly do exist and are proliferating .
UCLAF does not have enough staff and they are not all available to operate on the ground . UCLAF 's structural dependence also prevents it from acting horizontally in an effective manner at institutional level .
Therefore , if we are to combat fraud , a lot must change not only in the area of external action but also , and most importantly , as regards internal action .
Without going into specialised analyses , I would venture to say that such a change should be undertaken in two principle directions : by strengthening the scope of Community action , particularly by strengthening UCLAF , freeing it from constraints imposed by supervisory bodies which restrict its action and guaranteeing adequate resources , and , at the same time , by ensuring satisfactory cooperation with equivalent departments in the Member States .
Transparency , independence for the body responsible for fighting fraud and more widespread action by all the institutions , including the Commission , seem to me to be essential and of priority importance .
The ECHO case and the dubious manner , to say the least , in which it has been dealt with by the Commission , particularly in its relations with Parliament , have guided us to this inevitable conclusion and we therefore welcome the proposal to turn UCLAF into an independent body .
Obviously , there are limits on our expectations .
On the subject of external action , I would stress that little progress will be made if there is no cooperation between the Member States , as I referred to earlier , and if they do not show a genuine political desire to act .
And I also consider that a certain degree of caution is necessary , particularly in the areas relating to crime and external action .
But none of this detracts from the significant step forward proposed by the rapporteur , which is essential as a minimum response to certain situations of which we are all aware .
Over recent years we have seen various ways in which the Commission 's way of operating has proved conducive to fraud . This is simply not acceptable .
The Court of Auditors ' latest reports have contributed evidence of the need for an external unit to fight the internal corruption and fraud that are clearly occurring within the EU institutions .
But I do not believe we can leave it there .
Mr Jacques Santer once announced eloquently ' We need openness and transparency . '
Fine words are not enough , Mr Santer , action is also required .
Applying the principles of open government is one of the better ways of preventing internal corruption , as the Commission ought to know .
Mr Santer , please do not use the pretext of employees ' rights to avoid talking about what is actually going on in the Commission .
We are dealing here with taxpayers ' money .
We demand to know what is happening .
And please do not deny the Committee on Budgetary Control the information it needs to pass on to us if we are to be able to grant the Commission discharge . That would be no way to behave towards a parliament .
Finally , I wish to make it clear that I am not calling for the new body called OLAF to be given the status of a judicial authority .
The results of its inquiries should be passed on to the national judicial authorities .
I am not interested in seeing some kind of EU-level public prosecution service set up .
All I want is an external unit capable of monitoring what the Commission is doing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , please let me say a heartfelt ' thank you ' to Jaak Vandemeulebroucke for his 17 years of service to the European Parliament and for all the work he has done with us over those years .
I wish him every success in everything he does following his resignation from Parliament .
Mr President , I should like to thank you for your speech , because you have asked the questions which needed to be asked in a debate whose purpose has largely been eclipsed by problems which are certainly serious , but which have made us forget the report that is before us today .
You have done a good job of dotting the ' I 's , and certain speakers have got to the heart of the matter .
Others have preferred to continue making exaggerated statements on subjects which should be dealt with at other times and in other places . In respect of these , decisions must be taken which are transparent , but without this transparency , to which we are all attached , being combined with leaks and incriminations , which can only poison the atmosphere between us , instead of creating calm .
Your speech was therefore a very timely one .
You told us that you had met with the President of Parliament and that you were going to take steps so that certain information which we wish to obtain in the context of another dossier - I will not go into this today - can be communicated to us as soon as possible .
I hope that this is the case , in the interests of both our institutions .
I believe that the Court of Auditors ' report has not been mentioned sufficiently , given that the Bösch report is based on this .
It is a quite overwhelming document which leads me to ask the question that was asked in ancient Rome : Quis custodiet custodes ?
The climate is one of concern , as stated in the Bösch report .
We are rightly asking ourselves where the Community 's resources are going , and in particular what use may have been made of them at a given moment . However , it has not been mentioned that the Court of Auditors ' report highlights serious shortcomings in the operation of UCLAF itself : lack of transparency , lack of security , lack of permanent officials - half the people working for UCLAF are temporary staff - deficiencies in the Unit 's database , and so on .
It is said that UCLAF 's computer system was set up by the Perry-Lux company , and some are even going so far as to refer to the risk of misuse of the data .
Mr President , I agree with your acceptance of the improved operation of UCLAF and your rejection of the creation of a new institute , as also voiced by Mr Dankert .
I believe that our work should be improved and extended so that UCLAF can be truly independent , within the possible structures - that is the current structures - so that it can be strengthened , and so that there is an end to these leaks and incriminations , which only poison the atmosphere and which do nothing for either ourselves or for Europe .
Mr President , Mr President and Members of the Commission , there can be no doubt that measures to combat fraud within the European institutions need considerable improvement .
The Court of Auditors ' report has brought a number of serious shortcomings to light .
One of them is the fact that UCLAF has hitherto been able to conduct investigations only within the Commission , not in other EU institutions .
The rapporteur rightly makes the point that all the institutions need effective safeguards against fraud .
He advocates the setting up of an Anti-Fraud Office , with an interinstitutional remit .
Like other honourable Members , Mr Dankert and Mrs Wemheuer , I would prefer to see that broader remit given to the UCLAF we already have .
I would also stress that this body must concern itself only with in-house detective work , the identifying of fraud within the EU institutions .
The responsibility for investigating outside the institutions , for example cases in Member States of frauds against the Community budget , remains with the Member States .
And that will not change after the Treaty of Amsterdam is ratified .
Investigation outside the institutions is not reconcilable with the laws of Member States or their criminal justice systems .
I thus reject outright recitals L and M , in which the rapporteur calls for a European criminal law area and a European Public Prosecution Service .
Action against fraud outside the EU institutions can best be improved by ensuring that the national investigation services are as efficient as possible and cooperate well with each other .
The anti-fraud units of the Commission have an important coordinating role to play here .
Mr President , Mr Bösch 's report is clear in its assessment of the situation and explicit in its demands .
However , I do not consider it helpful to vest the Commission with the power to appoint the staff of OLAF .
The proposal that OLAF should be overseen by an independent five-strong inspectorate , on the other hand , is to be welcomed .
But OLAF would not possess real autonomy as long as the Commission enjoys even indirect authority over OLAF personnel .
Only an independent OLAF , cooperating with the Court of Auditors and , of course , with the Commission and answerable to the European Parliament , will develop into an incisive instrument in the fight against fraud and cooperation .
I believe that an inspectorate operating in a vacuum , as Mr Bösch called it , can indeed be successful if it is endowed with a sufficient number of first-class personnel .
That investment would surely pay dividends .
Mr President , I rise as the parliamentarian responsible for recommending discharge for the 1996 budget .
I have listened to this debate with great interest as this is one of the main subjects , within the granting of the 1996 budget discharge , that we must decide upon before the end of the year .
I would like to make a couple of personal comments on this debate .
Firstly , I very much welcome the fact that the President of the Commission came to our Chamber this afternoon to tell us how he felt about the conduct of matters and to look to the future .
On the first point , the conduct of matters , I very much welcome his wish to give us further information so that we can better understand what is happening within the Commission .
What has driven some of us to put the 1999 ECHO budget for humanitarian aid in reserve is precisely this lack of information and inability to be able to judge for ourselves .
I hope this will be done as soon as possible .
In his remarks he made a comment which seemed a little strange , saying it would not be proper to impose individual sanctions on officials who committed these irregularities for the sole purpose of keeping departments going .
One wonders where responsibility begins and ends .
Edith Müller was absolutely right to say that , in certain instances , without of course conducting a witch hunt , where there is responsibility then that responsibility must be taken up .
Secondly , as the Court of Auditors report said , on the broader point of improving the system , we want to strengthen the UCLAF operation rather than weaken it .
The EPP would like to support the Bösch report even it is not supported by his own colleagues because we believe that progress must be made .
No doubt once we have had this debate and voted , we can also take into account the remarks made by the President of the Commission , so that we can have a really efficient procedure for anti-fraud to take us into the 21st century .
Mr President , there is method in madness , but if madness is the only source of our method , a new type of method is needed .
The Bösch report contains sound proposals that should be fully endorsed .
The circumstances surrounding the report were anything other than satisfactory .
The Bösch report has been held up , and what has subsequently hit the headlines has been disastrous .
It is reminiscent of the time of the BSE crisis and of many other problem cases that have been mentioned today .
Documents disappear ; the information is not there , and we cannot check anything .
The guilty parties have gone too , either promoted or sent away with a golden handshake .
The responsible Commissioner is no longer there either .
Even today , and I particularly regret this in view of the latest ECHO revelations , neither Commissioner Marín nor Commissioner Bonino is here , and the same thing happened last time for part of the hearing .
Mr President , we welcome your proposals that the ideas put forward by Mr Bösch be further developed .
We believe it is right and important to do that .
Entering into contact with the President of Parliament is a first step , but many more steps must follow , and above all must follow quickly .
We cannot seek protracted or long-term solutions , because we need to send out credible signals now .
You , Mr President , have assumed political responsibility .
When will the two main defendants , Commissioners Marín and Bonino , do likewise ?
How quickly will the promised disciplinary law become fully operative ?
How long do we really have to wait until each of the relevant documents is available ?
I believe there is one thing that really would be a problem , namely if the debate we are holding on this report today were to be shelved until next year when the new Commission is appointed , and we should then have to sanction all the mistakes that have been made during the present five-year term .
And one final word : the fact that the Group of the Party of European Socialists has left its rapporteur out in the cold makes me think and should make us all think .
Would it do the same if the incriminated Commissioners had different affinities ?
Mr President , as we will shortly be reaching the end of this debate , I would like to put all conflicting points to one side so that we can come to some agreements .
And , in order to do this , I am going to discuss the crux of the problem , and the points in the Bösch report on which I am sure we agree .
I believe that we all agree that UCLAF has gone through a stage that has involved more positive than negative points , but also that it has reached a point where it is in need of more economic and human resources . It is at a point where its powers need to be extended to include all Community institutions and , above all , it has reached a point where it must be transparent in order to be credible .
I hope that no-one will throw up their hands in horror if I say that whilst examining the report on ECHO , Parliament lost faith in the anti-fraud unit .
Therefore , the time has come not only to provide UCLAF with all it requires but to create a truly new version of UCLAF so that its credibility can be salvaged .
UCLAF must ensure that it leads the way in the transition from the current system to becoming a true officer of the court with an enhanced group of criminal experts .
And there is no better way to redefine its organisation and legal framework than to make use of this key moment in relations between Parliament and the Commission .
We can face up to the challenge before us : the Council , the Commission and Parliament are responsible for doing everything that is necessary to establish an anti-fraud office . It must have real experts and professionals whose code of conduct will be based on respect for the law , and , although it is a body that will be dependent on the Commission , it will have full political independence .
In short , it will be an office with the necessary equilibrium to ensure that its work is in the interest of the Community and not any particular Member State .
Mr President , when voting on the Bösch report , there can only be one way to vote : either we are for or we are against change .
Mr President , many thanks for a diverse and constructive debate .
Parliament and the Commission need to work together on the basis of mutual trust , and I am therefore in favour of plenty of discussion of this proposal in the House .
UCLAF is still young - not yet ten years old - and of course it has experienced growing pains .
Over time , though , it has developed into a very good organisation , in my opinion .
Three years ago UCLAF 's staff were scattered throughout the Commission . Today the whole operation is under one roof .
It is capable of coming to grips with cigarette smuggling ; it has recently turned its attention to the Central and Eastern European countries , and to the PHARE and TACIS programmes , among others .
I should however like to iron out one or two misunderstandings .
Several speakers stated that the Court of Auditors has uncovered cases of irregularity and fraud , yet it was UCLAF , not the Court , which did the uncovering .
The Court of Auditors ' report dealt with the organisational side of UCLAF .
Its data system was felt to need modernising ; there was a call for improved record-keeping .
And this call was heeded by both the Commission and UCLAF .
We have now made changes in working methods . In July a new programme was adopted , laying down how UCLAF 's investigations should be organised and , importantly , providing for protection for individuals supplying information .
I believe that UCLAF is on the way to becoming what Mr Bösch and many others in the European Parliament want it to be : namely an even better organisation , ready to perform the tasks expected of it by taxpayers in the Member States .
As a parallel exercise , we have launched SEM 2000 , the aim of which is to overhaul our general administrative culture and turn ourselves into a fitter and more modern institution .
I should like to conclude by saying that my personal experience has taught me that openness and transparency are of great value in pre-empting fraud and corruption in an organisation .
That is why we in the Commission , with the help of the Amsterdam Treaty , are working alongside our partners to foster more open and transparent practices for the future .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
1996 discharge
The next item is the report ( A4-0289 / 98 ) by Mr Miranda , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge procedure for the 1996 budget :
Section I , European Parliament-Section IV , Court of Justice-Section V , Court of Auditors-Section VI , Economic and Social Committee and Committee of the Regions .
Mr President , allow me to begin by saying that this report is far more than just my own .
First and foremost , it is a report by the Committee on Budgetary Control which was the subject of long and transparent reflection and thought and was finally approved almost unanimously .
I would also like to say that the differences that may exist between the report we are discussing today and the version I would have preferred do not prevent me from approving it in its entirety .
I am making these apparently unnecessary statements for two simple reasons : first , because I cannot but be surprised by the comments that have been made about it , particularly in various Parliament bodies , but never in the Commission on Budgetary Control and without any involvement by any of its members and certainly not its rapporteur . Second , and no less important , because I fear that if a disagreement arises on a particular point , however important , the fundamental problems which most urgently need a response will be neglected .
Having said that , let us move on to the substance of the report .
There are two factors that have had a particularly marked effect on the discharge procedure for 1996 .
First , Parliament lost an excellent opportunity to reduce the final cost of the D3 building in Brussels by some ECU 30 million , which had been our priority for this financial year ; second , the administrative irregularities revealed by the audits carried out by the Economic and Social Committee itself and by the Court of Auditors cannot be overlooked .
It is important that these two particularly serious factors should not , however , lead us to ignore other matters relating to the implementation of the budget which also deserve attention and appropriate action to correct them .
Let us consider the matter of the ECU 30 million .
Without wishing to take the place of the Parliament 's Bureau which decided to institute an inquiry that has now been completed , the particular responsibilities of certain services are clear , namely the authorizing officers , firstly , but also other services involved , and the absence of cooperation between them is patently obvious .
My particular concern in the report , from the outset , was to examine these two issues in a balanced manner , as this is the only way to show people the various errors which led to the loss of the sum in question and , consequently , the opportunity to pay for D3 in advance .
Indeed , the errors were legion .
Use was not made - in this , as in other earlier processes of a similar nature - of the option unilaterally to establish the sum to be paid in advance . It was argued that this was established practice .
The situation was further complicated to the point of absurdity when it came to the wording of the additional agreement , and particularly the amount to be specified , to the extent that what had been done on previous occasions appeared to be forgotten , with everything meanwhile growing increasingly complicated , as though there were no deadlines to be met whereas they were in fact about to expire .
Opinions were given and comments were made , some of them contradictory , others too late and irrelevant , contributing nothing to the satisfactory and timely solution of the matter but only complicating things still further .
Not even the main priority was observed , no attempt was even made to keep the losses to a minimum , as would have occurred if at least the advance payment of ECU 29.5 million had been made .
Some lessons should at least be learned to prevent any recurrence of such situations .
Everything must be done to ascertain not only the professional qualifications but also the solid professional experience of the institutions ' main administrators .
Maximum transparency and stringency are essential in filling such posts , and all possible steps should be taken to ensure efficient and continuous cooperation between the various services of the House .
I would like to end this point on a positive note by mentioning the measures subsequently taken by the Secretary-General to remedy such administrative errors and to ensure the success of recruitment competitions .
Still on the subject of Parliament , I would like to draw attention to a few other points , including the increase in cancellations of appropriations , the various refusals of approval , particularly regarding interpretation , and the need to regularise the discrepancy of some ECU 4 million between the cash situation and accounts , which has been outstanding for several years .
On the subject now of the Economic and Social Committee , as I said before , the audits carried out both internally and by the Court of Auditors reveal obvious irregularities and manifest administrative negligence in connection with the travel expenses of members .
It should be remembered that the Council itself , when it learned of the results of the audits , stated its opinion on the matter in the clearest terms .
However , certain measures have subsequently been instituted and remedial action taken but , if discharge is to be granted , it is essential that the Court of Auditors and UCLAF take note of the conclusions , particularly as regards responsibilities , the reliability of the new system of reimbursement and the conditions for recovering sums overpaid .
It is obvious that until these matters have been settled , we cannot grant the discharge .
We likewise regret the irregularities revealed by the Court of Auditors regarding the Committee of the Regions , and we take due note of the interim report which brings us back to the matter of recovering sums incorrectly paid and the administrative measures taken .
Meanwhile , we consider that the Court of Auditors should also verify that the measures taken are appropriate .
Two brief points regarding the Court of Justice and the Court of Auditors .
First of all , we need to improve financial forecasts for the amounts and the justifications given for the various budget headings .
Secondly , we need to include the Court of Auditors systematically in the horizontal audits carried out .
Lastly , I would emphasise that Parliament 's particular responsibilities in the discharge procedure mean that the Commission needs to draft amendments to the Financial Regulation promptly . And they make it essential that Parliament should be consulted prior to the appointment of the treasurer and financial auditor of each of the decentralised institutions and agencies .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group in the absence of Mrs Wemheuer , the coordinator and Mr Tomlinson who is our spokesman on this issue .
In my five minutes I cannot really say a lot but I know there were four points that Mr Tomlinson wanted to be highlighted and these are as follows .
Firstly , the ' mopping-up ' transfer , which the rapporteur has described quite eloquently .
This was nothing short of a disaster for Parliament .
Many of us considered that to be the case .
We have gone through the implications of it , we have gone through the reasons that it occurred and whatever else .
One can only hope that it is now in the past , and there is a statement in the report which welcomes the actions taken by the Secretary-General to make sure that this type of thing will never happen again .
It should not have happened and the fact that it did did not help Parliament 's budget one iota .
That is one item that the rapporteur has already dwelt on .
The second item concerns qualified staff as outlined in Paragraph 14 .
Mr Tomlinson would say that there is a lack of qualified staff , certainly when it comes to accounting and financial control within Parliament .
Here again we welcome the action being taken by the Secretary-General .
We should not forget that this report is based on the 1996 budget and we would hope that the staff who will manage the resources within Parliament will be as the Secretary-General expects and certainly as we expect .
Another item was the inventories .
Paragraph 19 says : ' Regrets the 1994 triennial inventory check has not been completed by the end of 1996 ' .
In other words , we do not know what Parliament owns .
We do not know what Parliament 's total resources are .
Not long ago I received in my office a piece of paper which was in effect an inventory check .
It asked me to fill in what I had .
Quite frankly that was an open invitation to nick half the stuff in my office .
I could fill in the desk and chair and take everything else .
That is not the way to do an inventory and it is one of the points I know Mr Tomlinson and our group have been commenting on for quite some time .
One would hope it can be rectified .
The main item Mr Tomlinson would want to emphasize is in paragraph 15 .
It is the comment about the legal services .
I know that there will be amendments to this paragraph and therefore I intend reading it out so at least it is on record before it is amended .
It says : ' Parliament ... reaffirms its support for the drawing up of quality opinions by the Legal Service which should enable decision makers to protect Parliament 's interests swiftly and effectively ' .
The part which seems to give offence is as follows : ' Notes the shortcomings in the quality of legal advice provided by the internal legal service of this institution , as identified by its rapporteur and as reflected in cases lost in national courts , in the European Court of Justice and in the Court of First Instance ; asks its Secretary-General to commission a study into the effectiveness of the results of the legal service 's advice over the past ten years . Calls on its Secretary-General to provide the Committee on Budgetary Control with comprehensive job descriptions for the A-grade officials in the legal service ' .
That is paragraph 15 in its entirety .
If , at the end of the day that is amended significantly , at least that now is on the record and I would hope that the services can take cognizance of what has been said there and can act upon it .
It is not a condemnation of individuals within that service but it is a hope that we can have a better legal service for the future for Parliament .
Mr President , Mr Miranda 's report , for which I thank him , contains two proposals for decisions giving discharge and one motion for a resolution postponing the discharge decision .
I should like to highlight the discharge given to the Committee of the Regions and to inform the Committee that we are very concerned about its staff policy and that the latest exchanging of posts approved by the budgetary authority with the Economic and Social Committee cannot exactly be regarded as progress .
As far as Parliament is concerned , we are closely monitoring the measures that were adopted on the basis of the Court of Auditors ' report in relation to Members ' expenses .
We had to delay by several months the discharge that can now be given to the Secretary-General , because our committee wished to await the findings of the inquiry conducted by the Bureau into the cancellation of funds amounting to about ECU 30 million .
The Bureau has decided on the question of personal responsibilities , and we respect that decision .
However , we are duty-bound to state that the decisions of the budgetary authority could not be implemented and that this was due to procedural errors and inadequate administrative structures .
We note the reforms and decisions adopted by the Secretary-General and we hope that these will eliminate the defects .
The administration of the parliamentary budget is fraught with many more difficulties , which are enumerated in Mr Miranda 's report .
I only wish to point out that the problems dealt with by the Court of Auditors in its report on Members ' allowances will have to be considered in our discharge for the 1997 financial year , since we only received this report two weeks ago .
I should also like to stress that we are not satisfied with the present arrangement whereby we grant discharge to the Secretary-General while responsibility for overruling a decision to withhold approval rests with the Bureau .
The 1996 budget was not affected by this anomaly , but it would be useful if we could reach an agreement with the Bureau as quickly as possible .
What concerns me most in Mr Miranda 's report is the postponement of the discharge decision in respect of the Economic and Social Committee .
The situation described by the Court of Auditors is so serious that the Council , in its recommendation on discharge , asked the Court of Auditors and UCLAF to conduct an inquiry in order to establish the precise scale and implications of the irregularities ..
This is also one of the reasons why we have been calling for the Bösch report on the independence of UCLAF and demanding that UCLAF be permitted to conduct its investigations in the other institutions too .
What we have discovered to date tends to suggest that the Economic and Social Committee is not taking our demands seriously .
It evidently considers the matter closed , but there is nothing to suggest that such irregularities cannot recur at a future date within the Economic and Social Committee .
A Financial Controller was appointed without our being given the necessary assurances concerning his independence .
For these reasons , we cannot guarantee at the present time that we shall grant discharge .
Everything will depend on how the Economic and Social Committee responds to our requests .
I hope we shall have the opportunity to apprise the new Secretary-General of the situation at our next meeting .
It seems to me that a separate vote is necessary on each of these three proposals .
Mr President , first I want to praise the courage of the rapporteur , who has tackled a difficult job over many months .
It is not easy to be responsible in this place and to make recommendations to the Committee on Budgetary Control and Parliament , because we are monitoring other institutions .
I know that Mr Elles is looking after the Commission 's discharge , but Mr Miranda looks after the rest .
This Parliament cannot be guilty of double standards .
If we are to criticise others we must make sure that our finances are dealt with in a correct way .
We must not hide our embarrassment and we must not be seen to break the rules of transparency in our procedures and our accounts .
In paragraph 4 we are dealing with the matter of the ECU 30 million .
The word ' deplores ' is strong .
But the paragraph does not mention that the financial controller had , before the event , advised against the idea of using the automatic carry-over procedure .
There was not time enough .
However , almost because he made that recommendation , the procedure of automatic carry-over was tried .
What happened ?
Parliament fell on its face and we missed the deadlines .
It is my belief that in many of our Member States a minister would have lost his job in such a case .
I have put down an amendment which has been refused .
I will refer to that at a later date and I will name names later .
The Secretary-General has an easier job in ensuring correctness .
He must make sure that Parliament staff follow the financial regulation and follow Parliament 's internal rules .
If that had happened we would not have lost ECU 30 million .
In paragraph 13 we mention consultants .
I am not opposed to outside consultants .
I do not believe this House contains all the wisdom .
We must be prepared to ask other people 's advice , but the rules must be followed .
The rules must be laid down and proper contracts must be made so that we are not paying on-running sums in order to make sure that the advice is paid for .
Paragraph 19 refers to the 1994 inventory , not completed by 1996 .
This is disgraceful .
But the previous one was a farce .
We did not get to the bottom of it .
Inquiries showed that some of the items said to be missing had not been received by Parliament but had been paid for .
The Members ' Cash Office case is also mentioned , with the loss of money which came to light in 1982 , 16 years ago .
It has not yet been dealt with .
It is before the courts , I know , and they are responsible for the delay .
But some of the delay in the courts is due to the fact that we did not follow proper procedures in this House in 1982 .
The matter was dealt with wrongly at the time .
This leaves us in a very serious position .
Year after year we have to mention in our accounts that so much money has been lost to Parliament and we do not know yet whether there is any chance of recovering it from the insurance companies .
It was sloppy procedures in the House that made it possible for this affair to start and it has been procedures in the House which have prolonged it .
l congratulate Mr Miranda on the way in which he has looked into ECOSOC and the Committee of the Regions .
Both needed his close attention .
Mr President , we live in difficult times where any lack of control can lead to irregularities or to fraud , and I am making a clear distinction between the two as Mr Santer previously requested .
Every day the media sound the alarm bells to report that certain things are not running smoothly within the European Union .
They report that the apparently efficient Community machinery is not as efficient , as honest or as incorruptible as we used to believe .
This did not begin yesterday as there have been signs of a deterioration for some years now , and this has given rise to books , press articles , television programmes and individual and collective accusations .
When this parliamentary term began we , the new Members , were surprised with Parliament 's building policy at that stage .
It is possible that many of the problems that are still hanging over us today date back to this time , when inadequate property management made the Members of the European Parliament seem like the main characters in a play when we were only really spectators , and passive spectators at that .
In politics , the sin of omission or passivity is doubly serious : it is a blow to the legitimacy of the system and it abuses the goodwill of the citizens who vote for us .
We should never , and particularly from now on , allow inaction or omission in this House to lead to situations being overlooked , situations that may later become deadly weapons aimed at the heart of the European Union , that is , its credibility and its honest image .
It is for this reason that the discharge procedure is so important .
If Parliament does not discharge the budget that this Parliament voted for , then the honesty of the discharge procedure is called into question and we will have to immediately take action to restore freedom , honesty and trust .
The rapporteur , Mr Miranda , suggests that we discharge specific sections of the budget .
This House has complete faith in Mr Miranda and we therefore support his conclusions .
However , I would like to clarify two specific points .
The first is that my colleague Mr Edward Kellett-Brown is right : we are a Parliament and we have a duty to report any irregularities , giving first and last names .
Transparency does not hurt anybody and it often helps to provide an honest environment .
And secondly , we must not harm Parliament 's bodies that are responsible for legal certainty .
The legal services of this House may have their limits , and their operation must certainly be improved , but to cast doubt on them does not help our work .
The amendment we are tabling reflects this and we hope that it will be adopted by the House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products
The next item is the report ( A4-0338 / 98 ) by Mr Tappin , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Council Regulation ( EC ) 297 / 95 on fees payable to the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products ( COM ( 98 ) 0021 - C4-0284 / 98-98 / 0135 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , firstly I should like to thank the Commission and colleagues from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and the Committee on Budgetary Control for their support for this report .
Part of my thanks goes to the Council and the Commission , which recognise that as part of the budgetary authority Parliament has a role in deciding the future of the fee structures for this agency .
The basic regulation only requires consultation of the industry before the Commission presents its proposals to Council .
Getting that inclusion has come after a considerable delay and a great many problems have been created for the Agency in London as a result of that delay .
This year alone the agency finds itself ECU 4m overspent and the Director risks finding himself operating from an illegal position .
The Commission has started proceedings for a transfer , but the lateness of the transfer will mean there will still be some difficulties .
This situation must not be repeated in the future .
We have an obligation to make sure that Community bodies operate legally , efficiently and to the ultimate benefit of the Community .
So the first two points which need to be stressed as far as this report is concerned are : firstly , Parliament must automatically be involved in future decisions affecting fee levels without delay ; secondly , as and when fees are revised in the future that must be done within a budgetary deadline so as to allow the agency to manage its affairs in a proper and efficient manner .
Failure to achieve agreement within that deadline puts an automatic obligation on the Commission to ensure the agency 's ability to carry out its function is not adversely affected .
This particular agency has always been most accommodating of Parliament 's requirements concerning budgets of the Community 's decentralized bodies and is to be congratulated on the excellent report it received from the Court of Auditors .
We have always insisted : firstly , that an agency 's resources should be budgetised ; secondly , that as an instrument of European policy , agencies should be accountable and transparent to the budgetary authority ; thirdly , that all surpluses should be returned to the budget .
These are outlined in the Kellett-Bowman report .
This agency has always supported those principles inasmuch as it could .
However , it was unable to give me all the necessary information on the costs involved in processing applications , etc . , simply because it does not have that information .
It does not even have a breakdown of how the Member States use the money they receive from an agency to pay for the action study of an individual product .
The actual evaluations are carried out by the Member State rapporteurs , who receive 50 % of the agency fee to cover the costs of producing the report .
The agency did not decide on this fee any more than it decides on what the pharmaceutical companies should pay for the evaluations as a whole .
The Commission claims that the fee levels do not cover the costs incurred either by the Member States or the agency and that they should therefore be increased .
Parliament may remember that it was the Council that reduced the fees the last time .
In general we would agree with the Commission and Mr Valverde López , who has produced an excellent opinion on behalf of the Environment Committee , an opinion which I have happily endorsed and for which I thank him .
But , since the figures given by the Commission can only be guesstimates we feel that future evaluations should be made on the basis of real information provided by both the agency and the Member States .

So our next recommendations are that : firstly , with the assistance of the Commission - for which we thank Mr Mingasson and his staff - the agency should complete its installation of a complete automated financial system , which will provide a breakdown and facilitate a cost analysis of the work of the agency ; secondly , the Commission should require member State agencies to make similar information on their costs available to us as the budgetary authority ; thirdly , in two years ' time we come back to a full review of fees based on an evaluation of real data .
This will tell us if it takes longer , for example , to evaluate an application for a veterinary product which would end up in the food chain as opposed to one which does not , or whether a variation of an original application takes the same amount of work or only half or quarter as much .
Such an analysis will also resolve the question of how much time is spent by the agency on evaluating commercial products or carrying out public health related tasks on behalf of the Community as a whole .
The pharmaceutical companies feel it is unjust that they should have to underwrite these costs .
They warn that if the fees are set too high or at levels which undermine their profitability , they will cut back on research and development .
They are obviously determined to protect their vested interests as we all are .
Members may be aware that the European Union has just taken a series of decisions on the desirability of maintaining work on orphan drugs , on pre-accession technical cooperation , on mutual recognition agreements with third countries and so on .
It is in all our interests that this important Union business is carried out effectively and efficiently .
It is in everybody 's interests , including the Member States ' , to reduce the costs of medicines since much of that cost is eventually subsidised by the state through public health programmes and medical care .
Although it was envisaged that the agency will become self-funding , we have to recognize that it is not going to happen in the immediate future even though we have continued to diminish the EU contribution as a proportion of the agency 's total budget year on year .
It is also clear that the future financing of this agency will rely on the structural mechanisms we put in place to guarantee the stability it needs to do its work properly .
These principles will apply to all agencies , not just London .
Although the starting premise has to be that each agency is different and must be treated as such , the sort of framework I am referring to is designed to ensure that the levels of accountability , transparency and financial efficiency , once assured , can be relied on .
Firstly , Parliament requires a mechanism to be introduced to adjust the budgets of the agencies automatically up or down , to compensate for the effect of exchange-rate fluctuations or changes to the institutional weighting allowances .
It is ridiculous that bodies such as the agencies , which are tied to institutional statutes and which have their budget levels decided after much debate and consultation by the budgetary authority , should have all that consideration thrown out of the window in mid-year by an institutional decision , which must be obeyed , on the weighting adjustments to their Title 1 , or by a decision of Mr Soros or one of his financial speculator friends to raise or wreck a particular currency .
The EMEA has suffered huge losses as a result of the strength of the British pound .
The point is not whether they lose or gain money , but that an agreed budget should be a budget which is executed .
We have also introduced a new line this year which would hold additional funds in reserve for all the agencies , except Torino which is in category 4 and , therefore , cannot draw down the line from category 3 to cover the operational costs of activities and programmes relating to Union policies which the agencies may implement .
This is not to be used as a slush fund .
We will require that the agencies show the greatest attention to cost management .
This is not instead of the Council and the Commission agreeing to increase funding for the agencies when they wish to increase their workloads - and this is important .
As we squeeze the budgets generally , some people might imagine they could transfer activities out to agencies without transferring the matching fundings , and thereby shift their budgetary problems to someone else .
This new line is to allow additional activities to be incorporated into the agencies ' work programme , as long as doing so does not involve increases in staffing or capital expenditure beyond the limits of existing budgets .
To make sure that London and all the other agencies maintain their support in the future of the principle , we have established and drawn up a code of conduct .
This involves , for example , agreements on reporting and transparency such as , firstly , asking agencies to report on any changes to their budgets to the budgetary authority ; secondly , reporting of their organigrammes and work programmes for consideration in the drawing up of their budgets .
Just to make sure there is no delay in getting this agreement through , we are putting 10 % of all agency budgets in reserve , subject to their signing and returning the agreements .
This could be done before the second reading .
I must stress that the vast majority of agencies have been totally supportive of the code and , indeed , it has been drawn up in consultation with those involved .
We have also had agreement , in the main , on the harmonisation of the founding regulations .
Although this passed through Parliament , it remains with the Council awaiting agreement .
It has been there far too long and we should be putting every pressure on the Council through the budget procedure to urge it to deal with this as a matter of urgency .
We have also included a section in the general budget which will cover the agencies ' buildings .
It seems ridiculous that the EU has assets or liabilities in the Member States of which we have no details .
What conclusions can we draw ?
Over the three years in which I have been standing rapporteur for the agencies for the Committee on Budgets , I have been fortunate to have the very positive support of people like Edward Kellett-Bowman - my colleague across the way - Mr Mingasson , and the agency directors .
We have tried to demystify the satellite agencies : to bring them down to earth as it were .
We want to make sure that , although they operate at a distance from the central places of work , they are still part of Community bodies , still accountable to the democratically elected Members of Parliament , controlled but not overwhelmed either by lots of different groups which have dropped in to check up on them and their work , or by the bureaucratic demands of people trying to assess what is going on from a distance .
We wanted to strike a balance .
Many of the agencies are still in their start-up phases .
Many were frozen in mid-growth by the standstill budgets of the past two years .
Some may never achieve the format originally set out in their establishment plan , and there are still ideas for more agencies in the pipeline .
Once there is a code of conduct and the harmonisation of regulation is achieved , we have all the transparency necessary to enable the budgetary authority or the standing committees to ask the questions they need .
The automated financial systems , which not just London but almost all the agencies will have up and running in the near future , will help .
This project , which has been developed in a spirit of cross-agency cooperation , is typical of what has been achieved in requiring the agencies to avoid duplication of effort in activities and to make themselves more aware of how they can increase their own efficiency .
It will also permit electronic financial control .
Our satellite links will never have been better .
The next agency budgets will take place in the new parliamentary term .
By then all the mechanisms and structures should be in place to make arguments about budget levels much more informed .
The budgetary authority should be able to make its assessments on the basis of real evidence of need and performance , surely the best basis for judgement .
To conclude , I commend my recommendations specifically on the fee structure for the EMEA but , in general , for those which will impact on this and other agencies ' abilities to produce the work we require of them in the most efficient and effective way .
I hope the House will support my amendments and the amendments of the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Mr President , I want to congratulate Mr Tappin .
Clearly he has become an acknowledged expert on the workings of the decentralised bodies and agencies .
The conclusions of the Budgetary Control Committee are brief , and read as follows : ' The Committee on Budgetary Control welcomes the proposal of the Commission whereby the EMEA charges its customers fees that are more commensurate with the costs it incurs , and also takes this opportunity to congratulate the agency on operational progress made . '
I wish to make four points .
Firstly , the agency is a splendid example of subsidiarity .
Here pharmaceutical manufacturers around Europe can get registration at one place which works in all the Member States .
This is far more efficient and certainly cheaper .
The fees problem has been well outlined by Mr Tappin .
The agency is squeezed by the way we go about it .
However , I am puzzled by one point - why veterinary products should attract a much lower fee than human products .
So many of the former products will ultimately be getting into the human chain and I wonder whether they should not actually incur a higher cost , but that has not happened .
Some months ago the House passed amendments to Statutes , as mentioned by Mr Tappin .
I am assured by the Council that those amendments are not blocked in the Council , but are merely behind schedule .
I hope the conciliation meetings will find an opportunity to raise this matter with the Council .
The fourth point is that the European Court of Auditors ' initial report on this agency for the past year gives them a clean sheet .
This is highly creditable .
It looks as if they might even be the first body to get the certificate of assurance within the European Community .
This certificate has eluded the Commission and all other bodies over the years since the Maastricht Treaty brought it into being but I see this agency as being a candidate for taking the blue ribbon very soon .
Mr Tappin has produced a good report .
I encourage the House to support the amendments and his report .
Mr President , I would firstly like to add my congratulations to those for the rapporteur , Mr Tappin , as he has drawn up an excellent report .
In this case , the report was based on the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products but it also affects the overall structure of the running and financial control of the rest of the Agency .
The agencies are proving to be an excellent working instrument within the Commission .
And , in fact , although the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products only came into operation in 1995 , it has already received international recognition . The entire sector and all those involved are very pleased with the exemplary running of this Agency .
Therefore , the three committees that have drawn up reports all express their support for the Agency and its excellent work .
It was necessary for fee levels to be updated - as provided for in the regulations establishing the Agency - and I therefore believe that it is appropriate for this Parliament to support the change in these fee levels .
Above all , I believe that the annual fee proposed by the Commission is extremely important as it will help meet the costs of post-authorization surveillance and maintenance activities , which are very important in this sector .
But perhaps we must also remember that these fees are not taxes and should only be paid for services rendered .
That is the basis of some of the amendments I have tabled - and I would like to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur , Mr Tappin , for having taken over the seven amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection - and these amendments aim to graduate fees in accordance with the work carried out .
However , Mr President , whilst I support an increase in fees , I would like to highlight the pressing need to maintain the Agency 's independence .
The contribution from the EU budget must be safeguarded - in other words , it should be maintained and reductions be avoided - as the Agency is working for the pharmaceutical sector in Europe but it also has the interests of millions of patients , health professionals and consumers at stake .
We must remember that Parliament has always supported this fundamental question of the Agency 's independence .
The European Union and its pharmaceutical industry - the largest in the world - need a strong Agency that has the necessary scientific resources .
And this will only be achieved through transparent and adequate funding .
Only recently , Mr President , in connection with the marketing of the Viagra pill , we saw how useful the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products is , because it was on the strength of the Agency 's opinion that the Commission decided to license it .
It is just one example of how important this body is .
It can only grow in importance , bearing in mind that it has only been operational for three years .
We too regard the EMEA as to some extent a government body .
I quite agree with the rapporteur because this Agency is to some extent concerned with implementing the policy of the single market and safeguarding public health .
So I think that most of the EMEA 's revenue should come from fees , but that some of it should continue to come from the EU budget .
But as the rapporteur points out , it is rather unsatisfactory to know that there has still been no in-depth study of the costs of processing applications .
Like the rapporteur , I find that regrettable .
It would give us a better idea in future of what proportion of the Agency 's work is taken up by the public health responsibilities laid on it by the institutions .
I hope we may quickly have a result on that .
The rapporteur also says that the Agency made a loss of 20 % due to currency fluctuations and the effect of the corrective coefficient or weighting .
Will the Commissioner tell us what she thinks about that ?
How does the Commission deal with this question of currency movements and the weighting in the Agency 's case ?
Lastly , we think it is important , and this must be clear , to guarantee the payment of a certain sum from our budget .
As rapporteur on the budget for the Environment Committee I argued in favour of an extra ECU 2 million over and above the present figure of twelve million .
The Committee on Budgets decided last week to give one million more , or half of what we had asked for .
But as you see , we in the Environment Committee are doing our best to safeguard the budget for this Agency .
I am very pleased that it has been possible to have this item on the agenda of the plenary session so quickly .
I would therefore like to thank all those who invested a considerable amount of work on this draft proposal .
The current level and structure of fees payable by the pharmaceutical industry to the European Agency for the evaluation of medical products was set out in the 1995 Council regulation .
In accordance with Article 10 of this regulation the Commission submitted a report on its implementation .
In the light of that exercise we proposed the definitive regulation in January 1998 .
In preparing this report the Commission has sought to ensure two aims : first , not to place undue burden on applicants ; second , not to endanger the achievement of the EMEA 's primary task which is to provide scientific advice of the highest possible quality in relation to the authorisation and supervision of medical products .
The proposed increase in fee levels is clearly demonstrated and supported by a cost survey of the national competent authorities and the EMEA .
Particular attention was given to the fact that fees should normally be lower than the total of fees charged by 15 Member States .
The Commission 's proposals also foresee some major new orientations : the introduction of an annual fee ; the introduction of a fee for scientific advice and protocol assistance ; a reduced fee for certain variations which do not involve detailed scientific evaluation ; fees for the establishment of maximum residue limits for clinical trials ; administrative charges ; the introduction of differentiated fees for the initiation of Community referral procedures .
I am pleased to announce that the Commission will take up several of the amendments proposed by the European Parliament .
We will therefore shortly produce an amended proposal .
It will take on board the following issues : the suggestion that future amendments to the fees regulation will be based on a complete evaluation of all costs of the Agency - Amendment No 16 ; clarification that the fee for evaluation covers all strengths and pharmaceutical forms of a product - Amendments Nos 10 and 11 ; increase of the additional arbitration fee for veterinary medical products - Amendment No 12 ; increase of the fees for changes to a maximum residue limit of a veterinary medical product - Amendment No 13 ; the introduction of a flexible fee for scientific advice ; Amendment No 14 .
Unfortunately we will not be able to take on board all amendments .
This is for several reasons .
Some issues cannot be taken up for legal reasons .
For instance , it is not possible to change the legal basis for the regulation .
Article 10 of the 1995 regulation already gives a precise and specific legal basis which has to be respected .
In other cases we think that the suggested amendments might bring about a possible risk for public health . For example , by encouraging an inflation in different presentations of one medical product .
The proposal to make the first fixation of a maximum residue limit for several animal species more expensive cannot be accepted .
This would be contrary to the Commission 's policy to encourage and stimulate applications for fixations of new MRLs .
Other issues will be laid down in horizontal legal texts and not in the fees regulation .
This includes , for example , the mentioning of the euro and budgetary details .
Thank you once again for your quick and fruitful cooperation on this issue .
Mr President , I asked the Commissioner how she proposed to deal with the question of currency movements and the effect of the corrective coefficient .
The Agency has lost 20 % because of these .
What is the Commission going to do about it ?
Mr President , I am representing Mr Bangemann and I will ask him to give you a written answer .
Mr President , I think that as Mr Kellett-Bowman might well attest , in the budget arrangements for 1999 we put in a series of amendments to ensure that the Commission actually tops up on the third or fourth payments every year the losses made by any agency through exchange rate fluctuations or the weighting arrangements .
If the budget goes through the first reading in early December , that will actually be operational .
Similarly , if agencies win out , they will lose their grant the next year , so there will not be a win-win but rather a win-lose situation .
I hope that clarifies the position .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended until 5.30 p.m. )
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0483 / 98 ) .
Mr Liikanen has just arrived and is probably running on Finnish time , which is not exactly the same as our own .
Nonetheless , we would like to welcome him and ask that he answers Question No 30 by Marjo Matikainen-Kallström ( H-0885 / 98 )
Subject : The impact of the crisis in Russia on the country 's energy production and nuclear safety
The deepening economic , social and political crisis in Russia has given rise to fears that the coming winter may cause major energy management problems there .
It has also been suggested that serious economic problems , as well as unpaid wages and the possible neglect of maintenance operations , may adversely affect the country 's capacity to produce nuclear energy safely .
Russia has nuclear power stations , inter alia near the Finnish border , whose technical condition and safety are not entirely certain even under stable conditions .
Because of this , the impact of the crisis , which is now rapidly becoming more acute , on Russia 's energy management and nuclear safety should be investigated as thoroughly as possible and above all quickly .
In view of the above , how probable and how serious does the Commission consider the adverse consequences of the growing crisis in Russia for the country 's energy management and nuclear safety to be ?
What will the Commission do to help the Russian authorities to avert and eliminate any safety hazards arising from the above energy problems ?
I give the floor to Mr Liikanen to answer Mrs Matikainen-Kallström 's question .
Mr President , there is nothing to indicate that the present situation in Russia is having a negative impact on the energy sector and nuclear safety .
There have been signs that the government intends to pay employees in the industries concerned the salaries that have remained outstanding .
In this way there could be a positive effect on the present difficult situation .
The Commission is monitoring the situation and makes a daily assessment of developments , mainly through its delegation in Moscow .
At the same time the implementation of the TACIS programme which is currently under way , particularly in the energy sector , will enable us to acquire the information that we need .
In this way , the situation with regard to nuclear power plants can be monitored continuously .
It is with this programme very much in mind that the Commission and the Russian authorities are developing fresh strategies .
Since the start of the programme around ECU 300 million has been made available to improve nuclear safety in Russia .
Safety standards have improved mainly through cooperation between the European Union and most of the Russian nuclear power plants .
It is hoped that the strategy will be fully in place before Viktor Kliman , Jacques Santer and Boris Yeltsin meet in Vienna on 27 October .
Mr President , I wish to thank the Commissioner for his reply .
I would still like to have it clarified what guarantees the Russian authorities have given to the employees that their salaries will be paid , since it is an absolute requirement for the employees concerned to stay on in these plants , as well as for the safety of the plants to be ensured .
Mr President , I am not aware of any legal guarantees on the subject , but only of a political commitment .
Let us hope that the matter can be resolved .
Obviously , our problem is that Russia 's economic difficulties cannot be overcome with the support of the international community alone .
Ultimately , it is Russia herself that must solve these structural problems , which include paying the outstanding salaries .
I shall pass the question on to the Commissioner responsible .
If we learn any more , we shall glad to forward the information to the honourable Member .
Thank you very much , Mr Liikanen .
I would like to stay with this matter as , pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , I have received two supplementary questions .
The first is from Mr Rübig , who has the floor for one minute .
You have the floor , Mr Rübig .
Mr President , we know that we spend a great deal of money on the safety of nuclear power stations ; that is done under Euratom .
But what is the situation regarding minimum standards ?
Are there not even any plans to introduce minimum safety standards for nuclear power stations in the European Union , particularly with the enlargement of the EU in mind ?
I believe it is time we all sat down to develop a common programme of safety standards for Europe , one reason being that it could serve as a basis for the applicant states to raise their own standards .
Mr President , I will gladly convey this suggestion to Mr Papoutsis .
He will be here tomorrow at the Commission meeting , and I will ask him to reply separately to you on that point .
Mr President , does the Commission really have any idea at all just how dangerous the Russian nuclear plants are and what condition they are in ?
We know that any nuclear accident there would pose a truly grave danger to the population of the European Union .
Mr President , as I stated at the beginning , there has been a good deal of cooperation with the Russian authorities to improve nuclear safety through the TACIS programmes .
ECU 300 million has been spent on this , and there has been an immense amount of cooperation among experts .
I believe the Commission has a very good overall picture of the situation , but I am prepared to ask our experts in the field to provide the honourable Member with detailed information if she so wishes .
Question No 31 by Pedro Aparicio Sánchez ( H-0896 / 98 )
Subject : Spanish nationality requirement for Spanish airline captains
Despite the fact that Article 48 of the Treaty bans discrimination between workers in the EC on grounds of nationality , the Spanish Government does not authorise Spanish airlines to appoint persons of non-Spanish nationality as aeroplane captains .
The government justifies this restriction ( laid down by law in 1960 ) on the grounds that , inter alia , ' the job of the captain of an aeroplane includes duties of a kind that would normally be carried out by a civil servant ' .
This restrictive interpretation is upheld in the face of requests for its abolition from various bodies and individuals , and in particular the Spanish Airlines Association , which represents 26 Spanish private companies .
Does the Commission believe that the Spanish nationality requirement for Spanish airline captains constitutes an infringement of Article 48 of the EC Treaty ?
If so , does the Commission intend to force the Spanish Government to rectify the situation ?
I give the floor to Mr Liikanen to answer Mr Aparicio Sánchez 's question .
Mr President , only posts having judicial powers or involving the public interests of the State are reserved for citizens of the country in question .
These would include such jobs as police officer , judge or state minister , together with certain top executive posts in the public administration .
The crew of a commercial airliner clearly does not fall within this category .
According to international law and practice , however , the captain of an aircraft is a representative of authority on that aircraft , since he or she is responsible for the safety of the plane and for public order and , ultimately , for the lives of the passengers .
On this basis , it could be said in a general way that the captain of an aircraft wields judicial power , or at least may wield it if called upon to do so .
This is the practice adopted by most Member States and that approved by the Commission .
Any condition of nationality for certain kinds of employment is , however , an exception to the basic principle of Community law that all European citizens should be treated equally in matters of employment .
This exception must therefore be interpreted within certain limitations .
It is possible that , in certain cases , the captain will not normally be called upon to exert his or her judicial powers because of the nature of the aircraft itself or other circumstances .
In such cases , the condition concerning nationality is without foundation .
However , such a case would be an exception to the general rules concerning the typical work of the captain of an aircraft , so the burden of proof should remain with the party invoking this exception .
Commissioner , thank you for your kind response that , personally speaking , gives me great pleasure .
The Spanish Government argues that the captain of an aeroplane performs duties such as authorising marriages on board , registering a new-born child or guarding diplomatic bags . Although the government does not class them as civil servants , they do hold a position of authority .
Therefore , in my opinion , this is a rather out-dated and old-fashioned interpretation of the role of a captain of an aeroplane . But I fear that the extremely powerful Spanish pilots ' trade union is behind this oversight by the Spanish Government and that it is exerting considerable pressure to keep the labour market restricted .
Question No 32 by Frode Kristoffersen ( H-0910 / 98 )
Subject : Preselection tests in connection with the Commission 's open competitions COM / A / 8 / 98 , COM / A / 9 / 98 , COM / A / 10 / 98 , COM / A / 11 / 98 and COM / A / 12 / 98
What measures does the Commission propose to take to ensure that preselection tests for Commission posts are conducted in future in such a way that it is not necessary to discard candidates ' papers ? What penalties will the Commission impose on the persons in the Commission who are responsible for these irregularities , and on the candidates in the tests who broke the rules for the conduct of such tests ?
I give the floor to Mr Liikanen to answer Mr Kristoffersen 's question .
Mr President , the Commission decided on 23 September 1998 to annul the preselection tests for competitions COM / A / 8 / 98 to COM / A / 12 / 98 held on 14 September this year , since there are sufficient grounds to believe that there has been a leak of information regarding at least one of the tests and at least one of the competition languages .
To ensure equal treatment for all candidates , the Commission will be organising new preselection tests as soon as possible for the start of 1999 .
An investigation was begun immediately to discover who was responsible for the leak .
The legal authorities are being contacted with a view to bringing possible proceedings .
Those found responsible will also be liable for damages in respect of the Commission .
The Commission is aware of problems at two of the test venues on 14 September , including a mobile phone being used and certain candidates not following the instructions of the invigilators .
For this reason , the Commission intends to tighten up considerably the rules on competitions and their supervision , so that all candidates can take part in them on an equal footing .
The Commission deeply regrets the inconvenience which this situation has caused to those candidates who participated in the competitions honestly and in good faith .
Commissioner , I would like to ask whether consideration has already been given as things stand to ways of tightening up the rules and improving them for the purposes of future tests .
Do you not agree with me , Commissioner , that this is a very serious and unhappy affair , since in reality it concerns a large number of young people in Europe who have applied for jobs in the EU ?
Indeed it has implications for the EU 's reputation too . Do you not also agree with me , Commissioner , that it is really necessary to get a grip on this affair , in the interests of improving the image of Europe ?
I can promise you , Commissioner , that we will be given a hard time in the election campaign that is due to get underway soon now .
All these negative developments currently hanging over the European institutions are no help to us whatsoever in advancing the European cause .
Do you share these concerns with me , Commissioner ?
Mr President , I agree completely .
I personally organised three meetings on this issue , and we had to conclude , among other things , that the rules on entry to the competitions , which were the same as usual , were not strict enough for candidates .
We must clearly tighten them up , for example as regards what the candidates are allowed to bring in with them when they sit the competition .
The second area in which I think the rules are lax concerns the invigilators ' right to intervene in disturbances , or when someone is cheating , for example .
In my opinion , the invigilators must have the right to intervene directly and not , as has hitherto been the case , only at a later stage through the system of appeals .
I agree with the honourable Member that this has been a very unfortunate and disagreeable affair .
That is why it is important that the Commission 's decision to annul the competition was taken quickly , and that a whole new competition should be organised carefully and thoroughly .
The third point is something that will obviously have to be discussed , and that is whether in future it will still be appropriate to hold these large-scale competitions , or whether it would be preferable to try and restrict the number of candidates so that the competitions can be better controlled .
You will appreciate that organising a competition for 30 000 candidates in 11 languages at 40 different sites is an enormous logistical task .
This is not a defence of the misconduct that has taken place , but it does oblige us to consider whether or not the competitions should in future be made more controllable .
Thank you very much , Mr Liikanen .
This question has certainly aroused a great deal of interest in the House to the point of four supplementary questions being tabled .
The Rules of Procedure only allow me to admit two .
Therefore , I will first give the floor to Mr De Coene and then to Mr Rack .
Mr De Coene , you have the floor for one minute .
Commissioner , your principled reaction does you credit and you have done what was necessary .
Nevertheless , I would appreciate some clarification of the notion of ' penalties ' here .
As the questioner rightly said and you confirmed , a moral as well as a financial loss has been sustained here .
So my question is this : do you indeed believe that those responsible for this loss , whether it be the organisers or invigilators , or those sitting the examination , must bear the cost of the loss which the institution has sustained ?
Secondly , can you tell me the exact cost of these preselection tests which had to be declared invalid thanks to the behaviour of these people ?
I specifically want to know if you will tell me what the cost was , because I cannot imagine that any employer would stand for the good name of the Union being besmirched in such a way by these members of its staff .
Mr President , there have obviously been problems in three areas here , and in these there are two guilty parties .
Firstly , the candidates are obviously guilty who entered the competition fraudulently .
If necessary , this will have to be pursued under the law .
Secondly , the officials are also guilty - if they are officials - who are responsible for the apparent leak , since this has done enormous damage to the administration .
Thirdly , we have to judge separately the responsibility of the administrative staff in this case , in the light of how feasible the present rules governing supervision are .
This is also a judgement that we shall clearly have to make .
But the main responsibility lies with the perpetrators of the deception and with those parties who assisted in it .
As for costs , the total costs of the competition were high , amounting to ECU 1.2 million .
It is unlikely that we shall be able to spend anything less the next time round either .
As for the question of financial responsibility , we shall obviously return to that when the investigations are over .
Mr President , Commissioner , will all those who were admitted to the test this time be admitted next time ?
Is there any means of excluding from the next test those who have been unmistakably caught circumventing the rules , because we surely do not want that kind of official in the Commission in future ?
Thirdly , is there also scope for reimbursing those candidates who have expended material resources in order to be able to sit this test , who have taken a day off and may therefore have been expected to pay their own travel expenses ?
Mr President , it is difficult for me to anticipate any future legal decisions .
But I agree entirely with the questioner : neither the Commission nor any other institution of the Community needs in its service people who flout all the Community rules in the selection tests .
This has to be viewed very seriously , and action must be taken accordingly .
As for the problems arising from the reorganisation of the competition , they are being addressed at this very moment .
I cannot yet reply in any more detail .
Unfortunately , I am afraid that most of the candidates will have to make the sacrifice once again .
That is why the deception that has occurred is so deplorable .
It is important in terms of people 's rights that no one should profit from the deception , but that everyone is genuinely in the same situation in the new competition .
Question No 33 by Angela Sierra González ( H-0912 / 98 )
Subject : Death of Semira Adamu in Belgium
The death by suffocation at the hands of the Belgian police of a young Nigerian woman who was to be deported to Togo , after she was smothered under two pillows in the aeroplane which was to take her from Brussels to Lomé , has caused widespread concern among Europe 's citizens .
Semira Adamu asked for asylum in Belgium to escape an arranged marriage with a polygamous 65-year-old .
Does the Commission not consider that Community policy on asylum should include sexual abuse among the criteria to be taken into account ?
I should like to welcome Mrs Gradin and ask her to answer Mrs Sierra González 's question .
Mr President , I share the sadness and indignation felt by so many over the circumstances surrounding the death of Semira Adamu .
Exactly what happened is currently being looked into by the Belgian authorities .
Regardless of eventual explanations , this kind of thing simply should not occur .
The Commission is not in a position to comment on the procedural handling of the Semira Adamu dossier .
We do not know all the facts and are not empowered to speak out on individual cases .
Mrs Sierra González asked about the possibility of granting refugee status to a person who has suffered sexual abuse , or who might risk such abuse if deported .
The basic principles are enshrined in the 1951 Geneva Convention .
This states that a person shall be deemed to be a refugee if he or she has well-founded fear of persecution on account of his or her race , religion , nationality or affiliation to a particular social group , or of his or her political beliefs .
The individual concerned must be outside his or her country of citizenship and be unable , or not want , to benefit from the protection of that country .
For many years now it has been my view that rape as an act of war should be treated as torture .
A woman subjected to rape in such circumstances would therefore be entitled to refugee status , according to my criterion .
The EU Member States have endeavoured to achieve a common interpretation of the Geneva Convention .
On 4 April 1996 , a common position was adopted on the definition of refugee in Article 1 of the Geneva Convention .
This interpretation does not , however , cover the issue of gender-related persecution or sexual abuse - which is a great pity .
We should certainly be seeking an updated definition .
In addition to refugee status , the EU Member States often offer alternative options to individuals in need of international protection .
Compassionate leave to remain may be accorded on purely humanitarian grounds if there are strong reasons for allowing someone to stay .
At the moment it is up to each Member State to decide , and practice differs considerably from country to country .
Discussion has already begun on introducing certain minimum standards for this type of protection .
The question is included in the Council of Ministers ' work programme .
A survey of the various national rules and practices was carried out during the spring .
An initial analysis has been produced and will form the basis for future work .
Parallel discussions are under way in Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
I imagine that this committee will also address the difficult issue of what our attitude should be towards people seeking protection on the grounds of various forms of sexual persecution and I look forward to being informed of the results of that work .
There are two shocking facts concerning the death of Semira Adamu .
The first is that it involves the violent death of a young person who had come to the European Union seeking protection against the moral injustice being forced on her in her own country in the name of tradition . The second - that is equally important - is the fact that the methods used by the police were perfectly legal , even though they were not only violent but also degrading .
In view of these facts and other deaths which have occurred during expulsions from other European Union countries , does the Commission believe that the severity of such procedures , which hide behind the Schengen Agreement , needs to be reviewed ?
As I said in my reply , I agree with the questioner that these things should not occur , but we must remember that it is the national authorities who bear responsibility for ensuring that their police forces and government departments behave in a decent fashion when deporting individuals from their territory .
I assume that countries are capable of handling these matters themselves .
This is not just to do with the fact of people being denied the right to asylum , but it has to do with how they are treated afterwards .
It is completely unacceptable that a person , even if denied asylum , should be treated worse than an animal would be treated .
The EU has a responsibility .
People here praise the Amsterdam Treaty for the fact that now human rights will be brought into the treaties .
Countries - particularly Belgium - are in breach of human rights standards .
Surely some measures have to be taken against those countries that do this .
It is not just Belgium .
The treatment of people seeking asylum in all EU Member States is absolutely appalling .
They are not treated like human beings ; they are not treated like ordinary people .
They are treated in some sort of inferior way that completely denies them any basic right or dignity whatsoever .
The Commission and the EU as a whole have to deal with this .
There should be proper codes of conduct and proper measures brought in to ensure that this kind of thing cannot happen .
As I said , I am as sorry as you are that this girl has been handled as she has .
But it is the responsibility of Belgium to look after their policemen 's behaviour when they send a person out of the country .
This is something I expect every country to be able to take care of .
Commissioner , in relation to your speech on the Status of Refugees and the Geneva Convention , I would like to ask if the Commission is considering recommending to the European Union countries that , in all matters relating to political asylum for women , and in matters that exclusively affect women , such as abuse and other gender-linked issues , this political asylum be extended .
As you know , there have been many years of debate as to whether we could widen the definition of political refugee status .
This has not been successful .
Nobody wants to change the Geneva Convention but we can complement the Convention .
We could do this as we have proposed in other areas in the Union such as when we are talking about persecution of third parties , or about refugees staying for a shorter time .
My personal wish would be that , with Parliament 's support - and particularly the support of the women - we should take up the question of rape and sexual abuse of women .
That could be a humanitarian angle .
Question No 34 by Mark Watts ( H-0864 / 98 )
Subject : Registration of EU citizens visiting another Member State
Are EU Member States entitled to require hotels and guest houses to demand that visiting EU citizens provide exhaustive details of their travel documentation ( including type of travel document , when and where issued , expiry date and document number ) as a condition of their stay ?
Are the authorities in Member States permitted to fine proprietors of establishments who fail to record such information from guests ?
Does the Commission agree that this practice , which I understand exists in Austria , makes a mockery of the principle of free movement , and what action will the Commission take to end this procedure ?
As well as welcoming Mr Oreja , I would like to thank him for battling against the elements to get here .
We knew that he was having a rather difficult journey getting to this sitting .
So , thank you for coming , and I would like to ask you to answer Mr Watts ' question .
Current Community law on the free movement of the Union 's citizens allows Member States to request that they are informed of the presence of nationals of other Member States in their country .
In some countries , EU citizens staying only for a short while have to declare their arrival to the administrative authorities or the local police .
In order to make this easier , some Member States allow citizens of other countries to declare their arrival through forms completed in hotels , campsites or guest houses and a copy of this is sent to the local authorities .
In this way , citizens do not have to go through any additional procedures and these pre-printed forms contain all the information needed to identify a person , as they include the number , place and date of issue of the passport or identity card .
The Court of Justice has accepted that these systems for declaring arrivals are compatible with Community law .
Indeed , according to the Court , this type of system cannot be contrary to the principle of the free movement of persons if the imposed time limits for declaring an arrival are unreasonable or when the penalties for not fulfilling this obligation are disproportionate to the seriousness of the infringement , for example , if they lead to a prison sentence or to expulsion .
Thank you Commissioner for your answer .
The trouble is that it highlight dual or treble standards operating throughout the Community .
After all , one of the benefits of the Community is supposedly free movement and if , for example , one takes a day trip to another Member State or stays in private accommodation , there is no such requirement to provide details of identification documents or passports .
It just so happens that when a business person or holidaymaker goes to a hotel these rather ludicrous and petty-minded bureaucratic restrictions are imposed .
The citizens of Europe demand an answer from the Commission as to why these dual standards are applied .
If it is in the interests of security or information on visitors , why is the information not required from every visitor ?
It is clearly not .
Therefore the information is not effective and , as the Commissioner implied , there should be an agreement between Member States to try to remove this artificial barrier to free movement .
As Mr Watts well knows , the same system does not exist in all Member States .
That is to say that , in practice , situations vary considerably .
In some Member States , such as Denmark , Greece , Portugal , Sweden and the United Kingdom , there is no system for declaring the arrivals of EU citizens only staying for a short while . Nor is there a police-controlled registration system operating in hotels .
Such systems do exist in the other Member States .
And , in the group of countries with no such system , there are certain countries that have a general system for declaring arrivals that is equally applied to EU citizens . Other countries , if they have not devised a system for the declaration of arrivals for EU citizens , have instead established a specific registration system in hotels and public accommodation that comes under the general duties of the police .
Consequently , there is no single system .
What I do believe to be important is that which the Court of Justice has maintained until now , in other words , that such arrival declaration systems are compatible with Community law .
Perhaps what Mr Watt is asking is if these systems should be harmonised in the future , that is , if the free movement of persons encourages us to establish an identical system in all the Member States .
This is a matter that has yet to be resolved and at the moment there are two main ideas being discussed .
The first is that there are certain standards , those that the Court of Justice has applied ; the second is that different systems are acceptable , as long as there are limits . In other words , these limits cannot be disproportionate to the seriousness of the infringement if , as I said earlier , they lead , for example , to a prison sentence or expulsion .
This is the rule as it stands at the moment but I have made a note of Mr Watts 's comments on the possible harmonisation of the different Member States ' positions .
Question No 35 by Joan Vallvé ( H-0865 / 98 )
Subject : Inclusion of the Misteri d 'Elx on the World Heritage List
The Misteri o Festa d 'Elx ( Mystery Play or Feast of Elche ) has been put forward for inclusion on UNESCO 's World Heritage List .
The Festa , whose origins date back to the late 14th century , is staged in the city of Elx ( Elche ) on 14 and 15 August each year to commemorate the Feast of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary .
It is the sole theatrical representation of mediaeval origin of its kind to have survived in Europe .
Does the Commission intend to support this initiative to gain explicit recognition for this centuries-old tradition of such great artistic and cultural importance ?
I give the floor to Mr Oreja to answer Mr Vallvé 's question .
The European Commission is aware of the importance and significance of the Elche Mystery Play ( Misteri d 'Elx ) in the history of European religious and musical theatre .
And , as the procedure for inclusion on the World Heritage list dictates , the UNESCO World Heritage Committee is the body that has statutory responsibility for taking decisions on these matters .
As Mr Vallvé is aware , it is the responsibility of local and national authorities to initiate the UNESCO procedure and these authorities must support any project which they wish to see recognised as a World Heritage project .
Within the framework of its powers , the Community does not have any formal or material possibilities , as far as Article 128 of the Treaty is concerned , that allow it to intervene in the procedure of naming World Heritage events .
Nonetheless , the Commission hopes that the authorities in Elche are successful in their bid , as this would give an extremely important European cultural event the world-wide status it deserves .

Of course , I am fully aware of Mr Vallvé 's sensitivity in this area and I completely agree with him as I have been privileged enough to witness the Elche Mystery Play . It is indeed a spectacular event and is proof of something I believe to be very important : the cultural identity of a people .
I believe that we should try to see the distinctive elements that exist in the varied cultures of the people and , undoubtedly , one of them is this Elche Mystery Play , which also has a universal dimension .
In other words , it is a locally acclaimed event but , at the same time , it has world-wide significance and it is for this reason that we believe it deserves to be recognised as a World Heritage event .
Mr Vallvé can rest assured that , if consulted , the Commission will stress the importance the Elche Mystery Play deserves .
I would simply like to thank the Commissioner for his response .
I did not doubt his sensitivity in recognising these cultural events , which have old traditions - the Misteri d 'Elx dates back to the end of the 14th century - and which have continued up until today . This is , in some way , proof of the multi-culturalism inherent to Europe .
For example , the Misteri d 'Elx is a play in Catalan which takes place every year during these holidays .
What is more , they are known throughout Europe and acknowledged internationally . Therefore , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his kind words and I am sure that the local authorities in Elche will take the necessary steps to ensure that this play receives the recognition it deserves from UNESCO , as European heritage to be shown to the whole world .
Commissioner , if you know the Misteri d 'Elx or if you have seen it , then you know how spectacular and unusual it is to see the Assumption of the Virgin Mary portrayed in this work of European art and culture .
In any case , I , too , wanted to say this to the House today as I am a devoted fan of this play .
Yet , whilst acknowledging how important it is that this celebration be included on the World Heritage list by UNESCO , and as you are here today , I wanted to take this opportunity to put a request to you . Is there any possibility , apart from this recognition , which is extraordinary in itself , and within the Commission 's powers - although I know that the Commission cannot do anything - , that there might be a budget heading that could be used to help this group of artists , not as part of the World Heritage procedure but as a different category , if possible ?
These people do not of course do this exclusively , but they dedicate their free time to keeping this marvellous European cultural display alive .
Mrs Sornosa , I obviously share your interest in the issue you have raised and there is one possible option .
As you know , the new framework programme for culture is currently with the two branches of the legislative authorities - the Council and Parliament - and will come into force as of the year 2000 .
It provides for three types of action : promoting networks ; special actions ; and high-profile projects .
If anything can be called a high-profile project , then it is the Misteri d 'Elx .
Therefore , why not initiate the procedure ?
I call on you , and all those interested in this matter , to take the appropriate steps to take this to the Commission .
And I assure you that I will follow this matter very closely .
But I would point out that I do not make the final decision ; a committee decides .
Nonetheless , the word from the Commission , through me - if my colleagues permit it - is that I think that the Elche Mystery Play will be recognised as a high-profile project .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am a great admirer of the Elche festivals myself , but in this context I should like to ask you something else , because this issue shows how important culture is to our future . My question is whether it is not time for the Commission to develop a system of its own , not only to catalogue these manifestations of popular culture but also to lend them effective support , so that a new attitude can gradually develop among us .
Since in spirit we are now in Elche , I should also like to refer to the moros y cristianos , in the Provincia de Alicante for example , which are a wonderful piece of popular culture ; it might be useful in places like that to encourage people to take more of these initiatives , and the Commission should support them .
Would you be prepared to involve yourselves in that sort of undertaking ?
I am aware of Doctor von Habsburg 's great sensitivity in this area and I must add that , scarcely a week ago , I passed through one of the villages in that area where I saw that one of them has , in fact , a street dedicated to Otto von Habsburg .
And in that street you can see the moros y cristianos festival being prepared . I therefore believe that all this points to one thing - and it is important to highlight it - , namely , that Europe 's wealth stems from the differences in the varied cultures which exist in Europe .
The Commission 's role will probably be to basically determine what the different European cultures have in common , but beginning with the distinguishing features of each of the cultures .
Consequently , I believe that these aspects should either come under the heading of high-profile projects or under special actions .
Therefore , I am making a special note of all these initiatives , and I hope I can continue to rely on them . And now that we have , in fact , reached the legislative stage , I would like to ask that this stage be speeded up as much as possible in Parliament , and that it progresses quickly at first reading , so that on 17 November , if possible , the Council can adopt a common position , and so that we might already have this framework agreement before the end of the year .
Initiatives such as those we have been discussing this afternoon will , of course , come under this framework agreement .
Thank you , Mr Oreja .
Your respect for speed and rapidity has been fully noted and we thank you for being here with us today .
We have reached the end of the questions for Mr Oreja and so we wish him farewell and a safe but not too speedy journey back .
We hope you arrive as safely at that end as you did here .
Question No 36 by Patricia McKenna ( H-0833 / 98 )
Subject : The Ilois people of the Chagos Archipelago
Is the Commission aware that , when it was negotiating its accession to the then EEC , the UK was forcibly removing approximately 2000 indigenous Ilois people from the Chagos Archipelago , which is now an overseas territory of the EU called the British Indian Ocean Territory , and that the unstated purpose of the clearance was to lease one of the islands , Diego Garcia , to the USA as a military base ?
Has the Commission previously considered the matter , and in any case does it regard these people as citizens of the European Union , even though they are living in forced exile in Mauritius , many living in very poor conditions there - many , indeed , having committed suicide - and despite the fact that a financial settlement was reached with the UK Government some years ago ?
Whether citizens or not , does the Commission believe that these people would have legal rights within the Union , sa displaced occupants of what is Union territory , or , in a sense , as EU refugees ?
What does the Commission intend to do to uphold the Treaties in relation to these unfortunate people ?
I give the floor to Mr Pinheiro to answer Mrs McKenna 's question .
The European Commission is aware of the Chagos issue but has never taken part in official discussions on the matter .
The question of whether the Ilois people of the Chagos Archipelago would be entitled to British citizenship is a matter between the UK Government and the concerned persons .
The European Community is a major donor in Mauritius and finances , through the European Development Fund , a number of projects and programmes which aim at reducing poverty among the most fragile elements of the country 's population , whatever their origin .
The Commission has recently launched a detailed study of poverty issues in Mauritius in order to establish a clear picture of this problem .
Although general poverty has been eradicated in Mauritius , due to impressive economic development in the last two decades , there still exist pockets of poverty among marginalised elements of the population .
The focused poverty alleviation programme will be set up early 1999 , financed by the EDF , from which associations or NGOs of Ilois people might of course benefit .
I do not think the Commission is actually addressing the issue .
The issue here is that basically these are overseas territories of the EU .
The people of Diego Garcia have been denied the right to live in their own homeland .
Surely they must have some rights under EU law as EU citizens .
They have been forced off their islands to live in exile in other places .
It is not acceptable .
The EU has to look at this .
I should also like to know if the Commission has any legal advice on this matter .
I would be very grateful if you could supply me with the legal advice you have on it .
But I do not think it is just an issue for the Member State , because if that is the case , could not any government in the EU decide that minority groups in some part of its country can be shipped off somewhere else ?
Have they no rights under EU law ?
It does not make any sense .
By virtue of the fact that they were actually living on an island that was a British island , they should have rights as EU citizens .
They have been living in exile now for almost 30 years .
That is not acceptable .
There is an onus on the EU to recognise the plight of these people .
Although the European Commission is aware of the problem , this is the first time it has been raised , be it by the Mauritian Government , the UK Government or the Ilois people concerned .
We therefore have no legal advice except to say that it is a complex issue .
We know that the governments and the people concerned are discussing this issue but apart from that I cannot go any further .
Question No 37 by Glenys Kinnock ( H-0845 / 98 )
Subject : Commission studies on trade with ACP regions
Would the Commission please indicate the current status of the studies undertaken on trade relations with ACP regions ?
Is it true that they have been completed but are now being revised by the authors at the Commission 's instigation ?
When will MEPs be given the access to the information contained in these documents that they were promised in order to enable them to formulate their response to the Lomé negotiating mandate ?
I give the floor to Mr Pinheiro to answer Mrs Kinnock 's question .
I am pleased to inform Mrs Kinnock that the studies on the economic impact of introducing reciprocity into the trade relations between the European Union and groupings of ACP countries are now in their final phase .
During the summer , the Commission received draft final reports for five of these studies .
The last one should be sent , we hope , very soon .
According to the terms of reference and normal Commission practice , the services gave their comments to ensure that all the reports were clear and complete .
We have now just received three final reports on the Caribbean , the Pacific and the SAADAC region .
As I have already explained during the ACP-EU Joint Assembly , I can assure you that it has always been my intention to share the results with you and everybody else as soon as it is possible , in order for everybody to have a comprehensive view of the issues at stake during the forthcoming negotiations .
Thus , you and other interested Members will receive copies of all the final reports , via the Secretariat of the European Parliament , by the beginning of November .
The Commission is also preparing a synthesis of all the studies , which you will also receive together with the reports .
I thank the Commissioner for that very helpful answer .
Presumably , Commissioner Pinheiro , you will want those studies to support the Commission 's view that FTAs would actually help ACP countries to be integrated into the global economy .
Therefore , I would like to ask you whether you heard - as I know you did - the clear warning we had last week at the opening of the negotiations given by Minister Billie Miller from Barbados , maintaining that ACP economies are far too fragile to withstand any kind of asymmetrical deal with the European Union ?
In the light of the recent breakdown of the negotiations with South Africa , are you prepared to say that Minister Billie Miller is wrong ?
We can all have an opinion on the future and the prospects of what the future holds for us .
My assumption and my position is that I hope and expect that our proposals will help the ACP countries , but I am not dogmatic .
That is why we should look very carefully at all the studies that are currently being made and will be made afterwards in order to give an in-depth view and perception , because not every country is the same and the situation might be different from country to country or region to region .
I am prepared to be extremely open in discussing these issues but , so far , I still keep my opinion .
As to the speech of the Minister of Barbados , I am afraid the response applies just to the position of Barbados , which had been previously stated by the Prime Minister .
As far as I understood the speech was not cleared with the ACP group .
From what I heard from many ambassadors and ministers from the other regions , they do not entirely share some of the concerns of Mrs Miller .
Having said that , I gather asymmetry and the opening up of borders is inevitable if the trend towards liberalisation continues .
We propose that opening takes place gradually and that countries should be assisted in that opening rather than their having to cope with a blind and horizontal opening , such as one dictated , for instance , by the WTO .
At the same time , we reckon that the fragility of those economies is such that they cannot endure any shock .
That is quite clear .
Therefore , whatever the solution , things will have not only to be gradual but monitored very closely in order to avoid derailment of the situation .
As for South Africa - and since I know you are going there very soon - there are three outstanding issues more of a political nature than a trade nature which I hope will be solved .
At the end of last week I made informal proposals and in mid-October I will see the Minister for Trade and Industry in order to try to see whether we can solve these political issues one way or another .
But I am still convinced that it will be possible to close the negotiations with South Africa by the end of October / beginning of November .
Question No 38 by Ulla Sandbæk ( H-0847 / 98 )
Subject : Supreme Court injunction on financing any new projects because of the EU 's legal basis for granting aid
In the light of the suspension of all grants from a number of budget lines involving the Commission 's DG VIII ( possibly including the one relating to the ' Gender action on the WTO ' project ) , which puts all projects on hold until the spring of 1999 at the very earliest , what has the Commission decided to do about projects that are directed towards development education and advocacy work concerning the preparations for the WTO 's Third Ministerial Conference due to take place in the US in the autumn of 1999 ?
The preparatory work on issues relevant to the WTO 's agreed agenda and possible new issues is already under way after the summer recess at national level and will continue at EU-level from the winter of 1998 / 9 and spring of 1999 .
( The Supreme Court 's injunction has stopped a number of projects relating to the WTO that were on the verge of being approved ) .
I give the floor to Mr Pinheiro to answer Mrs Sandbæk 's question .
The Commission fully realises the importance of integrating developing countries - the ACP states in particular - into the world economy .
This is why the Commission supports the full participation of ACP states in the WTO and has taken several initiatives to promote this .
At the same time the WTO can only play its proper role if the concerns of all participating states are met .
That is the reason why I insist that trade and development have to be firmly on the WTO agenda and that the particular constraints of developing countries must be adequately assessed and taken into account during all multilateral trade negotiations .
This is truly essential .
I am personally committed to this , and I use all opportunities I have in our relations with trading partners to build support for our position .
By the way , I have just come from Washington where I participated in a G8 meeting on development , and it was thanks precisely to my intervention that it was possible to ensure that the next G7 / G8 meeting on development will include trade and development and the concerns of developing countries as one of the main topics of the agenda .
As for the initiatives on WTO which the Commission has taken for the ACP states , and which I referred to above , I would like to mention the following .
In spring 1998 an informal working group was set up with the ACP secretariat for exchanging information , discussing and possibly coordinating positions for the next WTO negotiating round .
From January 1999 - and this is extremely important - an antenna of the ACP secretariat will be set up in Geneva for coordinating ACP positions within the WTO .
The Commission is financing this .
Also we financed a preparatory seminar before the second WTO ministerial conference held in May 1998 .
We have also financed seven forthcoming regional seminars regarding the WTO agreement and its implementation .
The Commission also confirms that it has a received a proposal for gender action on the WTO presented by the International Coalition for Development Action , for financing under budget line B7-611 .
As a result of the ruling of the Court of Justice , the implementation of this budget line remains suspended .
It is not therefore possible at the moment to give a favourable response to the above request .
The Commission is , however , ready to examine project proposals for eligibility under other existing budget lines which are open to development education and advocacy projects and which already possess a legal basis and can therefore accept projects for financing .
Mr President , it is the last part of the Commissioner 's answer regarding the other budget lines that I am interested in .
If other budget lines are found , is word then sent back to the NGOs that these budget lines are available , or are they simply told that money has already been appropriated via these budget lines ?
There is , for example , NGO cofinancing .
It is normally very large amounts that are appropriated via that budget line , but many of the amounts that are currently being sought for seminars or other forms of training in the ACP countries with a view to participation in the WTO negotiations are very small .
Is it possible , for example , to take money from the NGO cofinancing budget , where it currently is , and in certain cases make transfers , even if the amounts are very small , so that money can be made available for this very , very important area ?
We are after all in complete agreement that it is essential for the developing countries themselves to be included in the WTO negotiations .
There are different issues at stake here .
The first is WTO as a whole .
The second is about gender issues and the promotion of these issues as regards not just WTO but all concerns of development .
This has already been approved and it is mainstreamed .
So in my opinion it is fully justified that WTO - trade and development and trade-related issues - should also be mainstreamed as regards gender .
What I suggested - I could be a bit more specific - is that for some of those actions we could appeal to the B7-6000 budget line , which is for cofinancing with NGOs , which offer possibilities for the scope of the project concerned .
If it is proposed under that aegis it stands a good chance of being eligible .
Question No 39 by Marie-Arlette Carlotti ( H-0907 / 98 )
Subject : EU support for the presidential elections in Gabon
In the framework of the support traditionally given by the European Union to the ACP countries in organising democratic and transparent elections , could the Commission tell us what technical and financial arrangements it intends to make for the presidential election due to take place in December 1998 in Gabon ?
I give the floor to the Commissioner to answer Mrs Carlotti 's question .
In a letter dated 23 July 1998 , the Gabonese Prime Minister asked the Commission to send an observer mission for the whole electoral process .
In its reply of 3 September , the Commission confirmed what it had already indicated during previous contacts , namely that it was prepared , in the context of a coordinated effort with the government and interested outside partners , to help Gabon to prepare and organise the presidential election .
In this respect , the contribution of the Commission might involve training , particularly for election agents and Gabonese observers .
Such an approach , conducted with the assistance of all the political forces , would allow the necessary conditions to be created in Gabon to ensure the essential transparency of the future elections .
The Commission is waiting at the moment for a reaction from the Gabonese authorities to this offer .
Thank you , Commissioner , for such a precise answer . However , I am concerned because the Gabonese authorities are spreading the rumour that they have not received any answer from the Commission ; this answer of 3 September to which you have just referred is not being mentioned .
What can we therefore do to let everyone in Gabon , the ruling majority and the opposition alike , know that the ball is in their court ?
What can we do , in addition , to indicate publicly that we are not losing interest in the democratic process in Gabon ?
What can we do as a matter of urgency ?
You mentioned training , yet the longer this situation goes on , the more difficult it will be to train observers .
I share your concerns about the time which is passing , particularly since Gabon is currently an extremely important country in this region of Africa .
We all know that President Omar Bongo is the most senior of the African leaders .
He has tried to play a peace-making role here and there , and it is absolutely essential that the presidential election in Gabon is totally transparent .
It is not appropriate to offer financial assistance since Gabon does not need this . However , training - and good training at that - is absolutely essential .
Our letter of 3 September deserves a response and I believe that it will get one .
And I can assure you that , following this question , I shall personally look into what is happening and insist on having a response as soon as possible .
Thank you , Commissioner .
We have now come to the end of the questions to Mr Pinheiro , whom I would thank for his replies .

Question No 40 by Eryl McNally ( H-0844 / 98 )
Subject : Rational Planning Directive
What progress has been made on re-introducing the Rational Planning Directive or equivalent legislation ?
I should like to welcome Mr Papoutsis and ask him to answer Mrs McNally 's question .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission approved the proposal for a directive on rational planning techniques in September 1995 .
As you will remember , the proposal 's purpose is to contribute towards the Community 's aim of reducing carbon dioxide emissions .
The European Parliament gave substantial backing to that directive through Mrs McNally 's report which , as I had the opportunity to say then too , was an excellent report which Parliament adopted on 12 November 1996 .
Many of Parliament 's amendments were incorporated in the amended proposal and served to clarify the directive .
Unfortunately , during the Council 's working group discussions , the proposal received only limited support and some Member States declared that they would prefer the proposed directive to be changed to a recommendation .
In the Commission 's recent statement on energy efficiency , we reiterated our position on rational planning techniques and stressed that the Commission still regards this directive as important , particularly in the light of the development of energy services that will stem from the liberalisation of the market .
And we also said that we will try to find the best possible way to carry the matter forward .
I thank Mr Papoutsis for his continuing work in this area .
Does he agree with me that a directive of this sort would be an excellent contribution towards giving us credibility in the negotiations at Buenos Aires , which will be coordinated - from the European Union 's point of view - by Commissioner Bjerregaard , with whom , I understand , he is working closely ?
Energy efficiency really is the key to meeting the promises that we made at Kyoto , particularly in the domestic sector .
It is in the domestic sector where we need to find ways to encourage firms to supply not simply electricity or gas , but electricity or gas as a means to have cool or warm houses , fridges , the electricity that is needed .
Many people cannot make those investments of their own accord .
They need encouragement and those firms need help .
I quite agree with you , Mrs McNally , that this is a particularly important and topical objective , especially since we are operating in the context of negotiations based on the commitments we entered into in Kyoto .
I too genuinely believe that carbon dioxide emissions from electric power generation account for over a third of the total carbon dioxide emissions in the European Union .
That is why we must find new ways and methods to restrict those emissions .
I sincerely believe , and that is why both I and the Commission insist , that a directive would be a very important contribution towards the efforts by Member States to achieve that target .
Question No 41 by Ludivina García Arias ( H-0852 / 98 )
Subject : Approved state aid to the HUNOSA mining company
The European Commission has finally given its approval to the Spanish plan for providing assistance to the mining sector but has again demanded cuts in coal production by the HUNOSA mining company , which means that for the second time it has failed to recognize the agreement between the Spanish Government and the social partners .
Does the Commission not think that in future it should sit at the same negotiating table so that any intervention on its part is rendered more transparent and is not seen by the Asturian public as the result of an agreement between the Spanish Government and the Commission to demand greater cuts ?
I give the floor to Mr Papoutsis to answer Mrs García Arias 's question .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission applauds the fact that the restructuring of enterprises to which Mrs García Arias refers was decided on the basis of agreement in the context of the social dialogue .
And it is a positive element that attention was paid to the future of the working people affected and the future of their families , and that measures are also envisaged for the economic conversion of coal-mining areas with a view to finding alternative ways and means of economic development .
Yet when the Commission expresses its opinion about that restructuring , it has a duty to ensure that the decisions taken are compatible with the provisions of the Treaties .
The Commission 's decision on aid for the Spanish coal-mining industry is indeed an important one .
For the HUNOSA company alone , aid was approved to the tune of almost PTA 262 400 million , i.e. ECU 1 590 million .
The Commission made very great efforts to reach a decision which helps the industry and which it considers compatible with Community law and can therefore now defend , if necessary , before the European Court of Justice .
Throughout the process of negotiating the Spanish agreements , the Commission showed the greatest possible respect towards all the parties involved in the dialogue , naturally making it clear that it was willing to cooperate at any time and also to express its opinion if asked to do so .
The Commission notes , however , that the social partners taking part in the negotiations made no approach to it , even though they were perfectly aware of their rights in the matter .
As for the amendments which Mrs García Arias says were made to the text prepared by the Spanish authorities , the Commission never asked for additional production cuts by HUNOSA .
The Commission 's comments concerning that company 's production in 2001 are based on a substantial and transparent analysis of developments over the last few years .
And that analysis showed that , because of the theoretical basis of certain calculations put before it , the production from underground seams envisaged in the said agreements for 2001 would not in reality be reduced by the amount estimated .
The Commission could therefore not accept that method of calculating the cut-back of activity , and it consequently asked for the agreement to be kept on the basis of the real figures .
Mr President , let me emphasise that Mrs García Arias was able to experience the openness and receptiveness of the Commission in person when she took an interest in discussing the problems of the HUNOSA company .
We are always at Mrs García Arias 's disposal to inform her about everything which was drawn to our attention and which we knew about at that time .
Perhaps the question should have been : how vigorously has the Spanish Government defended or explained the contents of the Hunosa plan ?
According to rumours and comments in circulation , the government and Mr Benavides agreed a document relating to the second stage of cuts .
However , Commissioner , I have my doubts .
When Decision 3632 was discussed here in Parliament , I was the rapporteur .
You know that it does , in fact , regulate Community interventions .
And , in both the Council and Parliament , the concept of European reference costs was explicitly rejected and the text therefore talks of social and regional reasons and of working towards reducing costs .
Although it is true that I have spoken to your representatives from the Commission on various occasions , I have never obtained a clear grasp of what those specific scales are , since there is no regulation governing this decision . I am not even convinced that the Commission has business criteria that it uses so that it might , in fact , say whether or not staff levels should be reduced by so much or production should be reduced by so much .
I also believe that the directive is being interpreted in a rather limited manner as we are talking about reducing costs here and that does not necessarily mean reducing production .
Any company can increase production and reduce the costs of that product .
I still do not understand those business criteria .
Mr President , I say again that the Commission is always ready to cooperate with the Member States concerning problems of a sensitive nature at national level , especially problems with particularly sensitive social and regional dimensions .
In this particular case , the Commission has done all it could to deal consistently with the problem facing it .
The Commission also respected the agreements signed between Spanish companies concerning cuts in production .
The difference of opinion between the Commission and the Spanish companies concerns the fact that the Commission , with a view to ensuring transparency , took into account the true level of production , while Spain took account of a theoretical approach to production .
From the analysis carried out by the Commission 's services , it emerged that the production of 2 100 000 tonnes in 2001 from underground seams proposed by Spain for the HUNOSA company corresponded almost exactly to production in 1997 from the underground seams .
This means that no cut-back at all of deep-seam production would be taking place , and consequently no reduction of activity either .
So the Commission took into account the aim of the net cut-back in annual production mentioned precisely in the agreements which had been signed , and held to this rigorously .
We did not call for additional cut-backs , and I repeat that we will continue to deal with this issue with the greatest possible degree of social sensitivity , recognising the special problems which exist in the Asturias region .
I believe that it will be no surprise to Mr Papoutsis that Mrs García Arias and I are the Members who speak when discussing Hunosa , as we are Asturians .
I understand what he is saying about the aid from the Commission and I understand when he talks of the need for reductions .
I would also like to thank him for suggesting negotiations between the social partners .
But , Mr Papoutsis , what happens is that the Spanish Government reaches an agreement with the social partners on cutting jobs and cutting production .
The problem appears to be solved but then , very soon after , the regional press reports - and there is a newspaper archive there that we can consult on this - that the European Commission is putting pressure on stating that the agreement reached is not being completely fulfilled and that it is putting pressure on to cut production and jobs . And you know that Asturias is a region that suffers a great deal .
Therefore , our concern is : why does the Commission not join forces with the Spanish Government and the trade unions to draw up a definitive plan , one which does not vary depending on the government 's or the Commission 's situation at that particular time ?
Mr President , yet again I wish to repeat that the Commission was at the disposal of the Spanish authorities and the social partners at any time during the agreement 's negotiation .
Since the finalisation of the agreement , the Commission has respected it absolutely , deeming that the cut-back already agreed should be implemented , but always with reference to the true level of production .
From then on , the Commission 's only intervention was to assess whether the agreement is compatible with the Treaty .
Beyond that , since the conclusion of the agreement , the Commission has never come back to ask for additional production cuts , as I explained earlier in response to Mrs García Arias 's supplementary question , apart from a return to the correct way of estimating the production level in 2001 .
That is all .
Question No 42 by Esko Seppänen ( H-0858 / 98 )
Subject : Use of appropriations for energy programmes
The EU has adopted the objective of doubling the use of renewable energy resources by 2010 .
At present they account for 6 % , and the aim is therefore to attain 12 % .
The bulk of renewable energy now in use is hydroelectric .
For practical reasons it will be difficult to increase the use of this type of energy .
This being so , the objective of achieving a six percentage point increase is highly ambitious and is unlikely to be attained with the resources currently allocated .
Will the EU increase the funding of programmes to promote the attainment of the objectives ?
I give the floor to Mr Papoutsis to answer Mr Seppänen 's question .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission agrees that the objective set by the White Paper 's plan of action for renewable energy sources , i.e. to double the contribution of those sources to the Union 's energy supply from 6 % to 12 % by 2001 , is an ambitious but at the same time a realistic objective .
The White Paper analyses in some detail the way in which that overall target can be achieved , on the basis of the most reliable estimates available of the probable contribution from each renewable source .
The proposal presented on the strategy for increasing renewable energy sources in each sector is based on the best combination of technologies and makes it possible for the Union to achieve its aim within the framework of existing technical , practical and economic limitations .
Estimates of the future share of the various renewable sources are certainly indicative , and will help in the monitoring of progress and to ensure that each technology is utilised within a clear policy framework .
It is true that most renewable energy technologies are in the phase of technical maturation .
This also means that the cost of producing energy from renewable sources is continually falling , steadily decreasing .
So we are at a stage when great efforts are needed to promote them in the market and to apply the policy of promoting renewable energy sources in practice , in all the Member States .
It is clear that , in addition to financing basic research and demonstrations , at the stage we have reached today it is still necessary to continue providing economic support for renewable energy sources .
As for the level of finance , the Commission agrees that it is important to secure the necessary appropriations for the promotion of renewable sources .
The Altener programme aims precisely to promote the use of renewable energy sources in the Community and is part of the Commission 's proposal for a framework programme on energy , which Parliament will debate on Thursday .
The Commission 's proposal goes together with an indicative financial allocation covering the period 1998 to 2002 .
The allocation refers to an increase in the budget for Altener from ECU 14.4 million in 1998 to ECU 17.1 million in 2002 .
I think it is clear that this represents a substantial increase compared with the present funding for Altener .
However , as you know , it is you in the European Parliament together with the Council who have the final say in budgetary matters .
The Commission awaits your decisions .
Mr President , Commissioner , the technological possibilities of renewable energy are infinite and they have been analysed in a white paper .
But in addition we need political decisions .
There have not been any political decisions taken in the EU that might lend support to the exploitation of renewable energy sources .
What does the Commission think ?
Could electricity produced from renewable energy sources be introduced into the grid at a price that is different from electricity that has been produced by traditional means , so that electricity generated from renewable sources could be subsidised by means of authorised price fixing ?
Mr President , the Commission has done everything possible to present all the proposals that could be put forward in the context of agreements within the Commission and in the Member States , to give a powerful impetus to the use of renewable energy sources .
That is why we first produced the Green Paper on renewable energy sources and later the White Paper with a specific plan of action , which we believe can really move things along .
I would remind you that in the plan of action we chose four specific initiatives : firstly , a million photovoltaic installations , about a million roofs ; large wind farms generating 10 000 MW ; biomass installations generating 10 000 MW ; and the introduction of renewable energy sources in 100 local communities .
This is the action programme in which we have invited industry , the Member States and all the other relevant agencies to take initiatives with a view to collaborating in the promotion of renewable sources .
In addition , however , I would remind you that in the directive on the internal electricity market , the Commission proposed that there should be privileged access for renewable sources to the network .
That is something we hope all the Member States will follow up and make use of .
Beyond that , though , the Commission has no powers as such to do anything else .
So it is up to the Member States to make the most of all these possibilities provided by the European Union 's legal framework and , at the same time , to utilise the Community finance available from various Community programmes to help industry produce cheaper technology , while at the same time making it possible for the regions and large cities of the Member States to exploit the new technologies for making use of renewable energy sources .
As the author is not present , Question No 43 lapses .

Question No 44 by Mihail Papayannakis , which has been taken over by Mr Alavanos ( H-0916 / 98 )
Subject : Sex tourism involving children
According to the results of research undertaken by Eurobarometer ( April-May 1998 ) , European citizens condemn the practice of sex tourism involving children and 88 % of them believe that it is vital for the European Union to take action to combat this phenomenon .
The Commissioner responsible for tourism has said that the initial response by European public opinion will prompt the EU to take practical measures aimed at combating tourism based on the sexual exploitation of children , a practice particularly widespread in the countries of Asia , Latin America , and Central and Eastern Europe and closely linked to poverty , social exclusion and international trade in minors .
Will the Commission say whether there is a common approach to combating this scourge , whether the action taken so far has proved successful and what firm measures it intends to take to tackle this problem effectively ?

I give the floor to Mr Papoutsis to answer this question by Mr Papayannakis , for whom Mr Alavanos is deputising .
Mr President , the results of a survey carried out by Eurobarometer at the request of the Commission contain some particularly useful facts and figures for everyone involved in the fight against sex tourism which victimises children .
As far as we are concerned , combating that phenomenon is a matter to which we attach particular priority .
I therefore agree with the finding of the survey that intervention by the European Union is now seen not just as desirable but indeed as essential by a vast majority of Europe 's citizens .
As the survey shows , 88 % of those questioned considered that Community intervention was important and essential .
All the activities envisaged in the Commission 's statement of November 1996 have been implemented as a matter of urgency . At the end of 1998 , the Commission now intends to submit to the European Parliament , the Council , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions a report on the implementation of all these measures and on the progress that has been achieved .
However , the fact that Europe 's citizens already recognise that the Commission is active in this area provides real encouragement for us to continue our efforts .
Let me refer briefly to an initiative concerning support for the coordination at European level of national information and awareness campaigns against sex tourism which victimises children .
The information activities currently being carried out , which are supported by the Commission , are based on the development in various Member States of two complementary programmes .
The first aims to design , produce and distribute a video on flights to destinations noted for the phenomenon , and to inform and raise the awareness of the staff of various airlines .
The second aims to design , produce and distribute first of all information leaflets for travellers and , secondly , files with data concerning sex tourism intended to increase the awareness of those in the tourist trade .
In addition to these information activities , another important event is being staged : the first European meetings of agencies involved in the fight against child sex tourism , due to take place in Brussels from 24 to 26 November as part of the Brussels Travel Fair 1998 .
Within this tourism exhibition , the Commission will have at its disposal a substantial area in which it will present all the initiatives it has taken to combat child sex tourism .
We shall also organise meetings of specialists and personalities , and six round-table discussions will be held to consider in detail all the issues and all the joint action we can take at European level in the future , both with non-governmental organisations and with the tourist industry and the governments of the Member States .
Mr President , let me thank Commissioner Papoutsis , because I think he has taken some important initiatives which go beyond mere words and extend to the promotion of practical measures , no matter how difficult they may be and how many obstacles have to be overcome .
I wish to ask two brief questions : firstly , as regards the countries of Eastern Asia , for example , where sex tourism is rife , very often with children as its victims , has the Commission made any approaches to Member State governments at a political level ? Secondly , in the Commission 's opinion , have all 15 Member States taken action with equal sensitivity and practicality concerning these issues ?
Thank you very much , Mr Papoutsis .
We have overrun our allotted time for questions to the Commission by ten minutes .
I am not sure whether to call on Mr Papoutsis 's generosity and that of Parliament 's services , but Mr Titley is here .
What do you think ?
Can we answer Mr Titley 's question ?
Many thanks , both to you and to Parliament 's services .
Question No 45 by Gary Titley ( H-0900 / 98 )
Subject : Follow-up to Parliament 's support for the Harrison Report on late payments
What action is the Commission taking to ensure that it complies with the spirit and letter of the Harrison Report on late payments adopted in September , to make sure that small and medium-sized businesses which carry out work for the Commission are not the victims of late payment by the Commission ?
I give the floor to Mr Papoutsis to answer Mr Titley 's question .
Mr President , the Commission did indeed have occasion to express its satisfaction with Mr Harrison 's report on this proposal for a directive on late payment , and it will take into account most of the amendments proposed in the report .
According to the Commission 's proposal , the payments made by Community bodies are not covered by the directive .
However , the Commission will submit appropriate proposals for these payments too , aimed at establishing rules equivalent to those envisaged in the directive with regard to public authorities .
In accordance with the working document on the amendment of the Financial Regulation of 22 July 1998 , the Commission intends to harmonise the current provisions concerning payments , so that all the Community 's bodies will work to the same standards laid down in the proposed directive .
In parallel , the Commission has undertaken to carry out a study on its own delayed payments , the conclusions and proposals of which will be announced before the end of the year .
In the meantime , however , the relevant Commission services will make every effort to respect in practice the guidelines of the directive we have proposed .
Will the Commission not admit to the embarrassment that is caused by the Commission on the one hand saying it wants to develop a directive on late payment while it is frequently guilty of leaving companies waiting for a long time for money ?
Companies are constantly complaining to me and I know they complained to the Commissioner when he was kind enough to come to my constituency .
Will he not accept that this is politically undeliverable unless the Commission takes action ?
Mr President , I accept that the Commission has indeed been slow in some cases , and I understand that there are some justified complaints from some companies , and possibly some in Mr Titley 's constituency .
Yet I must say , and I must insist on this , that the Commission makes every possible effort in procedural terms , because sometimes we receive erroneous invoices and it takes time to establish if the invoices are correct or not .
In any event , the Commission makes every effort to respect the framework proposed by the directive and to comply with it in practice .
Beyond that , however , and I wish to stress this point , in July 1997 the Commission approved the principle of paying interest in cases of late payment , to compensate the beneficiary for the delay .
So far as we know , no other international organisation pays interest in cases of late payment .
I do wish to emphasise this , because it really proves that in practice the Commission has taken on board both the framework and the spirit of the directive we have already proposed concerning late payments .

Thank you , Mr Papoutsis .
Questions Nos 46 to 86 will receive written answers .
That concludes Question Time to the Commission .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.18 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Ro-Ro ferry and high speed passenger craft services
The next item is the report ( A4-0310 / 98 ) by Mr Watts , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive on conditions for the operation of regular ro-ro ferry and high speed passenger craft services in the Community ( COM ( 98 ) 0071 - C4-0162 / 98-98 / 0064 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , just over four years ago in September 1994 the roll-on / roll-off passenger ferry Estonia sank in the Baltic with a loss of over 900 lives .
This Parliament resolved then that such an incident must never happen again .
The Estonia tragedy was only one of many ferry disasters in the past decade .
I can name others , including The Herald of Free Enterprise , back in 1987 , or , indeed , the more recent Scandinavian Star .
Parliament then asked the question : why were the lessons not learned ?
Why were the lessons of the loss of The Herald not learned ?
Why was next to nothing then done ?
Never again is this Parliament 's aim .
As Parliament 's rapporteur on ferry safety , I am very pleased that we are making real improvements now today in ferry safety .
Indeed , thanks to the determination of Commissioner Neil Kinnock , we have witnessed a series of measures to learn and apply the lessons .
Firstly , the International Safety Maritime Code has been made compulsory to ensure that management , master , officers and crew put safety first .
Secondly , passengers will in future be counted , and data vital in the event of an emergency will be collected .
Thirdly , the stability problems of roll-on / roll-off vessels are being tackled as a result of the Stockholm agreement as it comes into effect .
Today we are considering the latest and the most ambitious measure so far .
In future , Member States will authorise the operation of each ferry and high-speed craft operating in the EU regardless of the country of registration .
In other words , operators will no longer be able to evade international safety laws by opting for a flag of convenience .
In addition , in future , black box voyage data recorders will become compulsory .
In future , Member States will no longer be denied the right to investigate maritime incidents .
As rapporteur , I fully endorse these measures , not least because many ferries are still , despite recent tragic events , simply not safe enough .
A recent Commission-funded survey found that almost one in three of the ferries checked had serious safety defects .
These included fire hydrants rusted shut , faulty life jackets , faulty lifeboat engines and locked emergency exits .
We must , therefore , secure the speedy adoption of this proposal and ensure that it is fully enforced throughout the Community .
Although we fully support this measure , we wish to see it simplified and strengthened in a number of important ways .
Firstly , we believe all ferries - old and new - should be fitted with black boxes within five years , closing the loophole in Article 5 which would allow exemptions from compliance in perpetuity .
Secondly , we believe that the results of the safety surveys communicated to the Commission under the terms of this directive , should be made publicly available .
Thirdly , within 12 months of the entry into force of this proposal , a thorough assessment should be made to determine whether enough has been done or whether further measures are required .
As a further guarantee of ferry safety , we believe an annual safety report should be produced .
All this information must be made publicly available .
These three amendments reflect our determination to make ferries safer , to guarantee that ferry safety remains at the top of our agenda and , indeed , to enlist the support of the citizen and passenger in ensuring that these high safety standards are met .
I hope that the Commission tonight can agree with these measures .
I also have a number of questions for the Commissioner .
Firstly , given the reliance on Member States to enforce the new safety regime , what resources will be made available to ensure compliance throughout the Community ?
Secondly , when does the Commission plan to review the Stockholm agreement to ensure ferry stability standards keep pace with the latest technological developments ?
Thirdly , given the reported failure of both black boxes in the final minutes of the Swiss air flight that recently crashed off the coast of Canada , will the Commission ensure that the black boxes in all ferries are fitted with auxiliary power supplies ?
Finally , I wish to thank all my colleagues and our staff .
Together , we are determined to prevent another ferry disaster .
Never again !
This proposal , together with our amendments and if properly enforced , will ensure that the 141 million passengers who travel on a ferry in European waters each year will get safely to their destination .
Mr President , in an election year such as this , people often ask us : what do you actually do in the European Parliament ?
I am always happy to tell them that we in Parliament 's Committee on Transport and Tourism have worked unremittingly , in Strasbourg and Brussels , to improve safety in all forms of transport .
Transnational , cross-frontier traffic must be made safe through obligations imposed on a common basis .
Our commitment to ferry safety , in particular , is well known , which is reflected in the report we are discussing today .
The figures - over 140 million passengers spread over 500 ferries - speak for themselves .
I do not mind saying that I myself make 200 sea crossings a year , so I know the ferries .
It is quite funny when you think of it that , when international rules drawn up by the IMO are to be enforced , we have to transpose them into a directive .
After all , they should apply throughout the world .
But that is the way it is .
Given the profusion of flag states and different legislation , it is necessary to have directives which ensure that trained seafarers are employed , port state control is applied and so on .
Critics of this directive will no doubt try to find new ways .
Ferries will be moved outside the EU and so forth .
But , as I have said , one might wish that this approach based on the Watts report and the Commission proposal could be the beginning of a global initiative which will ensure safety at sea everywhere .
Again and again we come up against the need to incorporate IMO measures into Community law .
It would be better if we had something that was enforceable throughout the world .
At this time - unfortunately , it might be said - a book is coming out in Denmark which deals with the Estonia accident .
So some of us will be reliving that disaster all over again .
I hope that this directive , but not least the implementation of the directive , will help to strengthen the common legislation and guarantee safety in the future .
Finally , I have to mention one or two Danish problems in connection with this directive .
They relate to Amendments Nos 2 , 15 , 16 and 17 , since it is debatable to what extent the Commission should have the power to act .
It could be the next question to investigate , when we have all the statistical information .
But leave that to one side for the moment .
I support the report as it has been adopted in committee , but have particular misgivings with regard to Amendments Nos 16 and 17 .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the PPE Group supports Mr Watts ' report wholeheartedly , with two small exceptions , namely Amendments Nos 9 and 14 .
I think they go a little too far , but then Mr Watts is after all a perfectionist !
On the matter itself , however , we entirely agree with him .
More than 2000 of our fellow men have lost their life in ferry accidents in the past years .
Unfortunately , Mr Watts , the ADAC study this year showed up considerable safety defects even in countries flying Member State flags .
I think the Commissioner knows what I mean .
We must ensure that all Community ferries flying a European flag fulfil the safety requirements .
Like Mr Watts and his colleagues , we maintain that the Commission proposals for ro-ro ferry operating conditions must be tightened up further .
We agree with the view that it is no longer sufficient to rely on the flag state 's safety checks .
We have fallen into that trap too often .
We must ensure that the host state , i.e. the state to or from whose ports a ship operates a regular service used by its citizens , applies an effective , mandatory survey system .
We entirely agree that passenger ferries must be fitted with a voyage data recorder , which must also be equipped with its own battery , as also on the need for strict compliance with the transitional provisions that have applied hitherto .
Passenger safety must be the same for everybody , as must accident investigation , regardless of the age of the vessel or the Member State in which it is registered .
We also agree with the rapporteur that the Commission 's database of incidents on or relating to ferries must be accessible not only to the Member States , but also to the public who want to travel on them , so that everyone can find out which shipping lines and which ships are safe and draw their own conclusions .
If shipping companies look at their bookings and find they have fallen , that might lead them to consider bringing their vessels up to the latest standards in order not to lose passengers .
It is certainly also right to accept safety standards in the form that applies during the checks and not as they apply when this directive is adopted , since I believe we will still have to tighten up some areas .
In conclusion , let me draw your attention to a point we keep raising , and I am keen to hear the Commission 's reply to the other questions put by Mr Watts .
Our main problem is always that even if we adopt the right directives and hope the Member States will implement them properly , the key question is still this : do the Member States actually apply them , and if so how ?
Do they all carry out equally careful checks ; in the event of defects do they all draw equally stringent conclusions ?
I believe quite a lot remains to be done here and I am eager to know whether the Commissioner can say a few words on this .
Mr President , we certainly welcome this further legislation , which is absolutely essential for the safety of passengers for whom this is one of the main forms of travel between Member States .
There are a number of areas that are important about this particular report such as the fact that we have included high-speed passenger craft .
Now there is increasing competition between ro-ro ferries and this type of transport we need to make sure that there is an equal emphasis on both these forms .
I want to comment , in particular on enforcement .
This has been mentioned by the EPP group and concerns me in a number of areas of legislation .
Europe is moving ahead quite rightly with its legislation for safety on ro-ro ferries which is a form of transport that is both theoretically and , as we have seen , practically potentially a very unstable form of craft .
What I should particularly like to know from the Commission is how an enforcement system will be successfully implemented for the public good .
This is a key area for the European Parliament to be involved in .
Citizens regularly travel on ferries .
We need to ensure their safety .
I should like to thank Mr Watts for his report which is an extremely good one .
Enforcement is an absolutely key area .
Mr President , we too believe that Mr Watts ' report on checking the safety of ro-ro ferries and high-speed passenger craft services in the Community is a very important one , and after the many accidents that have happened we must include it in the framework of legislative initiatives on safety .
The presence of a voyage data recorder , and the Transport Committee 's proposals such as those for an annual report on the safety of ships and for a data bank open to the public , are in my view important steps , although still not sufficient .
We think that ship safety issues should be covered more broadly still , and in particular that their implementation should be monitored , because from a practical standpoint we can see that the situation is a long way both from what we are calling for here today , and from the measures enacted in the European Union .
Implementation must take place in ways which the European Union itself sometimes does not allow to proceed .
Given this opportunity , perhaps I ought to mention that we were very concerned indeed about the fact that , in another directive on the safety of passenger craft , which requires the refitting of vessels which will be 27 years old in October 2000 , Greek vessels are being exempted .
As a Greek MEP , I would like to say that we cannot in any way accept this exemption , which might have been acceptable for economic or social reasons in other sectors such as textile factories or shoe manufacturing , for example , but which is not acceptable when it comes to the safety of passenger vessels , when Greek ships can be temporarily exempted from refitting , but at the same time the ships thus exempted will not be allowed to sail into European ports , thereby in effect making our country a banana republic .
Mr President , this directive is indeed an important link in our strategy to increase marine safety .
It forms part of a series of measures decided by the Council in the wake of the Estonia disaster in December 1994 .
No one will be surprised to find me supporting this proposal , since the Finnish Minister of Transport at the time of that disaster was Ole Norrback , the former chairman and leader of my party .
Importantly for marine safety , the directive stipulates binding survey requirements , establishes clear rules for the investigation of accidents at sea and calls for the fitting of voyage data recorders or ' black boxes ' .
Although this will entail higher costs for maritime transport , I still support the proposal .
We need a level playing field , because the provisions governing EMU tend to be interpreted in different ways and this creates uncertainty .
Privatisation of public administrations is not feasible where the economic interests involved are too great ; this emerged clearly from the background studies carried out in preparation for this directive .
Yet I am sure everyone would agree that a system of quality control and best practice will be essential to ensure that the public bodies are doing their job .
It is good to see that countries other than traditional maritime nations like the United Kingdom , Ireland and Finland are now supporting this proposal .
I am fully behind Amendment No 3 , which calls for the provisions to apply to traffic to and from the same port . This is precisely the kind of operation we have in my area of the world .
Amendment No 12 , on the other hand , runs counter to the subsidiarity principle , in my view .
The question of cost allocation should be dealt with by the Member States themselves .
I am not one to heap thanks on rapporteurs , but this time I really would like to say thank you to Mr Watts for the good work he has done .
On behalf of all of us in this House , I wish him every success with his evaluation of the ADAC report he refers to in his explanatory statement .
His report is certainly an excellent memorial to the victims of the Estonia disaster .
Mr President , I too - together with the rest of the House as we have seen - can only welcome the report by Mr Watts and applaud his work , as well as the amendments he has tabled and which I believe Parliament will approve tomorrow by a large majority .
I must say , however , that the Commission has made a great deal of progress in this area and has proposed a substantial number of directives and regulations on the safety of ships .
And , quite rightly , those directives are adopted and pass into law .
But it has largely neglected measures to assist European shipping .
Let me remind you that , until the end of the 1980s , the Commission was literally bombarding Parliament with proposals for measures to support European shipping .
Then , all of a sudden , there were no further proposals or discussions about positive measures to preserve European shipping , and the only issues which now concern the Commission are ones involving safety .
That is not blameworthy in itself , but there is an imbalance .
At this time , the people who have to run these shipping lines see a ship 's operating costs increasing , since it must be modern and properly equipped with all that Mr Watts ' report quite rightly says it should be .
However , there are no positive measures on behalf of shipping .
Shipping has been forgotten as an industry .
There is no interest in shipping , and so we have Hapag Lloyd leaving Germany , P & O leaving Great Britain , Stena Line leaving the Scandinavian countries , all of them going to well-known tax havens because only by avoiding taxes can they cope with the increased costs of operating their vessels .
I am saying all this because I want an answer from the Commission on what it intends to do about measures to support European shipping , even at this eleventh hour .
Because without European shipping there will be no European seamen .
A sure way of making the European seaman disappear as a species is for there to be no ships under European flags .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , maritime safety , the object of this proposal for a directive , is something of vital importance . Things had reached a point where the European Union just had to do something about it .
So I congratulate the Commission and the Council on completing the legislative architecture they have gradually been putting into place in recent years after the tragedies we saw at the start of the decade .
The proposal for a directive now before us follows on from a number of initiatives designed to deal with the safety of ro-ro ferries .
It is the third text which the Commission has presented in response to the Council 's wishes in respect of maritime passenger transport safety .
And so , following the regulation imposing compliance , ahead of time , with the International Safety Management Code and the directive requiring the compulsory registration of persons on board passenger ships , the proposal for a directive covered in Mr Watts ' report seeks to set up a system for compulsory monitoring of all passenger ro-ro ferries leaving or entering European Union ports , and to allow Member States to inspect all such vessels for safety , including the right to conduct inquiries into any accidents at sea .
These legislative texts are all the result of a Council resolution of 22 December 1994 on the safety of ro-ro passenger ferries , adopted after a number of tragic accidents to ferries operating between European ports .
We all remember the Herald of Free Enterprise , Scandinavian Star and Estonia disasters , to name but few of the more recent ones . These disasters , let us not forget , took the lives of close on 2 000 people .
The Union had to act .
The proposal for a directive will cover nearly 550 vessels and high-speed passenger craft and 277 European ports .
The rapporteur tells us that 141 818 786 passengers were carried in 1996 .
That shows how timely it is to consider the issue .
In this respect standardisation , the harmonisation of safety regulations at Union level is altogether paramount if passengers are to travel in optimum safety .
In conclusion , may I compliment the rapporteur on the quality of the arguments outlined in his report .
I know that maritime safety is a subject dear to his heart .
He has done an outstanding job and put in a great deal of hard work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to say that I am speaking for the European Commission on behalf of my colleague Mr Kinnock , who is very sorry that he cannot be here at today 's sitting , since he is in Luxembourg at the Council of Environment Ministers , deputising for my colleague Mrs Ritt Bjerregaard , who has had a slight accident and is unfortunately out of action .
I am particularly pleased that Mr Watts ' report is in favour of introducing into the Community an extensive and mandatory survey regime , with routine investigations in the event of any incidents on regular passenger vessel routes .
I am glad to be able to tell you that the Commission will support a substantial number of the amendments proposed in the report .
To be specific , with reservations about a few changes to the wording , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 10 and 11 , and can also accept in principle Amendments Nos 9 , 12 and 15 .
Many of these amendments seek to ensure and maintain consistency with other directives and regulations concerning maritime safety .
However , the same concern about consistency prevents us from accepting Amendments Nos 3 , 7 and 14 .
Amendment No 6 proposes that the IMO guidelines , the International Maritime Organisation 's Resolution No A.746 , should apply as they stand during the surveys , in accordance with Article 13 .
While we appreciate the wish to apply the most up-to-date rules , as legislators we cannot contemplate the automatic application of future amendments to official IMO acts .
However , the Commission 's services are working on a proposal to deal with that situation , and I am confident that it will satisfy Parliament .
One of the most important measures proposed for the system of investigations after incidents is the obligatory presence on the vessel of an instrument to record data related to the journey , the voyage data recorder , or VDR .
The Commission has taken due note of the technical difficulties that could arise during the fitting of such instruments to existing vessels . For that reason , our proposal allows the Commission to make exceptions regarding certain technical demands which must be satisfied by VDRs .
We think this possibility of allowing exceptions is fundamental , and consequently we cannot accept that it should be limited to five years as in Amendment No 8 .
As regards the information on the particulars of ro-ro ferries , Amendment No 13 proposes firstly that these should be made publicly available and , secondly , that they should form the basis of an annual report to be drawn up by the Commission .
While we echo the demand for transparency , I must draw Parliament 's attention to the risks that could stem from the publication of these data , particularly in relation to trustworthiness , security and commercial fraud .
The Commission 's interest in precisely this area led it to propose a comitology procedure to determine the prerequisites for access to such data .
The issue of transparency brings us to Amendment No 15 , which requires the Commission to assess progress in the area of ro-ro ferry safety in the light of the 1994 Council resolution .
The Commission obviously agrees with the need for regular assessments relating to measures adopted by the Community , provided such assessments are carried out at the right time and at reasonable intervals so as to be effective .
For that reason , I propose that the assessment called for should take place three years after the directive comes into force , and the related submission of the annual report should take place within the already existing framework for submitting reports on the implementation of Community law .
Amendments Nos 16 and 17 propose that Member States should provide additional information on the customer services facilities and about the number of crew members employed on a regular service and the number employed on a temporary basis .
Given that these matters are not included in the requirements of international conventions or in Community laws on the safety of shipping , I see no need to add that information , nor any value in doing so .
I should like to thank the rapporteur Mr Watts , and the European Parliament too , for facilitating the early approval of the common position on this important measure , one which I sincerely believe will open the way towards improving the safety of European citizens travelling on the Community 's waters .

Turning to the questions put by Mr Watts , Mr Jarzembowski and Mr Teverson , I would like to say that as regards the possibility of the directive being implemented by the Member States , of course the Member States are responsible for implementing Community law .
The Commission encourages the implementation of these decisions , takes care to see that the national legislation is adapted promptly , and of course takes action if there are protests .
Precisely because the subject is a serious issue , we believe the Member States ought to respond quickly .
As for Mr Watts ' next question , I should like to say that the Commission is monitoring the application of the Stockholm review and the implementation of the directive on specifications for passenger vessels .
I assure you that if we see a need to act in that context , we will do so at once .

Turning now to Mr Watts ' third question , let me say that as regards the reliability of black boxes on ships , we must be quite clear : there is no guarantee of 100 % reliability even in air transport , and nobody can guarantee 100 % reliability in the use of black boxes , especially after many years .
However , the Commission will certainly continue trying to ensure the highest possible specifications in accordance with the IMO rules , in other words the specifications relating to equipment and operation .
And finally , on the question put by Mr Stenmarck , I would like to say that to improve the safety of ro-ro ferries , we must fully implement the Community laws that we have adopted over all these years .
That indeed is the challenge and the duty of us all .
Mr President , very briefly , on some of those points , most of us would welcome the comments in relation to Amendment 15 regarding the safety assessment .
But we still need to receive a clear explanation from the Commission why these voyage data recorders cannot be fitted within what seems to us to be a very generous period of five years from the date of implementation of this directive .
Secondly , why can we not trust the public to decide for itself whether or not ferry travel is safe ?
If we can make the data available to the operators , we should have the courage of our convictions and make the data available to the public and indeed to the passengers themselves .
I welcome the answers regarding enforcement of the Stockholm review but I note that the Commissioner failed to answer my specific point regarding auxiliary power for black box voyage data recorders .
Without such power , in an emergency these black boxes are potentially worthless .
While I appreciate that a response may not be forthcoming tonight , I would appreciate a response in writing to that particular point of detail .
I would like to thank the Commissioner nonetheless .
Mr President , first of all , I think that my answer to the questions concerning Amendment No 8 was complete and I do not think it could be made any more so , particularly in relation to the technical specifications we use to record the data .
As for the other technical questions raised by Mr Watts , I sincerely promise on behalf of the Commission that he will be answered in writing .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Pan-European transport network
The next item is the report ( A4-0241 / 98 ) by Mr Sisó Cruellas , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament ' Connecting the Union 's transport infrastructure network to its neighbours - towards a cooperative pan-European transport network policy ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0172 - C4-0206 / 97 ) .
Mr President , the cooperative pan-European transport network policy must be seen as part of a dynamic process that has already found expression in different procedures and in the previous pan-European conferences that were held in Prague and Crete and that certainly did not end in Helsinki .
However , what we are discussing now is bringing the results of these conferences to fruition by putting the ideas developed into practice .
One of the priorities should be to establish and consolidate a global strategy that will finally lead to the creation of an integrated and multimodal pan-European transport infrastructure network .
Such an ambitious objective may only be attained through a complex and sustained process of coordination of the different participants and complementarity of the available resources . It also requires the harmonisation of the principles and criteria that should govern the actions required if the Union is to play its key role of stimulating and guiding the overall pattern , bearing in mind that the various starting points are very different .
And , above all , we need to have the cooperation of the governments , the international financial institutions and the private sector .
But if we are to achieve the desired results from this process , it must be carried out in a transparent manner .
It is vital that information be made available so that we can assess progress to date and determine what still has to be done at any given moment .
The role of the TINA group is to analyse the existing transport infrastructures , to calculate the estimated growth in the volume of traffic , to assess infrastructure needs and to determine the future trans-European transport networks in an enlarged Union .
The careful completion of this work is extremely important as only in that way can we ensure that Community resources and activities are being used appropriately .
The fundamental issues which , in my mind , must be highlighted when trying to overcome obstacles to the establishment of the transport infrastructure networks that Europe needs are : interoperability , funding , the availability of mature projects , and any uncertainties that exist .
The actions aimed at guaranteeing the interoperability of these networks require , and will continue to require , a considerable technical effort and considerable investment .
This is all the more important since the modern transport infrastructure networks of the Member States have been developed according to a vision that is completely different to that of the possibility of a market without borders and the role the infrastructures must play in the development of this market .
The interoperability of networks is therefore a matter that should be resolved beforehand , because if there is no interoperability , there will be no free movement .
But I believe that if obstacles to interoperability are to be removed , then creating objective conditions that will eliminate any positions and interests that are objectively contrary to interoperability will be just as , if not more , important than developing agreed Community standards on every aspect involved .
As always , the main problem is how to finance the construction of the transport infrastructures .
When public debates on financing transport infrastructures use the word ' finance ' with no other clarification , they usually overlook or misunderstand the difference between financing in the strict sense and paying .
Therefore , the fact that the resources allocated and the participating agents in each of these operations can be - and often are - totally separate is overlooked .
From this standpoint , financing transport infrastructures , in the strictest sense of the word , implies an intermediary operation which involves obtaining and providing the immediate resources required to allow investment to be made and objectives to be met .
However , paying for transport infrastructures is a more final operation which involves providing final resources that will allow the economic cycle of investment to be brought to a close .
In the present economic circumstances in the European Union , with deficit amounts and public debt being severely limited , it is very difficult to find the levels of investment needed for the pan-European transport infrastructure networks .
The variety of theoretically valid formulas for the intermediate financing of the transport infrastructures springs from the wide variety of possible responses to the identification and assessment of economic flows , which may become a source of finance and be allocated to a private agent .
The Community 's obvious concern over the problem of private funding for transport infrastructures has led the Commission to present a communication on public-private partnerships in the trans-European transport network projects .
A careful reading of the communication and an evaluation of the real problems that , in the last analysis , gave rise to such partnerships suggest that the key issues are those I mentioned earlier .
One of these issues is the inadequacy of European long-term capital markets : these markets are vital in managing the risks involved in an investment that matures over a long period of time . Other key issues are the absence of mature projects and the distrust and uncertainty of the private sector as regards the current and future activities of the public sector , particularly in terms of the cooperative pan-European transport networks proposed by the Commission that encompass the Union , the governments of the Member States and of the other countries involved , the international financial institutions and the private sector .
We must offer potential investors , construction enterprises , transport service providers and the capital goods sector a stable framework for their financial transactions .
If stability is to prevail , the governments of the partner countries will , of course , have to take on their responsibilities and create a clear political and legal framework . This will allow investors to be fully aware of the political and administrative risks involved in the projects and , at the same time , to respect EU legislation on competition , the environment and public contracts .
Mr President , better connections between European transport networks and those of our neighbours is an objective which the European Union has been pursuing for many years .
That said , the process has for a long time been fragmentary , not to say chaotic , resulting in a whole mosaic of provisions .
The Commission communication on connecting the Union 's infrastructures is a coherent and rational response and is altogether consistent with the implementation of the findings of the third Pan-European Transport Conference in Helsinki .
So we should welcome this desire to coordinate and bring some order into the situation , because the action plan is undeniably a step forward .
The concept of interoperability , with all it implies by way of adapting standards and legislative measures , is especially interesting because it will allow the combination of very different technologies and partnerships between public and private structures .
Clearly , the prospect of enlargement makes this multi-directional approach all the more essential .
That being so , this strategy applies equally to the newly independent states and to the Euro-Mediterranean countries .
But the countries of Central and Eastern Europe are concerned primarily with the creation of these nine corridors , which have now become ten .
This requires these applicant countries to modernise their infrastructures and find the funds to do it .
They will receive money from PHARE for the purpose , but they will also need loans from the EIB , EBRD or World Bank .
The REX Committee congratulates the Commission on the general structure of this communication , but has raised a number of questions in its opinion .
I am grateful to the rapporteur for taking our comments on board in his excellent report .
Whilst we see improved transport infrastructures as a factor for development and thus for growth and believe that this will ultimately bring the CEECs closer to the countries of the Union , financing these networks may prove difficult .
Nor must we underestimate the environmental and social problems which a growth in transport , especially road transport , will bring .
So answers have to be found to pressing problems : the development of piggy-back transport , definition of anti-pollution standards , and so on .
These observations apply to all aspects of communications in and around the Mediterranean basin ; the same problem arises in our relations with Switzerland , and this is something I should like to touch on , ladies and gentlemen , both on my own account and on behalf of my group .
I refer to the progress of negotiations between the European Community and Switzerland on transport and towards a settlement of the dispute between ourselves and that country over the Swiss concern that transit traffic through Switzerland should not cause congestion in the Alpine valleys .
So we can only welcome the result of the Swiss referendum of 27 September last , even though the negotiations are not yet completed .
Believe me , ladies and gentlemen , in our debate this evening this matter is far from insignificant .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my colleague Mr Sisó Cruellas 's report is so excellent that I really have nothing to add , for it has all been said .
I just want to address one point which the Socialists smuggled into the committee discussions but that really has no direct bearing on the report , namely paragraph 25 , which we must reject .
The proposed agreement between the European Union and Switzerland on overland transport negotiated by Mr Kinnock and supported by the Group of the Party of European Socialists contains what we regard as unacceptably sharp rises in transit charges for HGVs , which would fall on the transport industry , the economy and , in the end , the consumer .
It is unacceptable that a lorry should be made to fork out a charge of 325 Swiss francs for a one-way trip from Basel to Chiasso from the year 2001 instead of 25 Swiss francs , even if it is one of the 40-tonne lorries that will then be authorised .
It is unacceptable !
Even if , as Mr Swoboda and the previous speaker said , 57 % of Swiss people agreed to the introduction of this kind of performance-related freight charge in the referendum of 27 September , all I can say is that this may be an endorsement of the Swiss Government 's position but surely it cannot dictate the negotiations with the European Union !
Then we might as well do the same and hold a European Union referendum that Switzerland would have to accept .
This cannot be true !
So I would call on the Commission to perhaps regard this referendum result as an endorsement of the Swiss Government 's position , but certainly not to allow or accept it .
In the interests of our hauliers , our industry , our consumers , we must have reasonable transit charges .
At any rate , let me say to my colleagues in the Group of the Party of European Socialists that we cannot accept the proposed agreement with Switzerland , if only because we do not even know whether Switzerland will approve the construction of the two new railway tunnels and the necessary funding in a month 's time .
If the Swiss people reject the construction of the railway tunnels and the funding required , there would be no commercial reason left for having the agreement with Switzerland .
We are making overland transport more expensive and telling people to use the railway tunnels ; and then we reject railway tunnels too !
That is pointless !
That is why we must tell the Swiss that we insist on a mutual rapprochement and expect an approach based on partnership .
Let me briefly reply to Mr Swoboda 's questions .
We are in favour of rail .
We are glad the German railways , like the Dutch and Swedish railways , are implementing Directive 91 / 440 .
Other Member States have not even begun to implement the 1991 directive , as they should have done by 1995 .
But since Mr Swoboda pleaded so strongly for the railways , let me make a brief comment .
I entirely agree with him , we should not preach something to Eastern Europe that we are not doing ourselves .
But in that case we really should tackle the special project decided in Essen in 1994 and make a start on building the Brenner tunnel ; perhaps you should discuss this with your government some time .
Mr President , may I begin by complimenting the rapporteur , who is becoming a real expert on infrastructure and how to improve it .
But we have to agree that we are in effect getting further and further away from the original purpose of the trans-European networks and their extension to non-Union countries , because the initial idea was to link up our own national networks .
What we are embarking on now is a gigantic undertaking .
The bill for it will be gigantic too , and we do not have the money , certainly not for Eastern Europe , where infrastructure is virtually non-existent .
So we now face the problem that the people in Eastern Europe want more road transport , they want us to pay for it , and such infrastructure as they have , namely railways and inland waterways , is being sorely neglected .
So I think we have to hold fast to the objective of multimodal transport .
This brings me to the point we are considering to some extent this evening , the debate on Switzerland - though that is not the main issue here .
Let us be very clear .
Mr Swoboda has gone , but Austria has yet to turn a single sod towards building its own rail tunnel under the Brenner .
So it is all very well me holding forth about Switzerland , but we should first take a look in the mirror .
The second point is that we want to avoid road transit traffic through Austria , but that means that the Swiss are themselves busy improving their infrastructure and so we need to be sure of agreeing a fair solution with them .
So the current paragraph 25 , which Mr Jarzembowski does not like , is very much appropriate here , and my group will be supporting it .
Regrettably , Mr President , I have to say that while there is much that is good in Mr Sisó 's report , it is guilty of the same shortcoming of which he himself accuses the Commission , namely it is a very general proposal containing little by way of specifics .
I am very keen that Parliament should take prompt action to follow through the proposals made by the Commission and by Mr Sisó too .
But the problem arises of which way we should now go , because the opening-up of Central Europe , for example by connecting it to the trans-European networks , will lead to an enormous growth in freight and passenger traffic and thus to environmental degradation .
So I am glad to see that Mr Sisó 's report several times raises the question of environmental pollution and suggests how it might be controlled in future if Central Europe joins the European Union .
I think it is likely , in my view , that it is not so much the law of the inhibitory head 's start which will obtain , but rather what I would call the law of the innovation lag .
What do I mean by that ?
I believe it is possible , or should be possible in future , to make use in Central Europe of the latest sustainable and environmentally friendly technologies which we have only been to apply in Western Europe very recently , in a way which will avoid the mistakes we have made for too long in Western Europe , namely paying too little heed to public transport and continuing to build far too many roads for far too long .
The danger of the same thing happening in Eastern Europe is a real one , and we must all work to stop it .
My group sees two priorities here .
I agree with those who say that because money is tight we must rein ourselves in and refrain from grand designs - we should confine ourselves to a few plans which meet the criteria of sustainability and transparency , and we should not lose sight either of the fact that things are happening in Eastern Europe which hint at the imminent collapse of forms of public transport which in fact work perfectly well , whilst more and more people are travelling to work under their own steam .
I am very anxious that the Union should spend time and money on reversing this trend and clearing the way for sustainable transport systems in Eastern Europe too .
Mr President , there is nothing more satisfying than to sit in front of a computer drawing infrastructure , roads and railways , then doing some calculations , thumping the desk and saying ' that is how it will be ' .
Mr Swoboda also said something on those lines .
Many of us feel the same way about all these traffic planners .
We suspect them of making it a little too simple .
But let me warn them : it is a long way from theory to practice .
We must be clear that the aim of this communication from the Commission is to secure the strategy .
Let there be no doubt about my support for that .
But the strategy only works if one is able to ensure that neighbouring countries and Member States are serious and will honour their commitments .
I have three comments of a general nature to make on this .
To begin with , the partnership which is to create a transport network extending into the next century will also , in the context of an enlarged internal market , help to secure growth possibilities and have a decisive influence on the sustainability of the pan-European project .
That has something to do with prioritisation and realistic economics .
I cannot associate myself with Mr Wijsenbeek 's remarks regarding the new applicant countries .
They are currently spending more of their gross national product on their transport networks than we are .
Secondly , the communication represents a huge leap forward , without subsidiary aims or description of methods .
That has also been mentioned .
Perhaps they are not appropriate at the present stage , but we ourselves know the situation when neighbouring countries disagree over strategy and method .
It is even more difficult when the Union takes one view and the neighbouring country takes another .
I could conceive of a process of step-by-step agreements , so that a common way forward is assured .
Now the Commissioner will perhaps say shortly that that is how it is done .
Yes , but I know of both good and bad examples .
I know of a good example as regards shipping in the Baltic area , but I also know only too well of a bad example in connection with the development of motorways .
A third comment relates to ambitious technological projects , such as satellites , telematics , traffic service , etc .
These are good advances , but they can only be exploited if the transport carrier has the equipment for them and they can only be exploited if the law provides for their use .
We talked earlier about black boxes .
Now , for the fourth year , I am rapporteur on what is called ' vessel traffic service ' , which means that , by analogy with air traffic control , ships can be assigned sailing routes via satellite .
That would indeed be a way forward , which could prevent many accidents , but unfortunately we cannot implement these proposals .
I am certain that we are on the right road , but I am also convinced that , if we do not follow up what we decide on operationally , we shall have some problems .
Mr President , one of the most worthwhile projects we can pursue is providing the physical infrastructure to link the EU candidate countries with the existing Member States .
A bird 's eye look at Europe reveals the dividing line drawn after World War Two between those countries which received Marshall aid and those that did not .
This is the division we now need to bridge as part of the current reunification and integration process .
There are those who say that the enterprise will cost a great deal of money .
Quite true - and it will inevitably take a number of years , but we should remember that spreading prosperity is in our mutual interest .
Improvements in road and rail networks on the other side of the old Iron Curtain directly benefit the countries concerned , but all of us will gain from the improved situation .
Any such investment has a positive spin-off for everyone .
Increased growth and new job opportunities can be expected , not only in the candidate countries , but within the whole area of what I hope will one day become a much larger European Union .
The rapporteur has indicated one major problem : access to private capital .
Perhaps I might ask the Commissioner responsible what further steps the Commission intends to take to boost private investment in roads and railways in the former Communist countries .
Mr President , there can be no doubt as to the need for a global transport strategy .
The transport sector is vital to socio-economic growth in the Community , and so a long-term , across-the-board strategy is needed for the development of social relations within the European Union .
A pan-European , multimodal transport infrastructure network is therefore needed , one which is well balanced and encompasses the entire continent , including the Mediterranean basin .
In this context , the Commission has drawn up an impressive communication setting out its five themes for action : development of the concept of nine pan-European corridors , plus the latest one for the former Yugoslavia ; extension of the Union 's trans-European networks to the applicant countries ; a joint approach to the use of interoperable technologies ; intelligent network use ; and cooperation in research and development .
Nevertheless , all of this could remain hypothetical unless attention is paid to the sources of funding to be used .
Therefore our request to the Commission is that it provide more precise information , both on the progress and timetabling of these actions and on the relevant sources of finance .
I should like to end by reminding the Commission that a fresh commitment to improving links with the East European countries should not divert the EU from the equally vital task of improving transport links with the Mediterranean basin .
These too are without doubt crucial for the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , transport routes have been vital to trade and commerce since time immemorial .
The economic growth of a region and the prosperity of its people depend on opening up trade routes .
Rural areas in particular need an effective transport infrastructure which , together with other infrastructure measures , can prevent rural depopulation and decline .
Products can reach the buyers and consumers , there is more chance of employment in rural areas and that of course boosts competitiveness in general .
That is why we must support a coherent , efficient and safe , but also environmentally compatible transport system in the Union .
But the European Union must also pay attention to link-ups with neighbouring states and the development of the Central and Eastern European countries ' transport infrastructure .
Both they and the European Union will profit from improved transport links , since this can further strengthen export and trade .
Under the PHARE and TACIS programmes , interregional and cross-border projects are to be supported .
The rural areas of Central and Eastern Europe need a well thought-out transport infrastructure for their development , to prevent large-scale migration to the towns and to promote employment and economic growth .
But we must realise one thing : within the Union , and in view of enlargement , our priority aim must be to shift traffic to environmentally friendly transport modes .
Here I am thinking in particular of combined transport , rail transport and , above all , inland waterway transport .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Joaquín Sisó Cruellas on his excellent report .
As has already been said , we are honoured to have a Member such as Mr Sisó Cruellas in our midst with such knowledge of the field of transport .
Secondly , I would like to briefly refer to the Commission 's well-chosen title for this communication : ' Towards a pan-European Policy ' .
Transport policies should indeed be Community policies , they should continue to be Community policies and they should continue to come under heading 3 of the budget and not heading 2 , as some think , since this may be structural expenditure .
It is strictly a Community policy and , therefore , should remain under heading 3 .
Transport networks are , undoubtedly , one of the most direct factors of development and , as a result , we must pay close attention to the fact that , with the future enlargement of the Union , we will have to give priority to such networks . Yet we should not offer more than a helping hand as there are severe financing problems .
We cannot raise expectations and then realise that we are unable to finance them .
Therefore , the time has come to involve the free market as much as possible , and to bring private businesses and private investors into the construction and financing of these networks . In this way , the unfortunately small amount of money we will be able to take from the budget to finance these networks might act as an incentive so that those businesses , banks and groups of investors can get a return on their investments in the medium term .
It cannot be denied that the trans-European networks will be the making of the European Union .
Now - and in the future with enlargement - we must believe that the European Union will be more of a union in that it will be more united . Also , trans-European networks will no longer be a pipe dream , and this will be shown in the budget with a sufficiently large amount to encourage public or private initiatives to help develop these networks .
Mr President , the rapporteur 's aspiration is for a system which is coherent , safe and kind to the environment .
That is a good thing .
Today , the overwhelming volume of road freight transport is a typical example of practices which are incoherent , unsafe and dirty .
Goods trains are disappearing from our railways , waterway transport is stagnating .
At the same time , the proliferation of heavy goods vehicles on the roads is pushing up considerably the cost of maintaining our major highways and the number of road accident victims too .
The report passes over in silence a question which is nevertheless a fundamental one : who is to pay for infrastructure , the user or the taxpayer ?
At present there are two coexisting systems as far as the roads are concerned , which means duplication and many forms of wastage .
It is not good for the environment , or for our finances either .
We shall have to choose between these two systems one day . Nowadays we have the technology to apply the principle that the user pays , and to make its application widespread .
Modern on-board electronic equipment means that we can measure exactly how much a vehicle costs .
This is the most environmentally friendly and fairest solution , and the one which uses taxpayers ' money to best effect .
Some aspects of the report are problematic .
Firstly , the action plan does not specify which measures are needed , concrete problems are not identified and there is no timetable .
The rapporteur himself deplores this .
Secondly , the manifest intention is that European taxpayers should pay for infrastructure in the countries of the Maghreb , in Turkey or the Middle East and I , for my part , am opposed to that .
As regards Russia , and even beyond , as the report says , I am in favour of certain agreements with Eastern Europe but there would seem to be areas which require far more urgent attention , not least the energy sector , before we reach into our pockets for infrastructure in Russia which , let us not forget , the West has already funded in the past for no return at all .
For all these reasons and because I do not think this has been thought through sufficiently , I am in favour of referring this dossier back to committee .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in our policy on transport infrastructure in Europe , there is a clear distinction between on the one hand the strategy concerning the transport network on the continent of Europe as a whole , and on the other hand the special situation applying to countries which are candidates for accession to the European Union .
For that reason , the Commission 's communication firstly deals with the enlargement of the Trans-European Transport Network of the European Union , which was designed to serve the needs of the internal market and the social and economic cohesion of an enlarged Europe .
Secondly , it deals with the pan-European corridors and transport areas which provide appropriate links throughout the continent .
And , thirdly , it deals with links between Europe and Asia .
I need not repeat the details of the differences between those concepts , since it is clear from the report by Mr Sisó Cruellas that you agree with our view about the appropriateness of that approach .
To form the Pan-European Transport Network , we propose that a partnership should be set up which covers the continent as a whole .
The Helsinki Conference supported the idea of that partnership , recognising that it concerned us all .
It concerns the countries involved , it concerns the European Union , the European Investment Bank , the other international financial institutions , it concerns private sector investors , and of course it concerns the social partners .
The massive challenges awaiting us can be met only by joint efforts and , in addition , by the development of flexible but effective means of cooperation .
The report by Mr Sisó Cruellas refers in particular to the need to coordinate investments related to infrastructure in Europe , and also to the need to monitor the creation of the appropriate transport infrastructure for the benefit of European citizens , for the benefit of those in the professions , traders , and European travellers too .
Precisely that aim will be served by the partnership which , while remaining an unofficial one in legal terms , is intended to facilitate cooperation and the monitoring of progress .
The Community provides sufficient finance for the implementation of its policies , and that is a basic concept in which we believe .
Our policy in the area of transport infrastructure has two basic priorities : first of all the creation of a cohesive transport network for an enlarged Europe involving a reasonable price structure and , secondly , the mobilisation of the necessary financial resources for the establishment of that specific network .
It is clear that the cost of these investments will be borne mainly by the countries involved , a particularly painful burden for the national budgets , which are already under severe pressure .
Of course substantial loans will be granted by the international financial institutions , among which the EIB will of course lead the way .
But there will also be a substantial contribution from the EU 's budget , at least for the countries which are candidates for accession .
Between 1992 and 1998 , the PHARE programme provided a total of some ECU 1000 million .
We hope that from 2000 onwards the contribution from the instrument for pre-accession structural policies , ISPRA , will propose the provision of an annual sum of around ECU 500 million for the transport sector .
Estimates of the cost of developing satisfactory and modern transport networks in Europe vary , but I should like to mention , by way of indication , that an estimate of the transport infrastructure needs in Central Europe has given a figure of ECU 100 billion by 2015 for the modernisation of 20 000 km of rail and road networks , to bring them up to the current specifications .
We also give priority to the mobilisation of sufficient financial resources for elements of the European transport networks outside the future enlarged Union , in the Community of Independent States or even in the Mediterranean basin , so that the necessary infrastructure can be created in good time .
However , the potential for providing Community finance for those areas remains limited , given that the TACIS and MEDA programmes can at present only provide finance for technical aid .
As for cofinancing by the public and private sectors , we are clearly aware of the realities .
However , even the most optimistic assumptions make it clear that the national budgets , the budget of the European Union and the international financial institutions will not be able to find the necessary resources to bridge the gap in the area of infrastructure in good time .
Consequently , I am sure that the need to mobilise financial resources to improve the quality of the projects , but also to increase economic productivity , which led the EU countries to set up various partnerships involving the public and private sectors , will now provide an important incentive for similar efforts in Central and Eastern Europe .
The combination of those needs , the new problems arising and the new practices in the context of the transforming economy of Central and Eastern Europe could substantively prepare the ground for the establishment of new financing instruments and new ways to manage infrastructure .
Mr President , the Commission 's contribution towards adapting Europe 's infrastructure to meet the requisite standards has been and will continue to be substantial .
We will of course continue to keep Parliament informed on a regular basis about the progress being achieved .
With these comments , I would urge the European Parliament to approve the report by Mr Sisó Cruellas , whom I would also like to congratulate on his work and on his dedication to the task of developing transport networks in Europe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Transport telematics
The next item is the report ( A4-0246 / 98 ) by Mr Baldarelli , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the communication from the Commission on a Community strategy and framework for the deployment of road transport telematics in Europe , and proposals for initial actions ( COM ( 97 ) 0223 - C4-0239 / 97 ) .
Mr President , the Commission communication seeks to establish a framework for action at EU , national , regional and local level , and puts forward five priority areas : traffic information services , based on the RDS-TMC system ; transport data exchange / information management ; electronic fee collection ; the human / machine interface ; and system architecture .
The Committee on Transport has no objection to the identification of five areas in the proposed strategy , but we consider that the range of priorities should be extended to cover goods transport , and that there should be a clearer specification of the place of public transport , in particular to encourage the development of coordinated multi- and intermodal transport .
This area is not spelled out clearly in the Commission 's document ; it does appear among the other actions of the Commission , but this does not satisfy us .
Another point concerning the Commission 's document is as follows : the Commission sets out its intention to develop telematics and illustrates the advantages , but does not analyse the costs of not using telematics .
This might be a semantic point , but in actual fact the costs of not using telematics are closely related to its advantages .
Looking at these advantages , the VMS system should bring about a 30 % reduction in accidents and a 40 % cut in the numbers of dead and injured , an average reduction in speed of 10 % , a 30 % reduction in rain-related accidents and an 85 % reduction in fog-related accidents .
The system of emergency satellite or cellular links should cut reaction time for the emergency services by more than 40 % , and the survival rate should increase by between 7 and 12 % .
The collision alert system , coupled with on-board computers , should increase driver safety and , what is more , the VMS should cut traffic delays by 20 % .
All these aspects are very important , and you will appreciate that , when analysed in terms of cost , their advantages are significant indeed .
Some interesting research has been conducted into the internalisation of infrastructure costs .
These data should , I believe , be investigated further in respect of the cost of not using telematics ; in other words , the social benefits should be assessed in financial terms .
Turning to the aspects not directly addressed by the Commission , but which could be taken up more specifically in further measures , and indeed in future communications , the principle of universal access for all the Union 's citizens must apply to telematics .
Ultimately , telematics establishes hierarchies and leads to democratic authoritarianism , so somehow we must ensure that telematics will benefit everyone .
This is the principle of free and universal access .
We would envisage telematics being freely and universally available for certain basic services : emergency situations , traffic congestion , dangerous goods and meteorological conditions .
These aspects could be extremely useful , and could be managed in the interests of the community at large so as to benefit all users . Other actions need to be devised to this end .
We are very keen on the financial possibilities opened up by the fifth framework programme of research .
We are convinced that a good job of work has been done here , and would encourage the Commission to work along these lines .
However we are also convinced that the financial resources for the trans-European networks need to be committed somehow or other - we discussed this a short while ago - with the involvement of the regional authorities .
I would conclude with a word on the local , regional and national authorities : regional , local and even national authorities tend to undervalue these issues .
Much more needs to be done in terms of public transport too .
Mr President , I must start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Baldarelli , on his excellent report which , generally speaking , we agree with .
Nonetheless , as the rapporteur knows , our opinions do differ on a few minor points .
For example , it would have been logical to regulate the equipment requirements for vehicles with technological instruments or the tendency towards abusing tollbooths , even in protected areas .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , I would like to highlight the most significant elements of this Community strategy .
It certainly deserves the most resolute and urgent political support from all the European institutions and , of course , from this House .
It is clear to us that no real progress will be made if research and development is not given the maximum support possible , and the fifth framework programme should not forget this .
Mr President , this strategy must be the first in a series covering each of the interfaces of all other modes of transport , as telematic applications for the various forms of transport must fit into a strategy aimed at developing a general , integrated transport system .
The Commission must also calculate the costs involved in the overall programme in order to allow an assessment of the correlation between the resources used and the practical results .
Nor should we ignore the principle of correcting territorial imbalances .
Similarly , the research programme should cover the development of telematic assistance systems for use when driving in fog or should seek to create the possibility of using on-board receivers of the ' no hands ' type with GSM functions .
Community strategy in support of telematic safety measures in the carriage of dangerous goods should also be strengthened , as Mr Baldarelli stressed .
There is an urgent need to improve traffic management systems , particularly in the large European urban areas , with a view to using telematics to improve mobility in congested cities .
In this respect , we also need to devise a range of models for cooperation between the public and private sectors .
And finally , Mr President , although this may seem obvious , we must ensure that we protect consumers .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Baldarelli 's fine report continues the discussion on transport telematics that we started at the beginning of our legislative term .
This Commission communication differs from the last one in two ways . Firstly , unlike the earlier one it is not concerned with specific telematics applications but with Community strategies and with the framework conditions for the Europe-wide deployment of telematics .
That reflects the very rapid developments in this field , or at least in the area of road transport telematics .
This brings me to the second difference from the earlier communication . We are concerned here only with telematics applications for one mode of transport , road transport , which is a good thing in that it leads to proposals for practical action .
But it is also a bad thing , because it is not a multimodal approach .
When we speak of an integrated transport system in transport policy and say that is the only way to achieve sustainable mobility in the long term , that means we consider two types of integration necessary : quantitative integration of the individual modes of transport beyond national borders , and qualitative integration , namely linking up the transport modes to form a multimodal transport system .
We have a particular need for telematics with regard to the second aspect .
The integration of road transport alone could even prove counterproductive for the overall project .
So we expect the Commission to set out a strategy and propose practical actions for multimodal transport telematics .
Turning now to the strategies for road transport telematics , even if the communication and the report are very belated , since most of the strategies have already been implemented , let me say this .
One : we welcome the strategy of introducing RDS-TMC-based transport information services ; we do , however , expect that this will be done across the board , Europe-wide , and not just in Germany .
We also expect a parallel strategy for introducing the technically superior DAB system .
Two : the exchange of traffic data and the creation of an information management service should be geared to intermodal transport from the outset .
Three : the effect of the Memorandum of Understanding on technical norms and operating reports needs checking .
Four : greater efforts should be directed at making the systems of electronic fee collection interoperable , since there is some need for political action here - at least in my view .
If we can sharply reduce what are called the external costs of road transport by means of telematics we must also be able to ascertain and apportion the residual costs on a uniform basis .
Five : we need comprehensive socio-economic studies on human / machine interfaces .
Six : the attempts to define an open , European system architecture are lagging behind recent developments .
That is why we look forward to the Commission 's next communication on telematics .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is rather like a family party here tonight !
The PPE Group supports the development of framework conditions for the deployment of telematics in road transport because transport telematics can significantly increase road safety , improve traffic flows and thereby reduce the environmental damage caused by traffic .
We thank the rapporteur for his excellent report .
But let me make two points of criticism . We Christian Democrats believe that , firstly , the advantages and disadvantages of road pricing need to be checked thoroughly .
Secondly , we categorically reject new charges for driving into towns .
On my first point , electronic , distance-related charges - called road pricing in short - for goods transport by road or even for private motorists may in theory be fairer than non-use-related charges .
But we Christian Democrats fear that the costs of introducing and maintaining this kind of gigantic electronic system - for all 15 countries and not just one or two , and here I agree with Mr Stockmann - will be so enormous in practice , for the Member States , the private HGV companies or indeed the individual citizen if this kind of system is also applied to private cars , that it will no longer have any economic advantages over the current system of road-use charges or tolls .
In that case it would be better simply to give up the idea of road pricing altogether .
At any rate , we Christian Democrats totally reject a road pricing system that would involve a special charge for lorries or cars entering the inner cities .
Inner-city parking fees , whether on the roadside or in car parks , are enormous , in my country at least . It costs DM 2 to park for half an hour in my home town , Hamburg , which is pretty steep !
So I believe that we really would be putting too much of a burden on the consumer , the customer , if we also introduced a road pricing system for driving into the inner cities .
High charges would in effect put an end to delivery traffic into towns , and also make it impossible for customers to reach business centres .
On the one hand , we keep saying that we must revive our inner cities .
On the other we force drivers out to the suburbs , to the big shopping centres , so that they no longer come into town .
We want jobs in city centres , we want the inner cities to be alive and well .
That is why we emphatically reject charges for entering the inner cities !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Baldarelli , for the excellent report he has brought before us .
Like Mr Baldarelli himself , we too recognise the importance of road transport telematics services in our common effort to make our roads safer , cleaner , more competitive and more effective .
Telematics can serve individual citizens , vehicle fleet operators or indeed emergency service providers , and of course they can benefit public transport agencies , while at the same time creating opportunities on the labour market for our industries and helping to ensure a more efficient use of energy resources .
It was for all those reasons that the Commission drew up the communication we are debating today .
It provides a framework for the development of a broad range of telematics services and systems for road transport , in a flexible way so as to respond to both local and Community needs .
We also share the view that RTT services will only be more effective if they have been incorporated in transport strategies aimed at achieving specific policy aims - in other words , RTT is a tool to help in the implementation of political decisions .
The communication published in May last year identified some very specific actions for the sectors with first priority , and also indicated actions in other sectors .
Most of the first-priority actions have already been completed , as many Members will know from the excellent hearing held by the Committee on Transport and Tourism at the beginning of this year .
For example , we have already concluded memoranda of agreement in the RDS-TMC sector for the radio broadcasting of data and road traffic messages and for the exchange of data , which have already been signed by the main players in these sectors .
As for the arrangements being made by the various bodies to put these memoranda into practice , they too have made significant progress .
Alongside these arrangements , the situation is now developing through European regional projects and national projects financed by the budget for trans-European transport networks .
And we have already started examining certain other sectors which Mr Baldarelli 's report rightly regards as important , for example information before and during a journey , public transport and multimodal transport .
Indeed , in the next few weeks we expect to be submitting a communication on interoperational systems for electronic fee collection in Europe .
The importance of European regional projects as a driving force for the development of RTT is also recognised in the report presented to Parliament .
These projects envisage the creation of RTT services in cross-border regions and have already attracted the participation of 12 of the 15 Member States .
Their contribution is of truly fundamental importance in securing the interoperability of RTT systems and the continuity of RTT services across the borders of these countries .
They presuppose the monitoring and management of traffic on the main arteries , including the formulation of new itineraries , information before the journey , information during the journey via message signal converters and the RDS-TMC services .
This presupposes the cross-border exchange of data between traffic monitoring centres .
In some projects , indeed , there is already cooperation in the sector of interoperational systems for electronic fee collection .
The Commission agrees that there is a need to establish standards at a high technical level for this sector , and for that reason it has commissioned the European Committee for Standardisation , the ECS , to carry out a project on matters which we regard as having particular priority for the achievement of our aims .
We asked the ECS to draw up a new working programme which would exactly reflect all those priorities .
Indeed , given the global nature of RTT markets , we will also be examining , again in collaboration with the ECS , to what extent the arrangements for the cooperation of the ISO on common standards are satisfactory from the standpoint both of the aims of a transport policy and those of our industry .
It is clear that the security of RTT systems on vehicles must be of great concern to us all , and that is exactly why it has been included as a priority among our actions .
Today , then , I am in the happy position of being able to tell you that an operational group set up by the Commission has drawn up a list of principles , and after consultation that list will undergo further refinement so as to give more accurate information about exactly what is required .
The Commission hopes to submit detailed proposals both to Parliament and to the Council on how this can be transformed into a self-imposed memorandum of agreement , a code of practice with which manufacturers of equipment and motor vehicles , and those who assemble them , will have to comply .
At any rate , I can assure you that if the self-imposed system we have proposed does not work , the Commission will not hesitate to submit new proposals for legislation in the sector .
Finally , another concern which runs through Mr Baldarelli 's report is that RTT must not be available only to a select group .
The Commission shares that view completely .
However , we will have to work closely with Parliament and the Member States to make sure of that .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Tourism
The next item is the report ( A4-0247 / 98 ) by Mr Novo Belenguer , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Commission report to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on Community measures affecting tourism ( 1995 / 96 ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0332 - C4-0576 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report I am presenting to you today will be my last parliamentary initiative as , regrettably , I am giving up my seat tomorrow and leaving it in your hands to develop from now on a true Community tourism policy .
The Commission 's report arrived at a key moment for the future of the Community tourism policy , between the problems of fraud concerning certain actions in the early 1990s and the major challenge that the start of the new millennium represents for us .
Perhaps for this reason , my intention as rapporteur is to present the report more from a strategic point of view than from the point of view of giving due recognition to Community activities in the field of tourism in 1995 and 1996 , although it must be acknowledged that there have been many such activities and that they have been extremely varied .
The Commission 's communication on Community measures affecting tourism in 1995 and 1996 was presented to Parliament in accordance with the requirements laid out in Article 5 of the 1992 Council Decision , which establishes a Community action plan to assist tourism .
I would point out that this plan ended on 31 December 1995 and has not been renewed , mainly due to the lack of a legal basis in the form of a multiannual programme .
For this reason , we have tabled an amendment - Amendment No 9 - that calls on the Council to adopt a Community framework for actions in this extremely important sector .
In any case , the resolution suggests that the tradition of presenting an annual report to Parliament on the Community measures affecting tourism should continue , together with an evaluation of the actions .
This will allow us to hold an annual debate in Parliament and to impose democratic control on future Community measures .
I would also like to highlight the main problems that , in my opinion , are hindering the development of a Community policy .
Firstly , there is the unwillingness of national authorities to entrust the European Community with the role of coordinating activities and supporting the tourism sector .
This was reflected in their refusal to adopt the PHILOXENIA programme last year , which meant that there was no legal basis to finance supplementary actions at Community level .
We are now in danger of making the same mistake once again for 1999 .
Secondly , there is a lack of confidence , once again on the part of national governments , in the Commission 's own services that does not allow it to develop an action programme ; this is mainly due to the incidences of fraud detected in 1991 , European Tourism Year , and in the most recent action plan .
Thirdly , the lack of human and financial resources means that the European Commission is having difficulty in developing a tourism policy that effectively coordinates the various Community policies affecting this important sector .
Finally , there is a lack of planning and long-term strategy .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is shocking that , in this day and age , there is no shared vision between the Community institutions and the various Member States of a sector that makes up approximately 14 % of GDP and provides 10 % of jobs in Europe .
However , it seems to me that now is the right time to relaunch a Community tourism strategy .
Since I began to prepare this report , I have been calling for a complete reorganisation of the Commission 's services , which would signal , from this moment on , a new beginning for European tourism . This would provide the Commission with the necessary human infrastructure to enable it to contribute a real added value to the activities of the Member States , and to the different regions .
Therefore , I can only be grateful to the Commission for announcing this summer that a directorate for tourism is to be formed from three units within Directorate-General XXII . And I believe that , by and large , we agree on the abilities and competences these units should have .
They include , firstly , guaranteeing cooperation and systematic consultation with other Directorates-General , maintaining a close and permanent link with the industry and with national tourist offices , carrying out the ex-ante and ex-post evaluation of all Community actions to promote tourism , and increasing the amount of information made available to tourists , particularly on those aspects relating to their rights and responsibilities as consumers .
Secondly , we also believe that the time is ripe for this as , in July , the Commission itself published its official response to the report by the Court of Auditors on the previous , allegedly fraudulent actions .
The Commission has identified all of the most problematic actions of the period in question , without prejudice to the legal proceedings that the national courts have yet to complete .
It estimates that approximately 9 % of all the actions carried out or financed between 1990 and 1995 show irregularities .
It also points out that it is taking action to recover funds that were overpaid and is referring the matter back to national authorities where appropriate .
Thirdly , the meeting of the group of experts on tourism and employment , chaired by the Commissioner , was an excellent initiative and we are currently awaiting its conclusions and recommendations .
In conclusion , Mr President , I defend and support the added value that the European Community can bring to tourism in Europe .
All we need is for the Member States to recognise this .
Mr President , as draftsman for the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , I could restate the conclusions that we reached , but I will refrain from doing so .
I have to say that tourism policy , and the Commissioner knows it full well , is something of a poor relation in terms of Community policy , and this is actually strange , because neither the Commissioner nor the rapporteur needs to be told that tourism is the biggest employer in the Community and is also a sector which could generate a great deal of economic activity in areas whose economy is in difficulty .
In short , we have a duty to see to it that something is made of tourism policy .
That means first of all that we have to do a good deal more about quality , and it means too , as we say in this opinion from the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , that we have to do something about the recognition and equivalence of diplomas .
Secondly , Mr President , we referred to fiscal policy .
Precisely because tourism is increasingly international , fiscal policy hugely distorts the level playing field , notably with regard to VAT .
Le me give you just one example .
Take the way in which theme parks are treated in one country ...
... the President 's own country .
Parc Astérix is regarded as a cultural attraction and is subject to a low rate of VAT , whereas other countries view this kind of park as a tourist attraction and so apply a high rate of VAT .
( NL ) Having said that , Mr President , I would point lastly to Amendment No 9 , on the new Article 7a , in which the rapporteur says that a framework programme constitutes a legal basis .
Not so , Mr Belenguer .
Framework programmes are not a legal basis , only Treaty articles are .
So once again our committee calls for the inclusion in the Treaty of an article which properly addresses tourism .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate not only the rapporteur , Mr Novo Belenguer , but also the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Both present us with a series of conclusions of great interest , and the clarity , conciseness and the scope of the proposals contained in Mr Wijsenbeek 's opinion , in our view , add a great deal to the report .
Although no specific legal base exists for tourism , Commissioner Papoutsis has succeeded not only in reorganising the tourism service in keeping with the guidelines drawn up by the European Parliament , but he has also continued to submit to us proposals with an obvious impact on this activity which is so important for Europe .
Although the principle of subsidiarity applies to this sector , in that each country should maintain its specific features and differences , and since tourists travel in quest of difference , it should nonetheless be carefully analysed , because the countries of the European Union have benefited from using the Structural Funds to maintain the specific features of each region and in particular to defend their own cultural heritage .
Information about the introduction of the euro and the greater freedom of movement within the Schengen area should be disseminated at Community level since citizens of the European Union account for some 90 % of the tourists received by these countries .
Even where third countries are concerned , action at European level is justified , since action taken individually by countries is of limited effect while action taken jointly can have a far greater impact and far more significant results for European tourism .
I would once more stress the need for a specific legal base for tourism in the Treaties .
Until then , Commissioner Papoutsis , continue to endeavour to coordinate the 6 % of the Structural Funds that are spent in the tourism sector and use all the possible legal bases to continue the Commission 's action in support of the increased competitiveness of the European tourism industry .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mr Novo Belenguer on his report and on the excellent steps he has taken during his time in this Parliament .
I would also like to take this opportunity to mention the pressing need for an action programme covering all the aspects of tourism that have already been identified as providing added value to this sector at European level . Whilst showing the greatest respect for subsidiarity , it is vital that we promote the quality and competitiveness of this sector .
With the reform of the Structural Funds and the process of enlargement towards the East , this is a crucial time .
Tourism is the industry that has proven to be most effective in stimulating depressed areas by creating economic activity and employment .
Its effects are extremely beneficial for regional development , be it urban , rural or coastal .
There is a great deal that we can teach the Eastern European countries and that we can share with them so that they do not make the same mistakes as we did and so that they can reclaim their historical heritage in a coherent way and make it profitable through tourism .
This , ladies and gentlemen , is added value .
All responsible Europeans value and are aware of the fact that tourism must be sustainable and that tourist destinations must be clean .
We are in favour of protecting the environment .
In today 's world , if environmental factors are not included , then the idea of quality in tourism has not been fully understood . These factors include integrated plans and hotels , no waste , clean water , solid waste monitoring , clean energy and harsh measures against atmospheric , noise or visual pollution .
Tourism in Europe is coming to the final stage of a long process that will lead to good value for money and increased competitiveness for SMEs .
Some countries promote cultural tourism , others promote rural tourism , good weather , beaches , sport , business tourism or tourism for children or older people .
Yet all countries are trying to diversify what they can offer , trying to break with the seasonal nature of tourism and to create employment .
Added value means promoting quality in training and the exchange of experiences .
Added value means projects for applying new technologies to tourism in reservations systems or in tourist destinations .
We would like to congratulate the Commission for having promoted the organisation of a conference on the impact of the euro on the tourism sector in order to help develop changeover strategies for businesses and consumers .
The euro will promote tourism in Europe and will promote Europe as a tourist destination .
We are looking forward to the report from the ' group of experts ' and we strongly support continuing actions to combat sex tourism .
Ladies and gentlemen , everything I have mentioned here is added value .
We must inform and convince the Council of this .
I believe that there are sufficient elements to warrant an action programme that could form a legal basis and that would be warmly welcomed by the Member States .
I hope that the Council will be forward-thinking on this issue .
Mr President , I should like to say first of all that I agree with the report tabled by Mr Novo Belenguer , and I think that he has put some extremely important points before the House .
In particular , he is right to stress the links between tourism and numerous other sectors falling under EU jurisdiction .
Therefore , although the lack of a clear legal base is a very real problem , it is also true to say that tourism has links with many other activities and sectors where the legal bases are clear .
Be that as it may , the problem of the legal base remains and must be solved .
Unfortunately , as we all know , the Intergovernmental Conference in Amsterdam did not come up with a satisfactory solution , and the consequences are evident in that the Philoxenia programme , dating back to 1996 , has still not been adopted because there is no legal base and hence no budget line .
In view of all these factors , we believe that efforts should at last be made to find a legal base , an appropriate programme and appropriate budget lines , and to recognise tourism as an issue in its own right .
For us Greens , this means in particular saying ' no ' to tourism that destroys the land , ' no ' to tourism that has so often led to the land being concreted over , but ' yes ' to sustainable and eco-friendly tourism .
This is why we Greens have tabled a number of amendments , and I would draw particular attention to one of these . It seeks to take account , when assessing tourism , of the tolerance threshold of individual areas affected by tourist activities : we propose a so-called eco-label for tourist areas and bodies .
In this way , we can give a clear indication of how tourism can itself become a part of sustainable development .
Mr President , I was councillor for tourism in the Campania region for three years , and during that time I heard many people maintain that tourism is an important factor of development and an essential economic activity .
Unfortunately , these statements of fact were never followed up by any tangible administrative , legislative or economic measures of support .
The Commission 's report likewise recognises the importance of tourism , both from the point of view of protecting and promoting our countryside , history and culture , and from that of economic expansion and job opportunities .
And yet , at European level , we have this state of affairs whereby tourist sector activities do not receive due recognition .
I therefore believe that immediate action is needed in three fundamental areas , which have been highlighted both in the report and by previous speakers .
Firstly , the determination of a legal base to promote tourism at European level : there is no title in the Maastricht Treaty , and nor does the Amsterdam Treaty allude to it .
Secondly , an undertaking should be made to insert a specific title into the Treaty at the next revision , as was said at the European Study Days held in Naples in 1996 .
Finally , a Directorate-General for tourism should be created and , in the reform of the Structural Funds , particular attention should be devoted to integrated projects which identify tourism as a factor of development and environmental protection .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , tourism is an important economic sector in the European Union .
It is also important to job creation .
And let me remind you that it is not only urban and coastal tourism that are important , but especially tourism in rural areas .
This brings in extra revenue and also supports regional development .
Of course it also creates jobs , which benefits the entire region .
Priority must be given to soft tourism here .
The European Union ought to create a suitable framework for the future development of tourist policy , as is being discussed in the Philoxenia programme .
Another positive step would be to submit a white paper , following on from the Green Paper , to define the future strategy - not the communitisation of tourist policy but a strategy .
It is important to maintain and promote specific , individual customs and traditions .
I believe that we must give real priority to training those employed in the tourist industry .
To conclude , let me once again protest strongly in this House about sex tourism .
I call on the Commission to do its utmost to combat and finally put a stop to this truly shameful form of tourism .
Mr President , let me , as a representative of the most tourist-intensive country in the European Union , say a few words on this excellent report .
After all , Austria derives 6 % of its GDP from international tourism .
The domestic pressure of competition is enormous , as a result of extremely cheap offers in areas with good climatic conditions .
Tourist companies are faced with a totally uncoordinated and inefficient EU tourism policy .
There is no uniform concept of tourism .
Twice now the Council has rejected the Philoxenia programme , which offers some really positive ideas .
In my view , this kind of action programme should obey the principle of subsidiarity and give priority to advertising particular regions , because I believe that would be the best way to find third-country customers for the European market .
The report calls on the budgetary authority to make a functioning budget available for direct Community measures for 1999 .
Budget line B5-325 is the only one that refers explicitly to measures to promote tourism .
Then it emerges that this budget line , which was virtually non-existent in the past given that it only accounted for ECU 2 million , is to be cut even more under the Council and Commission proposals .
That is incredible when you think that the Commission described tourism as one of the five economic factors most likely to create jobs .
Tourism is to be promoted via the Structural Funds and various Community initiatives that were not originally geared to tourism .
As the Commission report shows , this results in an unfair distribution of resources , which is a serious disadvantage to Austria , among others .
Mr President , tourism in the European Union does not have its own fundamental law .
And since the Treaties omitted to mention it , it has no legal base .
And since it has no legal base , neither does it have any activities : the PHILOXENIA programme is still on ice .
Consequently , it has no budget : the budget proposal came to nothing and the Committee on Budgets made sure that the amendment proposed by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , involving the modest sum of ECU 3.5 million for 1999 , came to nothing .
How is it that , when everybody agrees that tourism is such an important sector for the European Union in terms of jobs , economic activity , investment and sustainable development , it did not merit even a tiny paragraph in the Treaty of Amsterdam ?
Why should it be bound by the unanimity rule in the Council of Ministers , even for decisions relating to minor measures , in a way which undermines the very process of European integration ?
Why is it that , although it is so clearly a sector which cuts across the greatest number of other sectors , from transport to the environment , from regional policy to employment , from trade to agriculture and rural affairs , the Council insists on denying tourism a minimum of institutional dignity and delegates it to a dark and shameful corner in the basement of DG XXIII ?
I know that subsidiarily should be the rule .
We all know that regional policy supported tourism-incentive projects during the 1994-99 period to the tune of ECU 9 billion , but this cannot be used to justify the absence of a Community action plan for tourism , because there are areas in which potential exists for Community added value , with external promotion outside the European Union , reduction of seasonal variations , coordination of the activities of different programmes and policies where they affect tourism , fiscal harmonisation , classification of tourism structures , safety and information for tourists as consumers .
If tourism is to acquire some dignity , it must be given a higher budgetary profile .
It is now up to the political groups of this House to achieve a consensus which will put an end to this irrational situation of a tourist sector with no foundation .
Mr President , there is good news and there is bad news for tourism in the European Union .
The good news first .
The introduction of the euro will make travel and tourism in ' Euroland ' easier and cheaper .
I have worked out that , thanks to the euro , one day out of a two-week holiday in the European Union will be free .
Another piece of good news is that there is every indication that travel and tourism will be the number one growth sector in the next few years , although the less optimistic economic outlook suggests that this growth may be less spectacular than we had thought until recently .
Now the bad news .
The crisis in Asia and Russia will reduce the numbers of tourists from those countries visiting Europe .
At the same time , these countries will become more attractive because of the devaluation of their currencies .
I am thinking of the important sector of conference tourism , where we shall get more for our money .
My question is this : what is the Commission 's response to this development ?
We urgently need a strategy to enable Europe to benefit from the level of growth expected .
The watchwords of this strategy should be : quality and greater competitiveness for Europe 's tourist industry , particularly with regard to SMEs .
In this context , I would like to see a uniformly low rate of VAT being levied on tourism .
Tourism does , after all , provide a great many jobs .
We must in future have tourism which is sustainable .
My second question is what part does DG XXIII play in the allocation of sizeable sums of money from the regional funds to tourism ?
And my last question , Mr President , how does the Commission rate the chances of getting Philoxenia approved by the end of the year , given the energy displayed by the Austrian Presidency ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Europe should assert its difference in tourism as it is doing in the information society .
The European tourist industry must , increasingly , be an industry of quality .
A European concept of tourism exists which links it closely with the promotion of the environment , culture , regional development , health and the safety and well-being of individuals .
The Novo Belenguer report appeals for a European tourism policy , and rightly so .
This policy should , on the one hand , seek to create within the Commission a structure that is able to carry out studies , compare statistics , promote training , encourage innovation and facilitate cooperation networks and , on the other , encourage coordination structures in the Member States to enable Europe to maintain its leadership as a tourist destination .
The recent example of the establishment of the ' Europa Traditionis Consortium ' to promote tourism in traditional private homes is just one example of a joint initiative in society which is on the right track , but which will be but a drop in the ocean if it is not publicised and extensively replicated .
The European Union could and should have a role to play , both in promoting cooperation networks and in training professionals , making them aware of the medium and long-term advantages for the sector itself of a sustainable type of tourism which respects nature and heritage .
If the Council persists in hesitating to deal with tourism policy at Community level , it should but consider the impact of its failure to do so on the competitiveness of the sector in Europe and on the development of its peripheral regions .
Under the present conditions of increased competition , with the absence of coordinated measures and common policies in the areas of mobility of professionals , efficiency of communications and marketing , in short with the failure rapidly to upgrade the sector as a whole , Europe could well lose its leading position , which it would subsequently find it difficult to recover .
Mr President , as the last speaker , I shall touch on certain matters which have merely been alluded to by others , above all ones relating to the economic and employment potential of this sector .
The statistics tell us that tourism is now the world 's third industry , after the oil and automobile industries .
The same statistics state that , in the year 2000 , tourism will be the world 's number one industry .
There are figures to substantiate these claims .
Between 1990 and 1995 , revenue from tourism rose by 8.5 % : it was USD 400 billion in 1996 ; by 2000 it will be USD 700 billion .
Currently tourism around the world accounts for 12.5 % of GDP ; in 2007 , the statistics say , this figure will rise to 12.8 % .
Here are a few more numbers in spite of the late hour : 19.1 million people are employed in tourism today in the European Union , the equivalent of 12.8 % of total jobs .
65 % of these posts are occupied by women ; by 2007 there will be an additional 1.8 million jobs .
That , then , is the economic scale of a sector which is progressing , growing , increasing , and to which Europe 's institutions still seem not to give proper consideration .
But I believe that , in spite of subsidiarity - which still remains a valid principle at territorial level - tourism can at the same time be promoted for Europe as a whole .
Yes , let us spread the word about this old continent of ours , just as the United States of America now speaks with a single voice , and similarly certain Eastern bloc countries .
Competition is worldwide . We have the reasons ; we lack the money .
ECU 10.5 million to promote Europe !
My region has 450 000 inhabitants - true enough , we can offer Lake Garda and the Dolomites - and alone spends ECU 7 million , almost as much as the European Union .
Perhaps it is an example worth following !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me firstly thank the rapporteur , Mr Novo Belenguer , for his detailed report , and Mr Wijsenbeek for the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
This report conveys an important message , namely that it is time we did something to improve the efficacy of Community action in the tourism sector , and to maximise tourism 's contribution towards achieving the Union 's objectives .
Of course , the necessary appropriations have to be secured , because the lack of specific finance for the budget line relating to tourism is creating serious practical limitations .
I am optimistic , however , that the Austrian Presidency 's efforts will bear fruit and that we shall achieve agreement on the very important Philoxenia programme in the coming months .
Let me now refer briefly to the basic priorities you have set out in the motion for a resolution and which many of you have just mentioned in your speeches .
First of all , I too agree that tourism-related action must include employment , training and education .
As you know , after the European Conference on Tourism and Employment in Luxembourg , we set up a high-level group whose mission was to examine how best tourism could contribute towards employment .
The first stage of that process is already nearing completion , and in the next few weeks I shall be receiving the group 's recommendations .
My intention is that the Commission should send the European Parliament and the Council a communication by the end of the year , in which an overall assessment of the report will be presented , along with guidelines for future action .
Secondly , there is the issue of modernising the tourism industry and improving its competitiveness , especially that of SMEs involved in tourism activities .
I absolutely agree that the application of new technology and the smooth operation of the internal market are essential prerequisites if Europe 's tourism industry is to maintain the strong position it holds today at world level .
I therefore believe it was appropriate to adopt an initiative which provides a basis for the development and dissemination of technical knowledge concerning the use of information technology in tourist services .
The Commission is already looking into the specific needs and actions required for tourism , which will have to be taken into account when implementing the fifth programme of research and technological development .
Thirdly , there is the matter of the introduction of the euro and the challenges this presents for both tourists and tourism companies .
As you know , we have been involved in far-ranging consultations about the preparatory measures being taken for the euro 's introduction .
Taking part in those consultations were banks , credit institutions , professionals in the tourism sector , and of course consumer associations .
The results of that work will be presented at the conference due to take place in Brussels on 18 October .
User-friendly guides for tourism companies are in the final stages of preparation and will be available by the end of the year .
Fourthly , there is the issue of the Structural Fund reform proposed in Agenda 2000 and the opportunities which could arise in that context for full exploitation of tourism potential in the less favoured parts of Europe , or even in declining areas .
In the context of the Structural Funds , then , the Member States are drawing up plans and indicating their sectoral priorities .
Experience shows that almost all the areas eligible under the Structural Funds have included plans related to tourism and its programmes .
However , application of the new operating rules for the Structural Funds is an opportunity for interested regional and national authorities to assess and reconsider their plans for the development of tourism , and in this way to determine coherent measures to upgrade tourist infrastructure and improve the quality of tourism-related services in those areas .
Fifthly , there is the question of applying the principle of sustainability to the development of tourism .
I agree with you that tourism cannot be developed successfully unless the principle of sustainability is fully respected .
I also agree on the need for a more widespread use in tourism of Community resources to protect the environment , and to protect and promote Europe 's cultural heritage .
Together with the Member States , we must strive for broader dissemination of the results of certain previous worthwhile programmes in that sector .
And finally , there is the matter of overall monitoring and assessment and the preparation of the reports on Community action that affects tourism .
I agree with you that these reports are a way to improve transparency , a means of helping to ensure the democratic control of Community activities .
I can therefore accept the continuation of the existing arrangements regarding preparation of the reports .
In conclusion , I should like to take this opportunity to tell you about some administrative developments , because this is an issue which is touched on by the recommendations in the motion for a resolution now before the House .
Recently , under the umbrella of DG XXIII , we have created not just a sector , not just a working group , but a directorate - a directorate for the coordination of Community measures and coordinated action related to tourism .
This directorate includes three operational units respectively concerned with matters of policy , competition and sustainability .
Before I end , I would certainly like to mention the Community action to combat sex tourism which victimises children .
Thanks to your support , and especially thanks to the decision by the budgetary authority to establish a special budget line , very considerable progress has been made in connection with informing the public about the problem .
We are continuing our initiatives along these lines , and towards the end of the year I am glad to say that I shall be able to put before Parliament a report on what has been done in this area over the past two years .
Lastly , Mr President , I would once again like to congratulate Mr Novo Belenguer on his work and to thank all the Members of Parliament who have steadfastly maintained that tourism is and will remain a major and dynamic industry , which must be actively supported by the Community , I would say even more so than at present .
Mr President , my thanks to the Commissioner for his answer .
I did not get an answer either to my question of how he rates the chances of getting Philoxenia approved by the end of the year , given the energy displayed by the Austrian Presidency .
May I also take this opportunity , Mr President , of saying how much I appreciate it that there is still a representative of the Council in the Chamber for our debates , despite the lateness of the hour .
It is right and proper that there should be , but thank you nonetheless .
Mr President , I wish to assure the House that the Austrian Presidency has indeed launched an effort by presenting a compromise proposal which contains ideas which I believe are fully in keeping with the spirit of Philoxenia .
It is based on the compromise proposed by the Luxembourg Presidency , and the Austrian Presidency is currently in consultation with the other Member States .
However , after the German elections we do not yet have the new government in the Federal Republic of Germany , and we are consequently waiting to consult with that new government because , as you will be aware , Germany is the only country , apart from certain reservations expressed by the United Kingdom , which has reacted against the acceptance of the Philoxenia programme .
I hope these negotiations will result in success .
And I certainly hope that the Council of Ministers for Tourism which the Austrian Presidency has scheduled for the beginning of December will be the meeting which approves the Philoxenia programme .
In any event , however , I sincerely hope for the European Parliament 's active support so that these efforts may be successful .
The European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions , the whole of Europe 's tourism industry , all the agencies involved in the tourism sector and 14 out of the 15 Member States are in favour of this programme .
At last , I think the time has come for the Philoxenia programme to form the legal basis for a multiannual programme on behalf of tourism .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Novo Belenguer , since this is the last report that he will be presenting , and to wish him every success in his future career when he leaves the House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 11.40 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I refer to an item in the Minutes concerning my report on ferry safety .
The Minutes indicate that Mr Papoutsis answered my question in response to his statement to this House .
In fact , the record should show that Mr Papoutsis gave me an undertaking that he would respond to my question in writing .
I would appreciate it if the Minutes could be changed to reflect that particular assurance he gave this House .
Mr Watts , I have taken note of that so that it can be corrected .
Mr President , this is not really related to the Minutes , but today I must once again draw your attention to a very unpleasant state of affairs in Brussels .
Two weeks ago , at 7.30 p.m. , one of my assistants was attacked in the vicinity of Parliament .
I really do think that action should finally be taken - in the interests of Brussels and Belgium as well - to stop this kind of thing happening !
I would also ask you to bear in mind that New York was once one of the most dangerous cities in the world , and within a short space of time has become one of the safest .
I believe that all of us who work in the institutions have a right to live and work in safe surroundings !
( Applause )
Mrs Schierhuber , I must admit that problems in this area of security are serious and have often occupied the Bureau 's attention .
Just the day before yesterday , Mrs Schleicher raised some problems of this kind .
I admit that we still cannot deal with them and we will look into how we can do so more effectively .
Mr President , if the Austrians are starting to defend Strasbourg and attack Brussels , and if the Bureau is dealing with the matter and the Quaestors are starting to get involved , then we know for sure that nothing will ever come of it .
But I would point out that one of the three flights from the Netherlands to Strasbourg has now been dropped , making Strasbourg even more difficult to get to , so it is now high time that we started meeting for longer and more often in Brussels .
Mr Wijsenbeek , you are enough of an old hand in this House , and for years we have become used to hearing comments about that sort of thing from you , and of course from other Members who have the same view .
Now is not the time to begin discussing the issue .
Mr President , I should like to mention , in reference to the last comment , that there is not a single direct flight from Finland to Strasbourg , so I suggest we meet in Brussels only .
( The Minutes were approved )
European Conference / Malta
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the European Conference of 6 October 1998 in Luxembourg , including the current situation in Malta in connection with enlargement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , yesterday the European Conference met for the first time at foreign ministerial level .
As well as the 15 EU Member States and the Commission , the 11 applicant countries - the 10 Central and Eastern European countries and Cyprus - and the Swiss Foreign Minister , Mr Cotti , participated as members elect .
Turkey had already indicated beforehand that it would not be taking part in the Conference .
Discussions during the first Conference session centred on problems related to cross-border organised crime and regional cooperation on environmental issues . There was also an opportunity for a group photograph with our partners .
During the working lunch , the situation in the western Balkans , in particular in Kosovo and Albania , was also discussed .
The presidency thus tried to cover a wide range of business and , with the exception of the subject of competitive economies , actually tried to contribute something on all the topics which the Heads of State or Government , meeting in London , had agreed should be addressed by the Conference in the future .
Let me now turn to the topics in detail .
By way of an introduction under the heading of cross-border organised crime , the presidency reported on the work of the group of experts on drugs and organised crime .
This group of experts , known as the COLD Group , was set up by the London European Conference in March of this year and held its first meeting on 10 June in Brussels .
At the meeting , participants expressed their support for the presidency proposals for the types of problem the group should address .
Those from countries outside the EU then gave detailed information about the organised crime and drug-trafficking situations in their own countries .
They informed the group about the action they are taking to combat these problems at home .
All participants agreed that effective international cooperation must be guaranteed .
This cooperation should be as broad as possible and include the police , customs authorities and criminal prosecution authorities .
They also agreed that every effort should be made to ensure that information could be exchanged between those involved as quickly and smoothly as possible .
In this context , it was also discussed whether structures to aid cooperation , or networks , already in existence within the European Union , should be extended .
Those participating in the meeting of the group of experts also proposed an extensive list of topics for their further work .
At the end of the discussion , it was agreed that several proposals , such as arranging contact points and inviting people to seminars , should be implemented quickly .
It was decided that other ideas , for example measures on criminal prosecution and combating money laundering , should first be examined at further meetings .
The group of experts will be meeting again under the Austrian Presidency .
In moving to the main topics for discussion at the Conference , the presidency referred to the importance that the EU attaches to the fight against organised crime .
The danger posed to our society by international networks of criminals should not , after all , be underestimated , since they have now infiltrated many different areas of human life - politics , economics and the law .
In the view of the European Union , two areas of organised crime are particularly abhorrent , because their victims are the weakest sections of society , children and migrants .
In the discussion on preventing and combating the sexual exploitation of children , the Conference participants agreed that protecting children , who are both the weakest members of society and the source of our hopes for the future , needs to be a particular priority of the international community , because , as well as being exploited economically and persecuted in times of war , children are the victims of a particularly detestable form of violence , that of sexual abuse .
Usually this takes place behind closed doors .
Such acts of violence are known to occur throughout the world .
Since the advent of business , the exchange of information and tourism on a global scale , the sexual exploitation of children has been a matter of concern to all countries .
The Conference participants agreed , for this reason , that effective measures to counter it also require productive international cooperation in the various fora .
The reports on the discovery of cross-border paedophile rings are something we all recall with horror .
Fighting paedophilia , and related evils such as sex tourism and child prostitution , on the one hand , and taking action to prevent child abuse within the family and the production and distribution of child pornography , above all on the Internet , on the other hand , therefore present a very particular challenge , not only to the Member States of the European Union , but , we believe , to all states .
The Conference participants here reaffirmed that these challenges should be tackled across national boundaries .
The presidency referred to the European Union 's intensive work in this area in recent weeks and months , giving an overview of the various activities being undertaken in that field and reporting on the progress of discussions in the General Affairs Council .
From the EU 's activities , the presidency singled out , in particular , the joint action to combat trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children , which the Council adopted in February 1997 .
This joint action contains proposals for improving judicial cooperation in the fight against trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children .
A number of the participating states reported on their experience of working in this field to the Conference and , at the end of the discussion , the participants agreed to invite the European Conference group of experts on drugs and organised crime to examine in detail , which of the EU 's legal instruments the European Conference partner countries might be able to adopt .
Finally , the Conference participants agreed to step up coordination in the United Nations , so as to fight together against the sexual abuse of children .
Under the topic of cross-border organised crime , the Conference participants also discussed the problem of illegal immigrant couriers .
Lately , in particular , there have been repeated reports about the huge influx of illegal migrants trying to reach the richer countries of Europe and North America .
This new wave of migration , which is growing every year , has led some countries to tighten their immigration laws .
The final topic discussed in the first session was that of regional cooperation on environmental issues .
The various representatives reported on their involvement in environmental initiatives , through European regional organisations : the Central European Initiative ; the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Group ; the Council of Baltic Sea States and the Council for the European Arctic Regions of the Barents Sea .
Conference participants emphasised that environmental policies should be complementary .
For the future , they agreed that , as a first step , the presidency would invite the various bodies responsible for regional cooperation , along with the European Commission and the Environment Agency , to submit contributions and suggest solutions to the problems identified .
Over lunch , we discussed two further topics , developments in Kosovo and the situation in Albania , but I do not wish to address these now , because they will be the subject of a subsequent debate .
Mr President , with reference to yesterday 's European Conference in Luxembourg , I would just like to say how much I welcomed the fact that the presidency decided to include on the agenda the important issues that Mrs Ferrero has just raised .
The fight against organised crime , the sexual exploitation of children and illegal immigration are all presently at the top of our political agenda , and we therefore feel that it is of the utmost importance that they should be discussed in a forum which brings together all the future Member States and the current members of the European Union .
It was particularly interesting yesterday to hear what the future Member States are doing or intend to do in these areas and how we can further strengthen cooperation .
I think that once the Amsterdam Treaty has been ratified we will have a number of new instruments to make transnational cooperation more effective , including with the new Member States .
I am thinking here of the activities which the Amsterdam Treaty has transferred from the third pillar of the Maastricht Treaty to the first .
This and all future presidencies can count on the Commission 's support in putting these areas of cooperation into practice .
These are all areas which are directly related to bringing Europe closer to the people and about which people are , I think , rightly very concerned .
Mr President , looking at the screen in front of me I can see the words ' Conference ' and ' Malta ' .
I am not sure whether I am supposed to say something about Malta now .
We all know that the Maltese Government has reactivated its application to join the European Union , which it withdrew , or rather postponed , two years ago , and has resubmitted it to the presidency . As normally happens , the presidency and the Council have asked the Commission to deliver an opinion on it .
What this means in this particular case is that the Commission must now examine what effect the two-year gap in preparations for membership has had on Malta 's current political and economic situation .
We have therefore told the Council that we will be updating the opinion delivered on Malta in 1993 , and that we will be delivering a new opinion on how Malta can best be reintegrated into the accession process .
It is rather difficult to give a precise timetable for all this .
The Council sets great store by having extremely detailed information , which means that we are having to work through the 1993 opinion and compare it with the current situation in Malta .
Finally , as I do not need to tell you , when I was in New York I had the opportunity to talk to Guido Di Marco , Malta 's new and also former Minister of Foreign Affairs , and I told him that we are delighted that Malta has renewed its application .
I also said that the Council is definitely expecting Malta to try to make this application a bipartisan matter , that everyone knows that the application withdrawn two years ago when the present opposition party came to power has been reactivated , and that the Member States are delighted that the people of Malta are so keen to become part of the European Union .
The minister told me that that was also certainly the intention of his government , and that as the integration process progresses it will also become easier to convince more and more people that this major political step that Malta is taking is both useful and necessary .
A second point was that the question of introducing a system of VAT in Malta was extremely important last time round and was even one of the main reasons why the coalition that has just returned to power lost the last elections but one .
It is another point on which clarification is needed .
This is all I can tell you for the moment about Malta 's application to join the European Union .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , I believe the topics focused on by the European Conference to have been wisely chosen and worthy of our full support .
I also endorse the words of the Commissioner , who said that it is important to address those issues which are of particular interest to people , which give them cause for concern -whether this is justified or not - and to which they demand a response at European level .
My colleague , Mrs Malone , in particular , will be commenting on Malta ; I do not , therefore , wish to go into detail on that now .
I should , however , like to make a number of fundamental remarks and ask a number of fundamental questions .
Firstly , I believe - and this is something of which the House should be aware - that the way we chose to deal with the applicant countries , using the European Conference as a kind of umbrella forum to negotiate with some of them , was the right way .
The elections in Latvia - as well as the referendum on integrating the Russian-speaking population - and the elections in Slovakia have shown that it was right to accept these countries as applicants .
Nevertheless , we must give them time and provide certain incentives for them to put the appropriate measures in place .
I am glad that this has actually demonstrated that we proceeded in the right way , even though our course of action was disputed in certain quarters of this House .
The incentives method - providing support for improvements on democracy , the rule of law and minorities - has proved to be the right method .
We failed - unfortunately , at this European Conference too - to secure the participation of Turkey .
I wonder how topics such as international crime , drug trafficking and so on can really be dealt with effectively without Turkey .
I should also like to take this opportunity to express my particular concerns about the current strained relations between Turkey and its neighbour , Syria .
Nobody should support terrorist groups and thus enable them to be active in other countries .
But if Turkey is not capable of solving the problem itself by peaceful means , then it has neither the legitimacy nor the right to take action and organise activities in another country .
I should like to ask the presidency whether this was discussed ; what the presidency 's views are on this issue ; and whether , perhaps jointly with the Americans , a clear statement could be made to Turkey about its relations with Syria .
My final question for the presidency , however , is whether an initiative was put forward at the meeting of foreign ministers in Salzburg to extend this project to embrace other countries , as well as those in the European Conference .
Both the countries of south-east Europe and those in the Barcelona process are , of course , very much affected by issues such as crime and drug trafficking , but also immigration .
I wonder how these issues should be dealt with in the future .
The initiative did not exactly meet with enthusiasm or approval , but in principle , I believe it is the right approach , even though it was perhaps not prepared as well as it might have been , and the details still need to be considered .
The topics discussed , quite rightly , at the European Conference , relate to problems which can ultimately only be solved if , at the very least , the countries of south-east Europe and the countries in the Barcelona process are involved .
I should like to ask you , Madam President-in-Office , whether you can comment on how people envisage this in the future .
That apart , I would repeat that the issues you are addressing are of central importance for our continent .
I wish the European Union every success with the European Conference , so that we can find solutions to these problems .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have the impression that the topic of Malta came as rather a surprise , not only to you , Commissioner van den Broek , but also to you , Madam President-in-Office , because I had actually expected you to comment briefly on this in your statement .
As vice-chairman of the Malta Delegation , I do , however , appreciate the opportunity to discuss this issue here today .
Admittedly , I had expected a rather clearer signal from the Council , given the remarks the Commission made in the Committee on Foreign Affairs and Security , which were , even at that stage , along the same lines as those it made today .
The Council now tells us that it is waiting for a Commission communication , so as to first ascertain its assessment of the situation .
The procedure is rather bewildering , because on other enlargement issues , the Council has always taken the initiative .
Indeed , perhaps it is also the Council that should take some responsibility for the somewhat confused situation , because it gave Malta the brush-off and said that its turn would come after the preceding enlargement .
Malta was then , as it were , catapulted into the ranks of those countries which are experiencing severe difficulties in preparing for accession to the European Union .
In the two intervening years , Malta has not closed any doors .
The government , too , in the meantime , has done all it can to give a subsequent government , of whatever political hue , the possibility to reactivate its application for membership .
Besides , the Commission must certainly also have been aware of these signals from Malta , through the regular reports of its delegation .
The intention of our motion for a resolution is to call on the Council to send out a clear and immediate signal , first of all , to indicate that it welcomes Malta and that Malta is now once again a part of the European Conference .
For Malta belongs in this forum , if only because of its constructive role in the Barcelona process .
Mr President , I welcome the report we have heard in the Conference ; the sensitive way in which it has dealt with dossiers such as crime , sexual exploitation and illegal immigration will prove very helpful when eventually we have to move into the serious negotiations and the application of the new powers of the Amsterdam Treaty .
I would like to use the opportunity of this debate to slightly broaden the focus , because also this week we had the important news that on 10 November next we will have the accession Conference , which is an integral part of the general Conference reported today , and marks an important psychological and political threshold .
In that regard , with the Council and the Commission present , I wish to make a number of political points .
My own Group , the ELDR , strongly believes in a wider and deeper political Union .
Now that we have crossed the threshold with the five plus one States for November , we must add new vigour to the search for the institutional reform of our own institutions urgently in advance , lest it become an obstacle later ; none of us want to see that happen , but it has that capacity .
Secondly , politically , we strongly welcome the green light which was given this week to Cyprus as part of that process .
But this , too , must add a new urgency for the Council and the Commission in respect of an EU-led political initiative to resolve the Cyprus problem under the aegis of the United Nations lest , again , we should institutionalise inside the Union an intractable and difficult problem on that divided island .
In this regard , I wish to say to the Council that my Group deplores the continued failure by the Council to agree a legal base for a financial protocol with Turkey .
It is little wonder that Turkey does not participate .
We really need to get our act together at Council level there and indicate a capacity for a maturing EU relationship with all the states in that region .
My final political comment , in general terms , with regard to the upcoming Vienna Summit , is that this will afford an opportunity to review the claims of other applicant states .
My Group believes , especially in the context of the Russian political and economic crisis , that we need to review our position with regard to the Baltic States .
They have exhibited a deep commitment to reform and have made commendable progress .
This must be recognised at Vienna as , indeed , must the renewed interest in Malta .
Mr President , the election of Mr Adami as the new Prime Minister of Malta is going to have the effect of reactivating the application of Malta to join the European Union .
He recently stated that there would be two objectives for his new government : firstly , the application of Malta to join the European Union ; and secondly , the repairing of the public national finances in Malta .
Both these issues are interlinked to a small extent , particularly in the context of economic criteria laid down in the Maastricht Treaty which prospective participants in the European Union must comply with in the single currency system .
The revival of the Maltese application to join the European Union will ensure that it is dealt with in the context of the next round of enlargement negotiations , in accordance with commitments given by EU Heads of Government at Corfu .
In fact the issue of Malta joining the European Union will be discussed at the November summit and the benefits of joining the Union for the 370 000 inhabitants of Malta are real and tangible .
There will be access to a frontier-free trading bloc encompassing over 20 European countries , assuming that the accession negotiations with the countries of Eastern and Central Europe prove successful .
The European Union with its internal market and free movement of goods , persons , services and capital is a positive economic prospect for a country which is seeking to find more markets for its domestic manufactured goods .
Malta has a lot to gain if it manages to align itself more closely with EU membership rules .
Signs of Malta 's close ties with the EU are clearly evident on the island .
In fact , one of Malta 's stronger arguments for entry rests on the close affinities that exist between the island 's economies and the European Union .
Many industries in Malta which export a wide variety of semi-manufactured goods are owned by British , French , German and Italian companies .
As a result , 66 % of the visible Maltese import and export business is done with EU states .
Malta 's other important cash income activity is tourism , which also depends on EU markets for its survival .
However , many of Malta 's administrative , legal and fiscal structures have already been aligned to European Union standards .
The accession negotiations still have to overcome other difficult issues such as state support to industry and levies on imports , but I believe they can be overcome .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . This Parliament did not wish the European Conference to be left to drift along as a kind of token event , but wanted to enhance its status and make it a forum for discussing issues in the common interest .
That is a step in the right direction .
However , it still lacks a coherent strategy , and has not developed into a pan-European body , capable of meeting ecological and social needs and fulfilling this continent 's hopes for stability and peace .
A failed and internationally highly dubious European migration policy , which has manifested itself in some astounding ways , in particular under the Austrian Presidency , cannot be boiled down to the problem of illegal immigrant couriers and is , if you will forgive me , Madam President-in-Office , hypocritical .
Regional cooperation , on the other hand , is an important step in the right direction .
I hope that the Council will now also succeed in developing joint programmes and , when the money is distributed between the regions , that it will not differentiate between them this time , but will allow the regions to develop in parallel and along the same lines . Finally , I hope , Mr van den Broek , that your Directorate-General will at last take a step in the right direction , and amalgamate the PHARE and Interreg funds .
Mr President , Madam President of the Council , Commissioner , I would like to speak about Malta , because today is a very important day for Europe and , I believe , for Malta itself .
I am delighted that Parliament agreed to the request made by my group , the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to have the relaunching of Malta 's application to join the European Union put on the agenda for this part-session , in the presence of the Council and the Commission .
As chairman of the delegation to the EU-Malta Joint Parliamentary Committee , I have been a privileged and attentive observer of Maltese political life for two years .
It goes without saying that our delegation has always shown the greatest respect for the positions expressed by the various governments , since the will of the people must always prevail over partisan interests .
However , I am not going to hide the fact that I have always felt that deep down the Maltese people have had a real desire to share with the other peoples of Europe a similar common destiny , a destiny that included , on the eve of the reunification of the continent , full membership of the European Union .
I am convinced that after having made certain necessary technical adjustments , Malta can be immediately integrated into the enlargement process .
In fact , agreements were reached in 1995 that stated that negotiations with Malta and Cyprus would begin six months after the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference . Therefore , I personally believe that , in accordance with these agreements , it should be possible to begin accession negotiations with Malta in January 1999 .
I truly hope that a decision in this direction will be taken by the Vienna European Council in December .
There is an additional reason why we should be pleased with the relaunching of Malta 's application to join the Union .
On an institutional level , Malta 's return will mean that the process of institutional reform will have to be speeded up . This is a necessary condition , in Parliament 's opinion at least , for successful enlargement .
I would point out that , in accordance with Article 2 of the Protocol on the Institutions in the Treaty of Amsterdam , the process of institutional reform is automatically initiated when the Union is faced with the prospect of having 20 members , which would be the case here .
Without Malta , the Union , Europe , would never feel complete .
Mutual coexistence will constantly enrich both parties , Europe and Malta . It will also be an important asset in relations between the Union and the Mediterranean countries involved in the Barcelona process .
Mr President , when examining Malta 's application for membership , which the Commissioner has confirmed has been resurrected , the Union must , I believe , take into account the following points in particular : firstly , consideration should be given to whether , from the point of view of its infrastructure , Malta is in any kind of a position to run a Council presidency .
A similarly small country such as Luxembourg , for example , cooperates with Belgium in this respect .
No such possibility is open to Malta .
Secondly , I believe that it is essential that value added tax , which has been abolished in Malta , should be reintroduced .
While other Member States are obliged to have a minimum rate of 15 % , a derogation clause on this point would put this country , when it accedes , at an unacceptable competitive advantage .
But , with your permission , I will close with a general comment on the value of the European Conference .
This instrument was created , as a matter of urgency , as a forum for dialogue between the EU and Turkey .
The fact that this state has again failed to participate should give EU strategists cause to rethink their policy on this matter .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the Presidency and the Commission for the reports they have presented to us here today .
I am very glad that such relevant matters as drugs and child prostitution were debated yesterday , as well as all the other matters that are of concern to us here this week in Parliament .
We did ourselves debate the whole question of the harmonisation of the pharmaceutical industry .
As Parliament 's rapporteur on Malta 's accession , I am delighted that Malta was there yesterday at the European Conference and that such a welcome was given to its renewed application for membership of the European Union .
On behalf of my Group , which also welcomes this renewed request for accession , I wish to say that we also welcome the Maltese Government 's decision and indeed the opinion , shared by the opposition , that there will be a referendum held on the conclusion of the negotiations .
That is of vital importance .
Our Group also naturally considers it important that the renewed request should be dealt with both expeditiously and in full accordance with the proper procedures laid down in the Treaty .
My Group has therefore taken the initiative of calling on the Commission to present an updated opinion on Malta 's renewed application , and , as Commissioner Van Den Broek has said , to see if and how they can catch up on the past two years while the application was frozen .
My Group will also , by way of amendment , be defending Parliament 's absolute right to express our opinion on the Commission 's updated opinion on Malta 's renewed application .
We consider that Malta has a natural vocation , both in terms of its democratic institutions and respect for human rights , to form an integral part of the European Union .
We look forward to receiving the Commission 's analysis of the economic and political developments since the freezing of the previous application in 1996 .
I was interested to hear what Commissioner Van Den Broek said about the VAT situation being much clearer here , but , as the Commissioner is aware , there were other problems associated with some small industries and so on .
There is also the whole question of neutrality which has not been touched on .
I know this is a very sensitive and divisive issue in Malta as indeed it is in other Member States including Ireland .
Finally , when we receive the Commission 's updated report , I hope we will be able to quickly resolve any outstanding problems , so that the Maltese people can themselves decide once and for all on their future place in the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating our friend , Prime Minister Eddy Fenech Adami , on his recent electoral success in Malta .
His success is all the more significant given that , at the same time , the electorate came out in favour of Malta 's accession to the European Union , thus confirming the line taken by the previous Fenech Adami government , and which obtained a favourable opinion from our institutions in 1995 .
The determination and speed with which Prime Minister Adami renewed Malta 's application for EU membership , as one of the new government 's first acts , should not only reassure us as to the possibility of including Malta in the first round of negotiations on enlargement , but should also give us great satisfaction .
Indeed , Malta complies with the criteria for accession to the Union to a much greater extent than other applicant countries , and we can also be sure that a rapid recovery and return to the Maastricht criteria - already achieved in the recent past - will reward this country 's legitimate aspirations to join the monetary union .
We need only recall that in 1995 , Malta achieved a deficit of 3.9 % of GDP and inflation of 2.9 % , and that the Maltese lira has been pegged to the ECU for eleven years .
Once it is fully integrated in the European Union , in my opinion Malta will constitute an important outpost in the Mediterranean basin , likely to form a natural bridge between the cultures and economies of third countries and of the European Union .
Therefore , I can state both out of the conviction deriving from my role as former vice-chairman of the delegation for EU / Malta relations , and for the reasons I have just given , that Malta should be considered in the first round of negotiations for EU enlargement by 2002 .
I should like to hear the views of the Council presidency on this point .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there has obviously been a communication problem between Parliament , the Council and the Commission , since the Commissioner only realised what was happening at the last minute thanks to the prompt on the screen .
We have not heard anything from the Council , although I am assuming that this will be covered in the response at the end .
Everyone in Parliament is delighted that Malta has decided to reapply , and I think that politically speaking it is important for the consolidation of the Barcelona process that the Mediterranean presence in the European Union should be a little larger .
The Barcelona process could certainly do with a little consolidation .
It is also a clear illustration of the fact that Europe is expanding not just towards the east , but towards the whole of the continent of Europe .
Secondly , I think that it is very important for the people to have the chance to have their say and to distinguish between voting for a party and voting for membership , and we naturally support the calls for a referendum here .
Finally , I do not think we need to adopt a paternalistic attitude towards Malta .
Malta is strong enough to protect its own interests , and I think it may also come to illustrate perfectly what Europe has always said about the first and second waves , which is that it is very easy to move from the second to the first .
This is what we want to see .
Mr President , I was delighted to hear the report from the Council on the activities in the European Conference .
It is clearly a very thorough conference .
It is important to know that the conference is prepared to deal with issues which are important to the ordinary voters of the European Union , such as drugs and the battle against crime .
It is important to know how seriously governments are now taking the way crime undermines the basis of a democratic society .
I am pleased the conference was able to find a mechanism to deal with these problems now rather than wait until we have negotiated full European Union membership .
I believe it is a step forward in the security of the continent .
I am particularly pleased to hear that attention is being focused on one group of people who are often ignored by politicians , namely children .
The situation in Europe , quite frankly , is an affront to civilised society ; it is an affront to civilisation to have abuse of children and to have , in effect , the return to Europe of slavery .
Clearly it would undermine the democratic legitimacy of the European Union if the ordinary voter began to get the impression that the people who most benefited from the freedom of movement in the single market are the murderers , the blackmailers , the criminals , the junkies , the paedophiles .
We must make it very clear that we are not prepared to allow them to abuse what we wanted as economic benefits .
I would like to hear the Council say something about what it feels is the future of the European Conference .
Mr Swoboda has already mentioned certain countries which he feels should participate in the conference .
I would add to that list Ukraine .
I believe that is important because Ukraine is tied very closely to the West .
I would like to hear the presidency give us its observations about where we go from here in the conference , because it can be a major force .
On Malta , like everybody else I welcome the decision by the Maltese Government to apply for European Union membership .
But we must not get carried away .
This is not the return of the prodigal son .
This is not the opportunity to slay a few fatted calves and have a feast .
This is simply a democratic government expressing the will of its people .
Our enthusiasm must not blind us toward the many problems that come with Malta .
EU membership still remains a political football , which is not the best way to prepare for full membership of the European Union .
Secondly , the Commission in its avis identified certain weaknesses , particularly in relation to the structure of the economy .
What we have to do now is look again at the situation in Malta and judge it on the same basis as any other country .
Talk of Malta jumping to the front of the queue - which I have heard in Parliament - is nonsense .
Malta has to be judged the same as any other country .
But we are delighted that it is part of our family again .
Madam President-in-Office , I very much welcome the fact that you gave pride of place at the Conference to issues which are without doubt crucial , such as drugs , paedophilia and new forms of slavery , subjects which we hope to return to on other occasions for further consideration .
Nevertheless , I cannot refrain from expressing a certain amount of disappointment - which I hope you will be able to dispel in your reply - regarding your silence on the matter of Malta 's accession to the European Union .
The Commissioner , whom I have heard speak several times in meetings of the joint committee , likewise struck me as rather more lukewarm this time than others , even though we now have before us a firm request for accession from the new Maltese Government .
We should like to hear more warmth , as much enthusiasm for Malta as for the other applicant countries .
Malta is not demanding special favours , Mr Titley .
Its Prime Minister has declared his intention to comply with the Maastricht criteria in full .
Some slippage has occurred over the past two years , it is true , under the Labour Government , as compared with two years ago when Malta met the Maastricht criteria in full , and now it needs to catch up again .
As for the neutrality issue which has been raised here , the Prime Minister has singled it out and said that the problem can be solved .
So Malta has all its papers in order .
I do not believe that a credible Mediterranean policy can be pursued without Malta being a member of the European Union .
The benefits would be considerable , especially as the Mediterranean will be a major policy area over the next few years .
It is our second main border , and we cannot tackle the problem of large-scale migration unless we conduct a serious policy , in conjunction with Barcelona .
Malta is a much-needed protagonist in all of this ; that is why we are strongly in favour of Malta 's accession to the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although I did not mention Malta earlier , because I was not aware that it was included in today 's discussion , I would like to say that we did take the first available opportunity .
You know , of course , that Guido De Marco emerged as the winner in the elections on 10 September , and obviously we took advantage of the first Council meeting after that to discuss the subject .
I believe that a very positive signal was sent out yesterday .
The Commission - as you know - has been requested to present , as soon as possible , an updated version of its opinion of July 1993 , which , naturally , needs to be re-examined and revised .
In addition , the President of the Council was authorised to send a letter of reply to the Foreign Minister of Malta , referring to the procedure which is now necessary , namely the updating of the opinion .
I do believe that we responded as quickly as we could , and I in no way wish it to be understood that we harbour any feelings of resentment against Malta .
I should like to make that quite clear .
On the contrary , we are delighted that Malta is back on board , if I may put it like that .
Secondly , I should briefly like to mention Syria and Turkey .
Obviously , both the European Union and the Council are concerned about the tensions in the region , and at the moment we are supporting Egypt 's efforts to restore a certain degree of calm to the situation .
On the Partnership for Europe , you are aware that at the informal Council in Salzburg , the Austrian Presidency pursued the idea of finding some kind of basis for bringing in those countries which are not applicants or have no prospect of acceding at the present time .
Unfortunately , perhaps because it had not been prepared in sufficient detail , many countries provisionally rejected this idea in Salzburg , saying that it was premature .
I myself believe , however , that opportunities will certainly also be provided in the future for these countries - Ukraine , Moldova , Belarus , etc. to at least have the prospect of working in collaboration with Europe .
As regards institutional reform , which was also mentioned , I should like to say that it will soon be the Pörtschach summit .
Admittedly , this issue will not be to the fore , but perhaps one or other of the delegations will in fact address the subject of institutional reform , which will , of course , soon be back on the agenda as part of the follow-up to ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty .
But obviously , we know that institutional reform is one of the preconditions for our really being in a position to accept further applicants for membership .
On Cyprus , I should like to emphasise once more that we , the Austrian Presidency , are very pleased that we have succeeded in being able to start negotiations on membership with all the countries in the first wave - five plus one , Cyprus - on 10 November .
This could not be taken for granted , and we struggled over it to the last .
It is , therefore , all the more gratifying that we have managed it .
Obviously , we support starting the negotiations on membership , and hope that this will also have a renewed positive influence on the political negotiating process ; in this respect , we are in close contact with the UN Secretary-General , Kofi Annan .
As far as Turkey is concerned , I should like to point out that the Council presidency is still endeavouring to establish the Association Council with Turkey , and of course here too , talks are being held with both sides , but as yet we have not achieved a breakthrough .
We will continue our efforts , to the end of our presidency at the very least .
I should like to make one more point on migration . Although we will be debating migration issues next , I simply cannot let the accusation stand that our action in this respect is hypocritical .
The Austrian Presidency produced a working paper , which gave rise to a number of misunderstandings , because obviously under no circumstances were we going to do away with the Geneva Convention on the Status of Refugees and its instruments ; in fact , it was only referring to complementary protection measures .
Incidentally , there has been cooperation on migration and asylum within the European Union for longer than you think .
But I will say more about that during the next debate .
The debate is closed .
I have received seven motions for resolutions on this subject pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Situation in Kosovo
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Kosovo .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is now exactly three weeks since I last spoke to you on the subject of Kosovo .
Since then , the situation has again worsened dramatically .
The High Commissioner for Refugees , Sadako Ogata , visited Kosovo , Montenegro and Albania just last week .
She reported that there were an estimated 200 000 refugees and internally displaced people , around 50 000 of whom are spending the night out in the open , in the forests and hills .
Almost every day , more displaced people join them .
Belgrade 's repeated proclamations that the fighting was being stopped and the Serbian forces withdrawn have proved to be either untrue , or a tactical manoeuvre on the part of President Milosevic .
In talks with Mrs Ogata , Mr Milosevic even denied the existence of a humanitarian crisis in Kosovo and gave assurances that the Yugoslav Government was endeavouring to ease the suffering of the displaced people and make it possible for them to return home very soon .
The reality , as perceived by Mrs Ogata and regularly reported by the KDOM , tells a different story .
So do the statements made by the Secretary-General of the United Nations in the report he presented to the Security Council the day before yesterday , in which he records that the Serbian security forces are waging a campaign of terror and violence against the civilian population in Kosovo .
Unfortunately , it is all too obvious that , given that winter is approaching , we are heading for a humanitarian catastrophe , unless the situation changes soon .
The Kosovo Albanians currently seeking refuge in the forest have no fresh drinking water , increasingly scarce supplies of food , no sanitation and no medicines .
The situation is , therefore , particularly serious for children , the elderly and the sick .
There is no doubt - and this needs to be repeated here - that the main responsibility for there being such large numbers of refugees and displaced people lies with the Government of Serbia and Yugoslavia , that is to say with Milosevic himself .
The Serbian and Yugoslav authorities are always claiming that they are , after all , only defending themselves against terrorists and separatists , and that the military offensive is merely a response to the attacks carried out by the KLA .
Obviously , the KLA bears some of the responsibility for the worsening security situation , but we should keep a sense of proportion .
As for the European Union , what I said three weeks ago still stands . It demands an immediate halt to the violence and early negotiations to find a political settlement to the crisis .
From the political point of view , the Union supports the proposal , drafted by the United States and expressly approved by the Contact Group , for an interim agreement , and sees this as the most important starting point for any negotiated solution .
The Union is particularly active in the humanitarian field .
In the margins of the United Nations General Assembly , EU foreign ministers agreed to appoint the Austrian Ambassador in Belgrade , Wolfgang Petritsch , as special EU envoy to Kosovo .
Two days ago , the Council also adopted the corresponding formal decisions .
The main tasks of the new special envoy will be to coordinate the EU 's humanitarian activities with those of the international humanitarian organisations and , at the same time , to act as a point of contact for the Belgrade government and as an intermediary between it and Kosovo 's political leaders .
Revisiting an initiative of foreign ministers Mr Kinkel and Mr Védrine , the presidency has also set up working groups in Belgrade and Geneva , composed of interested EU states , the USA , Russia , UNHCR , the ICRC , and the ECMM and KDOM observer missions .
The aim , by undertaking concerted action agreed on the spot , is to identify villages and towns to which the displaced people , at present living in the open air , can return , in safety and with dignity .
Within the last few days , the presidency has also presented ' Project Home ' to its EU partners .
This initiative aims to make it easier for displaced people living in the open in the Komorane and Lapusnik area to return home . In addition , it provides for a number of accompanying , confidence-building measures .
Admittedly , all initiatives of this kind were called into question by renewed clashes and fear of further persecution , destruction and massacres .
I refer , in this context , to what happened in places such as Gornje Obrinje , where dozens of innocent people , including in particular elderly people , children and pregnant women , were tortured and murdered .
At its meeting two days ago , the Council condemned these atrocities and their perpetrators in the strongest possible terms , and called on the Belgrade authorities to investigate these abominable crimes without delay and punish those responsible .
Furthermore , it requested all those involved to cooperate with the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in the investigation of these crimes .
Besides this , in the light of repeatedly levelled accusations that horrific war crimes were being committed , the presidency has for months been arguing in favour of sending a team of experienced forensic experts to Kosovo .
The resulting invitation from Belgrade University to a forensic team from Helsinki University on 2 October , represents the first modest fruits of our efforts .
Finally , from the Union 's point of view , I should also like to recall the decisions the EU made on sanctions .
As you know , these consisted of refusing entry visas to security force officials , freezing the overseas assets of the Serbian and Yugoslav Government , banning new investment in Serbia , and lastly banning the Yugoslav airlines from flying and landing .
More far-reaching measures can only be taken with the support of a qualified majority of EU States .
Moreover , there is an EU-wide consensus , that the sanctions should not affect the civilian population or Yugoslavia 's neighbouring states , which would themselves be faced with severe difficulties if there were an embargo on Belgrade .
In the same way , it is agreed that , wherever possible , Montenegro should not suffer as a result of the sanctions applied .
Nevertheless , at the most recent Council meeting , in Luxembourg , it was decided to examine the gaps in the current sanction regime and make proposals to close them .
In the Council 's discussions and many other events over the last few days , however , another more fundamental development has become apparent .
A certain shift of opinion on the crisis in Kosovo can be observed within the international community .
There is increasingly clear support for tougher action from the international community .
Resolution 1199 , adopted by the United Nations Security Council on 23 September , was the first outward sign of this .
The current mission of the American special envoy , Mr Holbrooke ; the consultations in the Security Council on the report tabled by the United Nations Secretary-General ; the preparations being made in NATO for possible air strikes ; and the forthcoming meetings of the Contact Group and the North Atlantic Council , should , in the meantime , have made it abundantly clear to Belgrade that the international community 's patience is running out .
There is no doubt that the decisions which lie ahead are also of tremendous significance for the European Union .
After all , they affect the security and stability of the whole continent .
For the sake of the presidency , which is involved in the work of the Contact Group , I do not wish to pre-empt these decisions .
In any case , it is clear to me personally , that Europe and the international community can no longer stand by and watch , while the acts of violence and massacres in Kosovo continue .
It is precisely because hundreds of thousands of people are threatened by a humanitarian catastrophe , that I believe that it is time for clear answers , if the Security Council 's decisions are not implemented immediately and in full .
Mr President , I would wholeheartedly endorse the President-in-Office 's statement that only a tough response will bring about any change in the terrible situation of hundreds of thousands of refugees and displaced persons .
A tough response towards President Milosevic , of course .
But what use are all these tough statements ?
Our hands are more or less tied , and we have now just about done all we can in the area where the European Union has the power and scope to act , with political and diplomatic pressure and economic sanctions .
However , I agree with the President-in-Office that it is rather worrying that it appears to be so difficult to get a package of sanctions approved , and approved in such a way that the Member States are forced to take tough measures without backing down .
I am thinking here of the ban on flights which , as far as I know , is still not being complied with by all the Member States .
I think the necessary measures have now been taken here , but the real sticking point , which has us going round in circles , is whether humanitarian intervention using military means is allowed or not .
It is not primarily for the Commission to answer this question .
We can have an opinion on it , but it is only one of many .
It is up to the major players to decide whether they agree , and if they cannot reach a consensus , which is the case , then the question is whether to go ahead on the basis of a ' coalition of the willing ' .
The thing that strikes me about this whole debate is that there seems to be constant confusion between those who say they want a political solution to the conflict but exclude any foreign intervention , and those who say they want a political solution to the conflict but that this will not be found unless President Milosevic , who wants a military solution , is removed , by military force if necessary .
We have often discussed the lessons to be learnt from Bosnia , and now history is repeating itself and another humanitarian disaster is looming .
Once it is too late we will all agree that we should have acted earlier .
It took 300 000 people to die in Bosnia before we realised this - how many will it take in Kosovo ?
Since Resolution 1199 , there have been 15 to 20 000 new refugees and displaced persons .
A Security Council resolution of 23 September referred to Chapter 7 , which called on the parties to cease hostilities immediately , yet here we are on 7 October and ethnic cleansing is still going on at this very minute .
Belgrade will issue new invitations to representatives of the UN , the OSCE , perhaps even the EU and the Council of Europe .
Endless talking against a background of endless shooting .
This may be my frustration talking , but I feel that we must take every opportunity to condemn this process as unacceptable .
I can understand why Russia has reservations about using military intervention , since there is such a thing as Slav solidarity , and the Russian Parliament , which is deeply opposed to such measures , is currently facing a serious financial , economic and political crisis at home .
But this can be no excuse for simply allowing a humanitarian disaster to happen , especially given that any new tides of refugees or displaced persons will not be seeking refuge in Moscow .
Those who are the worst affected after the refugees themselves are other countries in the region or in western Europe .
So there are very clear interests at stake in ensuring that this destabilisation and humanitarian disaster are not allowed to happen .
I have nothing more to add to what the presidency has already expressed in very clear terms .
We can continue to ask questions , but the only answer that counts - how we can put an end to the violence - will remain open until those who have the power to decide give a clear , unequivocal response .
Mr President , for nine years I have sat in this Chamber and heard lots of pleas for a common foreign and security policy .
My suspicion is that what people were talking about during this time was simply the harmonisation of a process - a neat bit of packaging around a policy that could be fitted onto an institutional shelf .
They were not talking about an effective policy and were not concerned about the effectiveness of its outcome .
This week all my suspicions have been proved absolutely correct .
Month after month we have heard Members of this European Parliament demanding ever tougher action in Kosovo , and yet we discover in the General Affairs Council that the countries these Members represent are the countries which are not prepared to take action on Kosovo .
When the going gets tough , the tough talkers sit on their hands .
That is unacceptable !
The common foreign and security policy is being seen as a total sham !
It is unacceptable to the peoples of Europe to see every day on their television scenes of atrocities and massacres ; to see the problems of refugees ; to see the destabilisation of a region of Europe as more and more refugees go into Albania and put more pressure on FYROM , so that the whole region could explode ; and to see the European Union , the Council of Ministers , simply not prepared to do anything .
I am not naturally somebody who instinctively talks about military action : I am naturally cautious .
Since my son recently joined the British Royal Air Force , military intervention is no longer an intellectual debate but is now a personal issue for me .
But I cannot accept that we continue to allow babies to have their throats cut while we sit around having ever more byzantine arguments about legal bases .
Resolution 1199 is enough to justify military action .
Milosevic is not adhering to Resolution 1199 .
How many more hurdles do we want to invent to excuse inaction ?
I say to the Council : how many people have to die before it does something about Kosovo ?
Let us have action !
No more words , no more hurdles , no more intellectual arguments about how many laws you can get on the end of a pin !
Enough is enough !
Do something !
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office : hear , hear , Mr Titley .
We could , therefore , take all the resolutions which we have adopted and adopt them all over again - this time , at last , with the support of the Socialists - so as to put an end to all that he has so forcefully denounced here .
Thank you very much , Mr Titley ; I hope we will adopt a resolution along those lines today .
All diplomacy could achieve with Milosevic was a scornful smile at so much Western stupidity .
Hitherto , he has always simply taken our weakness as a licence to continue the genocide in Bosnia and now in Kosovo .
Unfortunately , however , the situation is even more unsavoury .
The West did not say it explicitly , but at the beginning , the reality was that they let Milosevic kill in Kosovo because he was said to be crushing the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army , whose revolt it was which shattered the deathly calm in Kosovo , and at last turned the eyes of the world on this miserable Serbian regime of apartheid .
Suddenly Mr Rugova is the most important man .
Why , then , did no one help him over the eight years that he led his people in peaceful resistance , hoping for our support ?
The crocodile tears which the West now sheds for Mr Rugova , the contravened sanctions and the empty threats are all signs of helpless political disarray .
And now the countdown has started .
It has started , but , we might well ask , where will it end ?
What does come after a military strike , which I have been calling for for so long in this House ?
The only formula which could provide scope for successful negotiations , mediated by the West , is a temporary international administration in Kosovo , safeguarding the right of the Albanians to live in Kosovo , removing their fears of extermination , and granting them self-determination of their affairs .
Unfortunately , however , I fear that Milosevic will then delay the negotiations , that the cat will lead the mouse a terrible dance and that , ultimately , the West will pronounce the mouse guilty because it did not give itself up to be eaten and because the poor spectators were forced to look on pityingly .
That is how it will end , and I very much regret it . I hope that the Council , the Commission and the international community will see reason and come to the aid of the people of Kosovo , who are dying every day .
Mr President , in Kosovo we have seen torture , burnt-out villages and violence against men , women and children - and a great deal of it .
Just as there has been a great deal of talk in this House and at the United Nations , but we have not actually done anything .
I am filled with dismay , especially since I get the feeling that a number of today 's speakers have some sympathy for the Serbian position .
Maybe they want Serb forces to crush the Kosovo Liberation Army before we undertake any steps . That would soften up Kosovo , rendering it more pliable over the question of continued union with Serbia .
Despite all the fine-sounding resolutions , I sense that some people would not mind seeing the violence go on . Afterwards it would be that much easier to impose a solution .
Take Mr Titley , who just had the floor . His actions to date could well have helped bring about what has happened in Kosovo .
He won applause today for saying that we must intervene . Yet when he himself could have intervened , when he could have demanded that measures be taken , he did nothing of the sort .

I read in the newspaper this morning that President Bill Clinton is now saying that the time has come to end the violence in Kosovo .
That time came a long time ago , in my opinion .
I call upon this Parliament to have the courage of its convictions and to state - even if somewhat late in the day - that the time really has come . Our own humanist values are on the line .
Let us demonstrate that democracy can muster a little strength at least .
Mr President , there are a number of questions I should like to ask .
Why has the war criminal President Milosevic not yet been brought before the tribunal in The Hague ?
This would have solved part of the problem .
Yesterday evening I was in contact with the opposition in Belgrade .
Mr Draskovic told me that if there is an air strike he will fight to defend his country .
Mr Gingic said , and I quote , ' If there is an air strike against Serbia the road to Europe will be closed to us , we will fall into a black hole and the opposition will find things very difficult ' .
People in Europe see refugees shivering in the cold and expect the international community to do something .
Air strikes perhaps , but what does the EU plan to do afterwards ?
Is the Council aware of the divisions within the KLA ?
How will it negotiate ?
Air strikes will simply provoke all these groups to take action .
The Serbs will resist , knowing their partisan mentality .
Is the Council prepared to support an international initiative to provide ground troops to break Serbia 's resistance and protect the people of Kosovo ?
Does it think that a forensic examination of all these terrible murders should be taken into account when deciding on air strikes ?
Is anything known about the outcome of the talks between Rugova and Holbrooke ?
If all diplomatic efforts fail , we have no choice but to order air strikes , and I support this .
But I still think that the scenario after the air strikes is not clear and has not been thought through properly .
This brings me back to my first point : Milosevic must be brought before the tribunal and part of the problem will be solved .
Mr President , I really do feel that , at this stage , we could do without speeches and meetings .
I believe we have to make very clear statements and , in particular , specific requests to the Council .
We all know that the situation in Kosovo is worsening by the minute , and we are all aware that Milosevic is about to attain his objective and complete his ethnic cleansing .
We are also certain that he will ignore Security Council Resolution 1199 , as he did all the preceding ones .
In the face of all this , what is the key question ?
The key question is whether Milosevic really believes that the international community is prepared to implement the measures it announces with monotonous regularity every two or three weeks .
I believe that the European Community must take some simple steps .
For instance , the Council should urge the United Nations to adopt a resolution to implement Resolution 1199 , military action and humanitarian aid .
In this connection , I believe that the European Union should conduct an honest debate amongst its Member States to inform public opinion as to which governments are fully prepared to implement the United Nations resolutions and which are not .
I also feel that , on the whole , public opinion needs a clear signal on this matter .
The Council must also take into account what Felipe González , the special envoy , has so often stressed : the solution to the Kosovo problem depends , as do so many other things , on Serbia becoming a democratic country .
In this connection , I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council if the latter is really prepared to support Mr González and act on his recommendations .
Finally , I earnestly hope that this Parliament will not become a laughing-stock and fail to agree on a resolution on Kosovo , as happened a few weeks ago , in September .
Mr President , this situation is nothing short of surreal .
Obviously , we are in favour of air strikes in Kosovo or on the Serbs .
The question is , who can make the decision ?
It can only happen if there is a proposal from the United Nations , a Security Council decision on the basis of a proposal by Mr Annan .
But , now you are saying , if they are not in a position to do this , then .. !
I tell you , if we are as strong as we are claiming to be , why has Mr Rühe - still the German Minister of Defence - who is in favour of air strikes , not yet ordered his troops in Bosnia to catch Karadzic ?
There are 50 000 soldiers there .
It is possible to catch him , but we have not done so , and all of a sudden we are being all pragmatic and wanting to threaten Milosevic with air strikes .
Everyone knows that this is not the way heroes behave .
Mrs van Bladel is right there .
If we want to have a say in Kosovo , then we have to be prepared to leave 30 000 soldiers there for a certain period of time .
You are right there , Mrs Pack .
But then we have to actually do what we say .
And that means not discussing air strikes , which will not solve anything , but doing some straight talking about the action we need to take .
I ask you : why did we not do this in Bosnia ?
Why do we not make sure that all those who should go to The Hague actually do go there ?
We mentioned Karadzic .
That is why I do not believe any of you .
I do not believe you when you say that you want a solution !
You know that the situation is unbearable in Kosovo .
This fact is unbearable for all of us .
But , Mr Titley , you have a stake in Mr Blair .
You all have a stake in some government somewhere , on which we are not getting a return .
All of a sudden , we are playing at being strong .
I tell you , it is a drastic solution and a drastic situation , but it will not be solved by a Parliament which is so bigoted , that faced with a drastic situation it always responds in the same way and is never in a position to implement what we have the potential to do .
That is why I ask you to deliver a strong resolution , but also to conduct a strong policy in your countries , to prevent your government from allowing itself to be blackmailed by Russia .
Mr van den Broek , if you can speak so plainly with us , then speak plainly with Mr Primakov for once as well .
The solution is also to be found in Moscow .
' No money if there is no change in Kosovo , ' in whatever language you like .
That is what you need to tell the Russians .
Say it clearly , and your colleagues Trittin and Fischer should say it , and all the rest .
Then there will be change in Kosovo .
Mr President , Madam President of the Council , Commissioner , I think we must all be mad .
For six months , our only policy has been to bury our heads in the sand .
Today , we are going through the motions .
We are flexing our muscles .
But what are we going to do ?
We are going to launch missiles which will simply strengthen Mr Milosevic 's regime .
That is the policy of Pontius Pilate .
Once again , we are ignoring the fundamental problem , which is that as long as there is no democracy in Belgrade , there will be no solution for Kosovo , just as there will be no solution for the entire Yugoslav population .
We need to take this on board and begin to take measures and define a policy .
Mr Milosevic already has his policy , and I think it might be useful to go through it once again : in Bosnia , Mr Milosevic did everything he could , day after day , to be able to conclude the Dayton Agreement and to divide Bosnia .
Today , three years after this agreement was implemented , no-one can claim that it has been a success .
Less than 20 % of the displaced people have returned to their homes .
There are fine programmes such as HOME and others which are designed to enable 300 000 Kosovan refugees to return to their region .
Milosevic will not allow this . He is currently implementing a policy of partition in Kosovo .
He is prepared to give up the part of Kosovo that cannot be used in exchange for the 40 % or 50 % of the territory which borders on Montenegro . This is land which includes Kosovo 's rich mines , which just by chance happens to be where the few Orthodox monasteries are based , and which , also by chance , would allow him to strengthen his control over an increasingly reluctant ally : Montenegro .
That is Milosevic 's policy .
It is perfectly clear .
Faced with that , the European Union has no policy .
We have adopted a racist approach : we believe that the Serbs have no right to democracy , and we continue , day after day , to condemn them to being governed by a nationalist-communist regime . Instead , the only thing we should be doing is bringing that regime down .
Rather than ' Exocet ' or American ' Tomahawk ' missiles , there is a much better missile that can work without leading to any bloodshed at all : it is called an ' arrest warrant ' , with Milosevic being taken directly from Belgrade to The Hague to appear before the International War Crimes Tribunal .
That does not require any special financing . It is a political measure that the European Union can take tomorrow morning by sending the appropriate signals .
Mr President , unfortunately in Kosovo we are witnessing the umpteenth Balkan tragedy , but as always we utter the same predictable and futile words .
However hard we in this House have tried to hurl curses or to trust in the prospect of peace , the facts remain the same .
Europe has been unable , incapable or unwilling to play a political role in preventing the massacres which have been going on for months now .
The big shots in this Parliament , as well as in the other European institutions , have opted to slow down - or rather to halt - the process of Europe 's political unification , so much so that Europe , bereft of a common foreign policy , now counts for nothing whatsoever .
We can trot out endless tedious , repetitive resolutions on human rights , and we can emphatically welcome monetary union , but the truth is that , without a political focus , our single currency will not create a single job for a long time to come , just as we shall go on standing cravenly on the sidelines of atrocities and massacres whose roots are lost in the dark past of Balkan history .
I would remind you that in the fourteenth century , the Muslims put all the Kosovan Serbs to death by the sword and brought in Albanians .
Ours is still the Europe of individual foreign ministers , isolated policies and the interests of nations which regard themselves as the strongest .
If we really wished to do our duty , we would all of us together , today , demand that the mandate given to the EU representative in Yugoslavia should be entirely free from constraints and conditions , and that at the same time the Member States ' Foreign Ministers should refrain from cultivating bilateral relations with this or that rival faction .
Milosevic has been able to act undisturbed , in the knowledge of Europe 's cowardliness .
The massacre of this European people must finally be brought to an end , but only with the intervention of a European Union peace force : it is time to stop relying on action from the United States alone , allowing that country to go on asserting its hegemony over others .
Mr President , I think it is time to draw a line under the situation in Kosovo .
The hour is fast approaching when action must be taken , as I think everyone here would agree .
Despite all the international pressure that has been brought to bear we still have not managed to put an end to the violent repression .
The report by Secretary-General Kofi Annan confirms that Belgrade is thumbing its nose at the UN demands , for which the report harshly criticises it .
The guilty party has been clearly identified , as we asked .
The mission by the American envoy Richard Holbrooke has so far been a failure .
President Milosevic seems bent on out-and-out conflict and is clearly counting on support from Russia .
Either that , or he is playing cat-and-mouse as he did before , and plans to agree to some concession or other at the last minute .
We must not on any account be drawn into such games and must put an end to this situation , as I said .
We welcome the fact that NATO is ready to enforce compliance with the UN demands and to enable help to get through to the refugees , because everyone is now talking about their terrible plight and we cannot wait much longer to get humanitarian aid to those who are suffering .
Winter is approaching , as people have pointed out .
I say that I welcome possible military action by NATO because I realise that a political solution , however desirable it may be , is becoming increasingly unlikely .
Belgrade refuses to budge and clearly expects us to accept the present situation , but this is out of the question .
The Security Council must decide in the next few days on whether to take military action .
If Milosevic refuses to budge , such action will become inevitable , in my view .
We would urge the Council to play an active part in this process .
It would be irresponsible to delay any longer , and the European Union must also adopt a clear stance here .
We are trying to find a UN-led solution , but as we have often said , the fate of the people of Kosovo must not be allowed to depend on details of international law .
The people of Kosovo cannot understand this , nor can our own citizens .
I hope that Russia does not force us to choose between our principles and our relations with it .
If it does , I would choose to stand by our principles .
We do not want military intervention .
President Milosevic has forced our hand and he must now face the consequences .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , what we are seeing in Kosovo is a humiliating display of powerlessness on the part of both the European Union and the international community , embodied by the international Contact Group and the UN .
The Amsterdam Treaty , not yet ratified by all the EU Member States , will , in theory , provide a means for us to undertake peace-enforcing , peace-keeping and humanitarian action in the form of Petersberg missions ; the EU will have the option of giving the Western European Union , which would itself have to call on contingents of NATO troops , a mandate to undertake action of this kind .
But until the Treaty is ratified , this is just pie in the sky .
The dilemma facing the European Union is that it does not have effective security instruments at its disposal , does not have the military backbone , to lend credibility to its demands for a political solution to the Kosovo crisis .
The crisis of credibility - and this is the tragic part - does not just affect the European Union , however . It also affects NATO , which has hitherto waited for the green light from the UN Security Council , but which must be aware that this green light to take military action will not come , because of opposition from Russia and China .
My question to the Council is - and I respect the Austrian Presidency 's policy of contributing to the political solution and the effort to avert a humanitarian catastrophe : what will Austria 's position be , as holders of the Council presidency , if NATO , to avoid this crisis of credibility , now intervenes and sends out a military signal , given that there is not even a consensus within the Austrian Government about our security options ?
Mr President , this morning we witnessed another show , another performance , on the television news .
We saw buses full of soldiers - or made out to be full of soldiers - which were said to be leaving Kosovo and returning to Belgrade , like a sort of Barnum 's Circus caravan .
At least that is what Milosevic would have us believe , one of the many yarns that he spins us , given that every week he tells us he is withdrawing .
Then , here , we have seen a few conversions on the road to Damascus : some who believed until ten days ago that it was possible to do business , to negotiate , with Milosevic , and who actually did negotiate with Milosevic , regarding him as a statesman who was vital to the balance of peace - peace , I repeat - in the Balkans ; well , this morning I have heard them call with great conviction for military action , intervention and bombing .
I , on the other hand , have long denounced Europe 's impotence in respect of Kosovo . Given that this House has drawn attention several times to the enormous risk being run , I now ask you all what we intend to do with Milosevic , before or after military intervention .
Do you believe that the problem will be solved by dropping bombs on Kosovo ?
I believe that with Milosevic we need to act immediately , so as to salvage some of our democratic credibility .
Milosevic must be hauled before the International Criminal Court ; he must no longer receive any support from anyone , and certainly not from ministers , such as the Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs , who even now still believe that Milosevic can be a reliable partner .
Mr President , in the Middle Ages , monks used to call meat fish and were therefore easy in their consciences when they ate it .
Here today , we are doing just about the same thing .
We are calling NATO bombardments a humanitarian enterprise and a mission of peace .
That is hypocrisy in all its glory .
Peoples are not laboratory animals on which the European Union can test its ability to exercise the foreign policy of an international police force .
Instead of criticising the European Union and the Member States for lack of substantive will , substantive political will for a peaceful solution of the Kosovo problem , we are rebuking the European Union 's bodies because they have not yet taken military action .
But when have military interventions ever proved to be a solution of any problem to the benefit of the people , which might lead us to think that such an attack can achieve this ?
What we need to do now is to discuss some substantive intervention to find a political solution , if we wish to respect the rights of the people in Kosovo and in Yugoslavia as a whole .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as happened in previous conflicts we are once again hearing the same platitudes , the same calls for peace , but also the same threats against those disobeying the new world order .
In 1990 it was the people of Iraq , who , I might add , are still subject to sanctions which are responsible for the death of hundreds of thousands of children .
In 1991 , it was the Croatians , guilty then of the double crime of freeing themselves from the federal and communist straitjacket of Yugoslavia .
Our European leaders , particularly Jacques Delors , threatened them .
Mr Santer , President of the Council and head of the Luxembourg Government , even went so far as to claim that Croatia was not large enough to become a country .
Everyone supported their communist comrade Milosevic whose army bombed the civil population , razed Vukovar to the ground , massacred injured people in the hospitals and committed all the atrocities with which communist armies have become associated .
At that time , we were the only ones who condemned this complicity , who maintained that our governments would have a heavy responsibility to bear for the Balkan unrest .
Similarly , we had warned the nationalist Serbian leaders that they were committing a fatal error by becoming comrade Milosevic 's back-up troops .
Rather than wearing themselves down in a terrible war , the Serbs should have , on the one hand , toppled the communist regime and , on the other , turned their attention towards their southern border .
The danger was not Croatia ; it was the resurgence of Islamic fundamentalism .
Today , Serbia risks losing all , or at least part , of its province of Kosovo where , in less than two generations , there has been a demographic revolution .
Muslims , who were previously a minority , now make up 90 % of those who live there thanks to a soaring population , continuous immigration and the collapse of the Serbian birth rate .
Our governments , which seem to be committed to getting the birth rate down and which open our borders to immigrants from all over the world , would be well advised to learn from this .
If , in the future , France wanted to keep its sovereignty over a Provence where the majority of the population were Muslims , would it also be threatened with bomb attacks from NATO 's air force ?
Today it is the Serbian people , dragged into this deadlock by their communist leaders , who are being put in the dock by internationalists .
NATO is getting ready to bomb Serbia .
That will not resolve anything ; it will only serve to inflame the Balkan situation further .
It is indeed strange that NATO , which was established in 1949 to protect Europe from communism , has never come to the aid of any Europeans invaded by the Red Army .
What did it do in 1953 for the people of Berlin ?
Nothing .
What did it do in 1956 when Soviet tanks violated Hungary 's sovereignty and entered Budapest ?
Nothing .
What did it do in 1968 in Prague ?
Nothing .
It has done nothing after 70 years of communist terror , after one hundred million deaths .
Was this out of cowardice in the face of the USSR or was it due to complacency ?
Although , today , I have no sympathy for the Serbian methods of repression , I cannot help but find it incongruous to hear a few people expressing such manly , warlike sentiments . For in the past , when the Christians in Lebanon were dying in their tens of thousands , when the Chaldean Christian villages were being razed to the ground , or when massacres took place in Sudan , there was total and absolute silence .
But Christians are inferior human beings who can no doubt be massacred at will , because they do not form part of the new world order .
Mr President , we need to express our frustration , but we must also send out messages , because we are trying to present military action as an alternative to political action .
I must remind you that the most powerful weapon at the disposal of any parliament is the spoken word and , in my opinion , we can send out three messages .
The most important of these must be to the Serbian people , the first victim of that apparatchik turned nationalist , which is what Milosevic is . He has laid a carefully planned trail of destruction : beginning in Slovenia , continuing in Bosnia and turning his attention now to Kosovo .
It is worth mentioning that we have checked his progress on occasion . In December 1996 , Felipe González , our special envoy at the time , succeeded in making Milosevic admit that the elections had been fraudulent .
Milosevic lost the support of the people , who turned against him . However , he is an experienced apparatchik , and regained the lost ground in four months .
Essentially , he is an expert in survival .
I believe that , firstly , the Serbian people should be told that at present , a separate solution to the Kosovo problem and a genuine democratisation of the former Yugoslavia are not possible , and that the onus is on them to reverse the situation .
I do not advocate a James Bond-style commando raid to get Mr Milosevic to The Hague , not because I think it would be a bad idea , but because it would provoke a nationalist reaction which could be in his favour .
I do feel that this message should go out to the Serbian people because he really has become an outcast from the international community .
Secondly , as regards Russia , we do have a significant relationship with that country , as Commissioner van den Broek has mentioned .
I believe that now is the time to raise this issue and to deal with it seriously within the framework of our relationship with Russia .
To conclude , I think there is another important message for the Council and for the Commission .
It is just not acceptable that , having appointed a special envoy , he should be vetoed by Mr Milosevic for three years , and that during that time , a whole series of Community political representatives should troop off to Belgrade .
This enables Milosevic to exploit any divisions between us , and also places him in a position of power . We should be consistent here .
If we appoint envoys , it is for them to deal with Milosevic when appropriate.Finally , we must urge the Council to support the implementation of the United Nations resolutions - Milosevic understands that language very well indeed - not just to resolve this situation , but to achieve a lasting solution . Then in five months ' time we will not need to start complaining all over again about the latest chapter in that gentleman 's murderous and destructive history .
Mr President , as the President-in-Office has made very clear , this so-called political climbdown and withdrawal of troops is a typical tactical ploy by President Milosevic to give the countries of western Europe and Russia an excuse to do nothing .
I particularly welcome the fact that the President-in-Office spoke so unreservedly about this .
She also mentioned NATO intervention , and I think it would be a very good idea for Austria to take this opportunity to apply for membership of NATO in order to underline how much it values the role it plays in international peace and security .
On the subject of the Council , our general view is that it has not acted particularly effectively .
We also have the impression , as the Commissioner also mentioned , that fear of being inundated with refugees is dominating the decisions and positions being adopted , rather than compassion with the huge numbers of victims .
The Justice and Home Affairs Council report of 5 October calmly recommends that we should send migration experts to investigate the causes of the refugee problem in greater detail , which sounds absolutely ridiculous given the seriousness of the situation .
It also indicates that the Council 's position may not be guided by the best possible motives .
This is borne out by its failure to enforce sanctions : the ban on flights has simply put money in the pockets of the Yugoslav airlines , there are plenty of ways to get round the ban on investment , and nobody even knows how the visa restrictions are supposed to work .
Perhaps this all stems from the fact that parliaments , not just ours but parliaments in general , often have too little influence over what actually happens , and the indignation and moral questioning of our citizens have too little effect on policy .
We can see this from the reports issued by the French Parliament , for example , describing how the French Parliament was involved , or rather was actually not involved , in France 's intervention in Rwanda .

I would also make the following point to the Commissioner : he said he understood Slav solidarity , but I think this is a very dangerous thing to say to the Russians .
People in the Netherlands did not show solidarity with white South Africans during the apartheid regime .
The law must prevail , not demonstrations of ethnic solidarity .
We must not give the Russians the impression that we will tolerate it .
We cannot force anyone to live under a criminal dictatorship , and this is why the regime in Belgrade will ultimately have to change , but for the moment nothing is actually happening .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , European foreign policy cannot consist of successively demonizing countries as dictated by American interests and their new world order .
Indeed , we might wonder why the United States is still militarily involved in the NATO summit in Europe , 50 years after the end of the Second World War and 10 years after the end of the Cold War .
Europeans should finally be left to deal with the conflicts within Europe and to build up their own security system themselves .
Why do we have to have this eternal American supervision ?
Furthermore , the current global media campaign against Yugoslavia is quite simply scandalous .
What is happening is , of course , appalling on a human level .
We all agree on that .
However , does a substantial part of the responsibility not also lie with the Kosovan terrorists who want to change the borders and separate Kosovo from Serbia ?
Why have we never spoken too of the bullying that has been inflicted on the Serbian minority in Kosovo for many years ?
The indignation is all one-sided and peace will never be achieved unless we respect the integrity of Serbian territory .
Humiliating this nation through sanctions will not bring any sort of viable or humane solution .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , I have now listened to the debate and heard much criticism and strongly-worded contributions .
I believe that we all need a clear idea of what we want , and how we intend to go about achieving it .
We want to come to the assistance of a people which is being brutally suppressed , sometimes to the point of death , and whose possessions are being destroyed , by its own government .
We can only do so , and that should also be clear , by sending assistance to Kosovo , accompanied and protected by ground forces , with two objectives - and we should indeed use ground forces if Milosevic does not give in .
The first is to provide large-scale humanitarian aid directly to those on the ground , and the second is to lay the foundations for Milosevic to agree to negotiate with the Kosovo Albanians about a new structure for Yugoslavia .
This may make NATO air strikes or air operations necessary .
But surely - and this may not have emerged clearly from the debate - two or three military air strikes will not be enough to change this grave , catastrophic situation .
We have to realise that if we are prepared , as an international community , to act as a protecting power , in much the same way as we did in Bosnia , then we will have to be involved for many , many years .
In my view , it would be a great mistake to believe that a handshake or a short attack on strategic targets would achieve anything .
I do not know whether the European Union is aware that this course of action will inevitably mean that NATO , and on the civilian side the European Union , will have to maintain a presence there for some considerable time .
I should like to say to Mr Oostlander that Austria has in fact already played an active role in other NATO operations , such as in Bosnia .
So , I do not see any reason for any stumbling blocks there - the EU has to realise this .
Obviously , I fully support all the efforts being made to win over Russia and China .
If every conceivable effort is made , and still no agreement is reached in this respect , then I believe that we must go to the assistance of the Albanian people in Kosovo all the same .
It is quite out of the question for Europe to watch while a people is - I have already expressed it thus - butchered ; that is not compatible with my conscience as a European .
Of course , it must also be clear - I should like to emphasise this here - that this is no licence for the KLA to take action , to a certain extent on the back of the NATO troops or whoever it might be . No , the KLA has to exercise the same restraint .
Madam President-in-Office , perhaps you could say a brief word about whether it is agreed , that , in the event of a military intervention , this will not be a short-term operation , but that back-up operations on the ground will also be necessary immediately afterwards , to provide humanitarian aid and , at long last , to achieve a political solution in Kosovo .
Mr President , I must say , and I must remind Parliament and the Council and the Commission , that three Balkan countries , one of them a Member State of the Community - Greece - and two candidates for membership of the European Union - Bulgaria and Romania - have ended up by agreeing on joint action concerning the issue we call Kosovo .
Consequently , I must stress the need for continual and constant communication between the Council and the Commission and those three Member States , which just recently , only ten days ago , established a tripartite military force precisely so that those countries , which are directly affected by what happens in Kosovo , will be able to deal with any consequences of the situation .
Our first concern is the protection of Albania , and of course the defence of our own frontiers too .
I will agree and say that everything the various speakers have said here is correct , given the standpoint from which it was all said .
But the solution to the Kosovo problem is above all else political , and if a military intervention of any sort takes place - I will not go into details , because I am not a military man ; my only military experience was when I did my national service , so I will leave that to the Council and the Commission - it will have to be an action stemming from a predetermined policy .
We cannot go ahead with military interventions in a vacuum , but only if those military interventions take place within the framework of a political solution .
And I would say that the most important thing to emerge from the harsh resolution we will have to vote upon tomorrow on the Kosovo issue is the message we convey to the Serbian people .
That nation , which has at present become the instrument of a clique , a military and political establishment in power in Belgrade , must see that there is hope and that we stand by them to offer support if they wish to go in search of solutions which , however , they must find for themselves .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , if the situation were not so tragic , the situation in Kosovo not so dreadful , then people would actually see an amusing side to the debate we are having in the plenary today .
If you recall the debate we held on Kosovo in this plenary a month ago , it really is hard to imagine that the great thinkers on foreign policy in the Socialist Group - Messrs Titley , Wiersma and Swoboda - were not able to foresee at the time what was actually going to happen in this country .
At that time , we knew exactly what was going to happen .
So , what has happened over the last month ?
What has changed ?
The whole situation has deteriorated significantly , as what we had already observed , in the countries where Milosevic had behaved in the selfsame way in the past , had indicated it would .
I also have to say that I am astounded to see everyone waiting today , as they did yesterday , for a possible United Nations resolution to bring about some kind of miracle .
In this respect , it increasingly seems to me that anything in which the United Nations has a hand comes to nothing .
Surely we cannot expect countries such as Russia and China suddenly to change their position , their opinion , on a situation , which closely resembles that in parts of their own countries , and which is dealt with in exactly the same way there , as we are seeing in Serbia and Kosovo at the present time .
By way of an example , I recall what we saw in Russia during the war in Chechnya ; that was a very similar situation .
And we see China treating its colonies in much the same way .
We cannot expect these countries to have a sudden change of heart , and so we cannot wait for a miracle from the United Nations .
Madam President-in-Office , you rightly said that our patience is running out .
It has to be said , I believe , that our patience actually ought to have run out some time ago .
We see what is coming ; we see what is happening here , and it is unacceptable .
There are only a few possible solutions - I have to grant you that , Mr Swoboda : he gave a very accurate picture of the military option and its implications .
But I believe that first of all , we must repeat that one of the political solutions , which must be at the very top of the list , is that Mr Milosevic come to The Hague and that negotiations be held , not with him , but about him .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will certainly give the Council a detailed report on the general feeling in this House , which has been clearly expressed in today 's debate .
Obviously , I also believe that the use of military force - as mentioned in the debate - cannot in itself automatically resolve the political problems .
Even so , experience in Bosnia has shown us that there are situations in which military force - and air strikes , if need be - can be necessary to bring the adversaries back to the negotiating table .
That should also be stated quite clearly .
I expect Russia , in particular , also to make a constructive contribution to bringing the crisis in Kosovo to an end , given the influence which Moscow can exert on Belgrade , and its responsible role as a permanent member of the UN Security Council . I am also saying this because Moscow should be aware that Milosevic has not in any way kept the promises he made to President Yeltsin either .
Opinions on the question - raised by several speakers - of the legal basis for military action against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , have hitherto diverged in the European Union .
I have already mentioned that intensive consultations are underway in the United Nations and NATO at the present time .
Discussions in the Alliance involve 11 out of the 15 states , which is why I do not expect the positions of the EU and the transatlantic community to differ on this issue .
In the light of the constantly changing situation , I thought it would be wrong to make definitive statements one way or the other on this very complex issue today , on behalf of the EU presidency .
I should , however , like to emphasise once more that - like Mr Swoboda and many other well-known representatives of the European Parliament - I personally believe that the international community simply cannot stand and watch , when there is an endless series of massacres and acts of violence in Kosovo , and the threat of a humanitarian catastrophe .
Finally , I should like to address one more issue you raised .
I do actually believe that it is quite legitimate to ask whether , in the event of a negotiated solution being implemented , a multinational peace-keeping force on the ground might be appropriate , on the Bosnian model for example .
These kinds of issues are under consideration at the present time , but it is too early to go into more detail .
Mr President , I very much support what the presidency said , including the last comments .
For the benefit of those who mentioned Russia 's role here , I would just like to repeat what I said at the beginning : I understand Russia 's situation , not just the Slav solidarity aspect , but also the traditional alliance between Russia and Yugoslavia , the position of the Duma , its unwillingness to set a precedent with military action that could be repeated in its own country , and so on , but I did not mean that Russia should be given the power to veto measures designed solely to end a humanitarian emergency or crimes against humanity .
I think we can expect a country like Russia , which we regard as our partner , not to do such a thing .
We are not asking it for active cooperation , but we must oppose Russia 's use of any sort of veto .
That is what I meant .
Finally , I think that the international community and the European Union now have a duty towards these hundreds of thousands of refugees and displaced persons to stop going on about the problems and repercussions of possible military intervention and to make it clear that it is time for action , not words .
Discussions are already advanced about whether a military presence will be required afterwards .
NATO is not naive .
Most of the Member States of the European Union are also members of NATO and everyone realises that once the violence has stopped and the shockwaves have died down , that may not be the end of it and a political solution may not automatically emerge .
There are more than enough models for such solutions already , but the atmosphere is not ripe for negotiation because there is at least one party that is dominating the situation and has opted for a military rather than a political solution .
We need to change this state of affairs , but as I said the time has now come for action , not words .
Mr President , in the heat of the debate Mr Cars made some remarks about me which perhaps go slightly beyond the normal rules of debate in this House , although they would be unexceptional in the British House of Commons .
So I feel I need to respond by making it clear - as I did in my speech - that I have always supported diplomatic solutions to this problem .
That is not inconsistent with taking the view that we have now reached the end of the road in that respect .
I want to make that position absolutely clear .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.15 a.m. and resumed at 11.30 a.m. )

VOTES
I would inform the House that Amendments Nos 1 and 2 are inadmissible .
That is the decision of the Chair .
Mr President , on behalf of the PPE Group , I wish to propose that the Miranda report be referred back to committee .
I wish to stress that this is no reflection upon the work of Mr Miranda and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
In fact I described his report yesterday as courageous .
As you mentioned , there was a difficulty with two amendments .
For the first amendment , which I put down under the Rule which requires 29 signatures , I got 43 without any difficulty from four political groups .
One wonders how many signatures and political groups would be required for the amendment to become acceptable .
The second amendment was exactly the same as a group amendment .
It will give the Budgetary Control Committee an opportunity to consider the wording of the amendment and , if necessary , to consult the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and alter the wording accordingly , in which case a report could go forward with general support .
We therefore have a request for referral back to committee , pursuant to Rule 129 .
I shall ask if there is a speaker in favour , a speaker against and , if necessary , seek the opinion of the rapporteur .
Mr President , I should like to express my support for a request from the PPE Group .
I believe that the Miranda report , which was the subject of considerable work in the Committee on Budgetary Control , should be more detailed in the section on Parliament .
We have no hesitation in refusing to give discharge for the section on the Economic and Social Committee , yet we are much more indulgent when it comes to our own institution .
As regards the problem raised by Mr Kellett-Bowman , I must say that it is not new .
For a few days , a few weeks even , we have watched amendments being judged inadmissible , even though I am not sure whether our Rules of Procedure provide for the power to examine the merits of amendments .
When we want to declare something inadmissible , we move a motion of inadmissibility .
We do not just declare like that that an amendment is inadmissible .
Therefore , for all these reasons , I support the request made by Mr Kellett-Bowman on behalf of the PPE Group .
I would urge that this report should not be referred back to committee . It is a very sound report that was examined in detail in the committee concerned and adopted by 23 votes for to one against , clear proof that it was supported by a large majority .
On the subject of the amendments , it is true that two were declared inadmissible .
I have no particular problem with this and I think it would be a complete waste of time for the House to refer the whole thing back to the committee just because of those two amendments .
We feel this is quite unnecessary .
The report is perfectly acceptable and also contains certain criticisms of how the House operates .
Mr President , I would briefly like to say that I also oppose the request to refer this back to committee .
I understand the procedural considerations raised by Mr Kellett-Bowman , but I do not consider that there are any fundamental , substantive reasons to do so .
Indeed , the report was discussed at length and in depth in the committee some months ago .
The vote was practically unanimous . Only yesterday a normal debate took place and today it has been the subject of only one amendment .
There is of course the matter that has been raised regarding the two amendments but , even in that connection , I must point out that one of them was rejected by the committee itself .
Therefore , I do not think that there is any justification for postponing this report , which obviously affects the normal functioning of the institutions involved .
Consequently , I think we should vote to proceed with the discussion and vote on this report .
To avoid any misunderstanding of the vote we are about to take , I would just point out that these two amendments have been ruled inadmissible by the President of Parliament , following detailed consideration of them by our services , and not just because of the naming of a specific person .
To prevent any misunderstanding , therefore , they were not ruled inadmissible simply because they referred by name to a former official .
We shall now vote on the request for referral back to committee .
( Parliament rejected the request for referral back to committee )
( In successive votes , Parliament adopted the two decisions and the resolution )
This Council regulation offers an excellent illustration of the complexity of the CAP compensation system . In order to follow it , we need to go back to 1984 .
Community legislation passed at the time took no account of the special situation of producers who had neither supplied nor sold milk during the reference year . These farmers were in fact taking part in a conversion programme introduced under a 1977 Council regulation and had agreed to refrain from selling their produce .
Over the years , case after case has gone to the European Court of Justice , and many a regulation has been adopted in an attempt to remedy the situation .
Sweden has not been a member of the Union for very long , but already we have seen milk producers deprived of hundreds of thousands of kronas in compensation payments because they have filled in the wrong coloured form .
These examples demonstrate how creaky the whole system of subsidies has become . We clearly need to reform the whole CAP .
Linkohr report ( A4-0350 / 98 )
The Agreement on wide-ranging scientific and technological cooperation between the USA and the EU , negotiations for which were completed at the end of 1997 , provides a basis for historic technological progress by both parties to the agreement .
The very considerable tasks that remain to be accomplished in such fields as biotechnology cannot be tackled in isolation from country to country or from continent to continent .
It is therefore crucial to bring about ever closer cooperation between different regions of the world , so as to facilitate coordination of research carried out by the most talented investigators and by scientific institutions working together .
It is thus a cause for great satisfaction that Parliament and its rapporteur , Rolf Linkohr , recommend rapid implementation of the EU / USA Agreement .
Le Rachinel recommendation ( A4-0349 / 98 )
I am pleased to see that this procedure aimed at harmonising the distinguishing signs to be attached to motor vehicles is to succeed .
Although it might appear to be a minor matter , this measure is likely to make life easier for the millions of motorists from the European Union who cross its internal and external borders every year .
At the same time , the general implementation of the ' Community ' identification will contribute to developing the common sense of belonging for the 375 million citizens of the European Union .
This is true both for them and for all those who will see vehicles registered with the Union 's colours pass them by , wherever work or tourism leads our fellow citizens beyond our borders . That is also something we should welcome .
However , I do have one regret : the proposal for a regulation leaves it to the Member States to choose between ' national ' plates and ' Community ' plates .
Although such latitude might be an application of the principle of subsidiarity , I would have preferred a slightly greater element of compulsion .
Watts report ( A4-0310 / 98 )
Among the large number of Commission initiatives on common rules within the EU for safety at sea , this proposed directive is both necessary and particularly relevant .
The growing interest in scheduled sailings within the Community among companies operating ferries under third country flags imposes the need for uniform safety rules applicable to all .
I am therefore happy to give the report my support .
In order to draw up his report , our colleague Francis Watts had organised a hearing on the proposal for a directive on conditions for the operation of regular ro-ro ferry and high speed passenger craft services in the Community .
Unfortunately , this hearing did not arouse a great deal of interest among our colleagues .
They were mistaken ! In fact , the hearing that was held on this proposal for a directive brought to light safety problems that really give us food for thought .
We must therefore thank our friend Francis Watts for having taken the initiative to request and organise this hearing . More than one of the experts who attended highlighted an unbelievable lack of safety , despite the fact that IMO regulations already provide for a wide range of safety measures .
During the hearing , German experts showed us image after image to support this . Of 30 European car and passenger ferries , eight were classified as ' deficient ' or ' very deficient ' on safety features and only five of the 30 ferries were deemed to be in good condition .
It is therefore understandable that shipowners hardly look favourably on the report by a courageous Member who is fully committed to ensuring greater safety for the hundreds of passengers carried every year on these boats .
However , it is not the role of a Member to make the public aware of the problems that might affect people 's safety or that of their families .
Our colleague Francis Watts has already been the rapporteur for reports on the safety management of ro-ro passenger vessels and on the registration of persons sailing on board passenger ships operating to or from ports of Member States of the Community . I truly believe that he was right to table amendments that go further than the Commission 's proposals .
The 2000 human lives that were lost through the tragedies of the Herald of Free Enterprise , the Scandinavian Star and the Estonia should be sufficient to mobilise all the European institutions and transport companies to do everything in their power to improve safety on these boats , which are unavoidable for many travellers .
In any event , I am glad that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg , which has under its flag some 84 ships with an average age of seven years and a gross tonnage of 970 000 tonnes , does not have any ships or high speed vessels carrying passengers on its register .
For if that were the case , my conscience would not be as clear as it is now .
For all these reasons , I voted in favour of the report by Mr Watts and I hope that the shipowners will take this warning from the European Parliament seriously .
I am backing this report and my Labour colleague Mr Watts ' call for the setting out of standards for safe operation of the many ferries using EU waters .
Like many British people I recall the tragic loss of life in the Herald of Free Enterprise ferry disaster at Zeebrugge .
As always the rescue services did a courageous job of trying to save as many people as they could .
However we should not put ourselves as travelling members of the public or our emergency services in this kind of situation in the first place .
Setting out the toughest possible safety standards is in the interests of all of us - travellers , ferry crews and , not least , the ferry operators who need to assure their passengers of the best safety standards on board if people are to continue to use ferries in their journeys around the EU .
I hope that the industry will cooperate fully with our governments and the EU to make further strides towards the highest possible safety standards .
Teverson report ( A4-0331 / 98 )
As has been stated throughout the debate , the Commission proposal , as amended by some of the amendments introduced by the report , represents a credible working basis in endeavouring to reach consensus regarding a possible control system that is more reliable , transparent and efficient .
It is essential that objective criteria should be established , once and for all , regarding engine power and tonnage in order to compare capacities and productivity and ascertain ( non ) compliance with POP commitments .
Other positive developments are the attempt to introduce common definitions and practises with regard to inspection processes and the definition of infringements , while simultaneously seeking to move towards the establishment of comparable sanctions .
Meanwhile , a lack of clarity exists in the attempt to make the Member States responsible for monitoring vessels in non-Community waters , particularly in waters which are subject to international conventions . There are no plans to allocate additional funds and operational problems could occur .
Ambiguities also remain to be clarified regarding responsibilities in and the scope of monitoring for vessels of third countries . These appear to remain in a privileged situation which could continue to give rise to unfair competition and , naturally , suspicion and opposition to the control system by Community fishermen and vessel owners .
Moreover , if Community inspectors were to be given broader scope , it would be useful if they could be accompanied by national inspectors , and observers from other Member States should attend only on pre-arranged inspections .
Likewise , prior permission should be sought for on-line access to data bases .
Imbalances therefore remain , even in the Commission proposal , despite the amendments made by this report .
We will therefore abstain in the vote .
We only hope that it will be possible to achieve consensus in the Council .
The development of the fishing industry in recent years has necessitated the modernisation of control systems .
That is both logical and correct .
Unfortunately , the Commission proposal must also be seen in the context of poor cooperation between the Member States in the monitoring of fisheries .
It is reasonable for the Commission to want a reinforcement of controls after the landing of catches .
This initiative is also necessary in the interests of restoring confidence in the EU 's control systems .
Increased monitoring of fishing vessels from third countries too is a worthwhile and necessary initiative .
Bösch report ( A4-0297 / 98 )
Mr President , as we all know , the report by Mr Bösch follows on from Special Report No 8 / 98 of the Court of Auditors concerning the Commission departments responsible for fighting fraud .
The Court of Auditors ' conclusions are overwhelming but they are not new .
The Committee on Budgetary Control had made similar statements on many occasions , but they never really received any reaction .
In a resolution of 22 October 1997 , the European Parliament had already condemned the shortcomings in the detection of and inquiries into irregularities and fraud , and the absence of an efficient and consistent prosecution system at European Union level .
The Commission 's policy in cases of corruption within its own ranks is still unclear and inconsistent ; there is , therefore , a tendency to cover up such cases wherever possible .
We approve of this assessment : in reading it , all the facts are clearly stated .
Similarly , we approve of the desire to increase the number of UCLAF staff , particularly those working on investigations , the proposal to establish an Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) to be responsible for combating fraud on behalf of all the institutions , as well as the technical elements proposed to ensure the necessary independence of this new body .
However , we regret the fact that the Committee on Budgetary Control did not include our proposal stating that the OLAF director should be appointed jointly by the Council and the European Parliament , and we regret , too , that the need for a European Public Prosecutor has not been reiterated .
It has been made quite clear once again that the effectiveness of the fight against fraud does not lie in ideological solutions , and we have often been told here that the only solution was to create a new integrated Community body , a European Public Prosecutor .
The solution is for Parliament - whose main function it is - to exercise rigorous control over all the Commission 's departments and , in particular , financial control , as is its remit .
The Bösch report goes more or less in this direction , which is why we voted in favour of it .
Mr President , I would like to present an explanation of vote on behalf of the Liberal Group .
I think it important to note that a concrete step has now been taken in determining how the fraud investigation unit , UCLAF , can be strengthened .
Parliament has once again taken the initiative and put forward a concrete proposal .
So now it is up to the Commission to react to that proposal and draw up measures to strengthen UCLAF .
It may well be that the model presented is not complete , and it may well be that a few things need to be changed .
We in the Liberal Group have had discussions , as have others , on what the absolutely correct model should be .
Opinions differed as to how the structure that is absolutely right should be achieved ; these differences were also reflected in the voting .
What is crucial for us is that something should happen , that the fraud unit should be strengthened , so that we are in a better position to combat internal fraud and corruption .
It is important to stress that we cannot accept a model that would require an amendment of the Treaty , because that would delay the process for a long , long time , which would not do at all .
It is vital that the system be strengthened now , so that we are better able to combat corruption and fraud .
We would begin by thanking the rapporteur for a thorough text , which reflects both his competence and his commitment .
Recent revelations of irregularities and corruption within the Commission underscore the need for visibly tougher supervision of activities - managed by the Commission or the Member States - paid for out of Community funds .
Confidence in the Commission has now been undermined and criticism of its ability to handle taxpayers ' money is justified .
The statement in the report that this might well be just the tip of the iceberg brings home the gravity of the situation . It is therefore incumbent upon the Commission to crack down on irregularities , whilst at the same time ensuring that legal and political responsibility is taken for any wrongdoing .
Both the Bösch report and the Bontempi report , which was discussed earlier in the week , spotlight the role of the European Parliament in pushing for fresh and stronger action to prevent the occurrence of further irregularities .
We should not underestimate our position or our strength when it comes to fighting fraud and pressing the Commission to take measures .
The Commission will be making a rod for its own back if it sets about hampering the operation of existing channels of communication with Parliament , thereby obstructing openness and transparency .
We do not feel that the proposal for establishing a new structure called OLAF is necessarily the right way to combat irregularities in the handling of Community funds . There is no basis in the Treaties for such an entity , which would not be subject to democratic oversight and could justifiably be criticised on that count .
A greater degree of scrutiny must be exercised in this area , and this can best be achieved through a combination of measures .
Several of the amendments put down suggest some interesting options in this respect .
Given the severity of the situation , the proposal discussed in Mr Bösch 's report should not , however , be totally thrown overboard .
We should be using the leverage it gives us to persuade the Commission to come forward with further suggestions .
The steps it is already undertaking are welcome and necessary , but still more action will be required .
The European Parliament will have a significant role to play , and the proposals in the Bösch report provide us with a good negotiating position vis-à-vis the Commission .
The Bösch report , which follows on from the Special Report of the Court of Auditors on the running of the Commission 's Unit for the Coordination of Fraud Prevention ( UCLAF ) , presents overwhelming conclusions . During the 10 years this unit has existed , it has not managed to finalise its procedural rules , nor to obtain the independence and security in handling information that would be needed for effective financial control .
So we see an endless procession of incidents of fraud , waste or administrative irregularities . These are three distinct categories that must not be confused - and the Commission is right to underline this - but all three of them are very much in evidence and they give an appalling image of the construction of Europe .
The Bösch report proposes granting greater independence to UCLAF by transforming it into OLAF ( Anti-Fraud Office ) .
Why not ?
This reform will not , however , be enough , for the problems run much deeper .
In this respect , I have often had the impression in this debate that the European Parliament was trying to salve its conscience by condemning its own sins in others .
We have to realise that certain European policies that are supported by Parliament , particularly those involving agricultural refunds or the Structural Funds , generate fraud just as surely as clouds bring rain .
And , in particular , the ' Euro-worship ' that has hitherto surrounded the Commission 's actions has created a climate that is scarcely likely to promote efficient financial control .
If a third party tries to criticise anything , he is told : ' We are working for Europe ; if you criticise us , you are being anti-European ' .
My group is well placed to know that .
The result is that Brussels has become submerged in a sea of waste , just like all the institutions that are not controlled and that believe themselves to be above the law .
Europe can only be regarded as adult when it accepts real external controls , by the Member States in particular .
But until that happens , I have no hesitation in saying that the worshippers of federalism who dominate here , and who want to kill off criticism at any cost , are indirectly abetting fraud .
Recently , in addition to the articles traditionally devoted to fraud committed at the expense of the Community budget , the press has also mentioned the possibility that wrongful acts might have been committed by officials of the European Commission .
The possibility of such activities shows just how relevant the report is that we are giving our opinion on today .
Our rapporteur points out that the effectiveness of the Unit for the Coordination of Fraud Prevention ( UCLAF ) is restricted by a strict legal and organisational framework that limits its independence .
Moreover , its has a staff of only some 30 officials who can work on investigations .
It hardly comes as a surprise , therefore , to read that UCLAF has a limited capacity for action at the moment .
The credibility of the institutions and of the construction of Europe obliges us to step up the fight against the fraud undermining the Community budget and the criminal acts committed by European officials in the performance of their duties .
I agree with the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control who voted in favour of the report that it is important to improve swiftly the resources the institutions have available to combat fraud . And the best way of achieving this is to establish an Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) that is not only independent , but that also has the necessary human and budgetary resources available .
I therefore fully support the report submitted to us .
The EU anti-fraud unit , known as UCLAF , has a primary function to protect the financial interests of the European Union .
This is an unenviable task , particularly if one reads the recent annual report for 1997 on the fight against fraud in the European Union .
According to this report cigarette fraud in the European Union amounted to over £ 1.28 billion in 1997 alone .
Three hundred and thirty million pounds of this figure related to the loss of EU receipts and the remainder covered the loss in indirect taxation such as customs and excise duties and VAT within the national territories of the 15 EU Member States .
This one example should put into perspective the magnitude of the problem facing the European Union if we are to successfully defeat organised criminal groups who intend to counterfeit the euro currency notes from 1 January 2002 .
On this date the euro currency will flood the territories of 11 Member States of the EU encompassing a population of over 291 million .
The law enforcement agencies of the EU must be extremely well prepared if the counterfeiters of the euro are to be defeated head-on .
I support a coordinating role to be given to UCLAF , the EU anti-Fraud Unit , as well as to Europol , the European police agency , to oversee this extremely important counter-intelligence operation .
Action must be taken to protect the credibility and authenticity of the euro currency when it is launched and replaces national currencies .
In light of the fact that EU Member States presently have different structures for preventing and combating counterfeiting , there will be a need for structures for exchanging information between all the EU law enforcement agencies .
There will also be a need for a common definition of currency counterfeiting and arrangements must be put in place to combat it in a concerted and structured manner .
The Amsterdam Treaty provisions give more powers to Europol by putting in place coordinated structures between European Union police forces and related law enforcement agencies , so as to ensure that organised crime can be tackled effectively at European level .
These new powers are only right and proper in light of the fact that we live in an international market where a free movement of goods , persons , services and capital operates .
However , these provisions can and must be utilised to the maximum so as to ensure that the evil of the prospective counterfeiting of the euro currency will be defeated .
The resolution on the independence , role and status of UCLAF aims to strengthen the control of fraud against the Community budget .
We of course think this is a positive idea , not least in view of the identification by the Court of Auditors of a number of irregularities in UCLAF 's present organisation and functioning .
However , we cannot support the report , because it calls for the control of fraud , corruption and financial irregularities to be dealt with through the establishment of a European criminal justice area and the setting-up of a public prosecution authority for the EU .
In our view , this initiative in principle presupposes that it should be possible to harmonise the criminal law and administration of justice of the individual Member States .
The legal formulation of the Member States ' criminal justice provisions and criminal law should under no circumstances be a matter for the Union .
Any further transfer of powers to UCLAF and the appropriation of more financial resources for the recruitment of officials must be undertaken as part of the control of fraud in the EU 's own institutions and must not constitute a move towards a European prosecution authority .
The many specific cases of fraud and corruption in the EU system should instead be taken as a basis for : firstly , launching a debate with a view to abolishing a whole range of the support measures which provide the opportunity for fraud ; secondly , introducing greater openness in the system , so that taxpayers and voters can see what their money is being used for .
The report also refers to Article 280 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which opens up new possibilities for the control of fraud on a Community-wide basis .
Paragraph 4 of Article 280 states that measures in the field of the fight against fraud ' shall not concern the application of national criminal law or the national administration of justice ' .
We feel it is important to draw attention to this because it specifically states that the EU may not interfere in national policies in this area .
The fight against fraud at Community level should , however , not be pursued on the basis of conventions and additional protocols which have not been ratified , as is also intimated by the comments on Article 280 in the report .
Clearly the EU cannot assume legislative powers in areas for which provisions have not been ratified by the individual Member States .
The fight against fraud and corruption is a key issue for the Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament .
Let there be no doubt that combating fraud directed against the financial interests of the EU must always be a top priority .
Hence coordination of the fight against fraud - as understood by UCLAF - must always be placed on the best possible footing .
The report proposes the setting-up of a new unit to investigate fraud internally in the EU institutions .
We do not think that is an optimum solution .
It should be possible for this work to be carried out by UCLAF , but it should have a more independent status with respect to the Commission .
The Edinburgh agreement of 1992 states that ' Denmark will participate fully in cooperation on justice and home affairs on the basis of the provisions of Title VI of the Treaty on European Union ' .
In practice , this means that Denmark will participate in that cooperation as long as it is intergovernmental .
For that reason , the Danish Social Democrats cannot support any moves to set up a common prosecution service or eventually to introduce a common criminal justice system .
However , as has also been stated in Denmark 's reservation in this area , we will also not stand in the way of others who wish to intensify cooperation in the legal field .
The Danish Social Democrats have therefore chosen to abstain from voting on paragraphs K , L and M. That does not alter the fact , however , that the main intention of the resolution is to strengthen the fight against fraud both in the Member States and internally within the EU system .
The Danish Social Democrats have therefore chosen to support the report as a whole .
I support the Bösch report because his proposals were a possible way forward for UCLAF .
In 1980 I proposed that the Community should have a flying squad .
So I was delighted when UCLAF was set up at this Parliament 's initiative .
Parliament has over the years added resources for the unit 's work .
However , we discovered that UCLAF 's investigations were inhibited when working within the Commission itself .
Mr Bösch 's proposal for an independent OLAF offers the answer to this problem .
All institutions can be looked at including this Parliament , which I welcome .
Mr Santer 's reply was helpful and constructive .
The House wisely , in my view , resisted attempts via amendments to emasculate this proposal .
I congratulate Mr Bösch .
Vigorous measures are required to fight fraud and corruption .
There is a problem within the EU itself and there are irregularities involving Community funds going on inside and outside the Union .
The latest allegations corroborate this , as does the report from the Court of Auditors .
The report calls for the setting-up of a separate body - OLAF - with extended powers and increased resources . This would be one way of ensuring that the necessary internal inquiries are carried out .
If OLAF is to be truly independent , the Commission cannot be allowed to act as the appointing authority . It must not take the decisions on nominations , or be responsible for instigating disciplinary measures .
A European criminal law area is not what is required , and OLAF should not be given the functions of a public prosecutor 's office .
This whole debate on fraud , corruption and vanishing funds is evidence that all is not well with the EU .
It is too big , too cumbersome to grasp and virtually impossible to oversee .
The single most effective way of fighting fraud , irregularities and corruption is to introduce Nordic-style openness and transparency , with guaranteed protection for those who provide information .
If all the EU 's documents were to be made public as a matter of principle , and the right to divulge information to the media were safeguarded , then our fraud detection rate would increase and our problems become fewer .
The Commission is living in an ivory tower .
The lack of consultation between Parliament and the Commission is mainly due to the fact that when we request information and apply to carry out checks , this is taken per se as a sign of mistrust . This is because in the Commission , the principle that good management must always - with a few exceptions - be open to public scrutiny , has been turned on its head , at least in those areas where criticisms are being voiced and Parliament wishes to exercise its rights to carry out checks .
Then , everything is suddenly classified secret , reserved , internal and confidential .
But I ask you , Mr Santer : what is there in an internal report on financial control that needs to be kept secret from Parliament ?
Why should we not be told speedily and plainly where overspending has occurred ?
Who has anything to hide from us here ?
The culture of mistrust within your Commission has even undermined the rights assigned to us by the Treaty .
Article 206 provides that the Commission shall submit any information necessary for the discharge to Parliament .
How do you explain , then , why Parliament did not receive the UCLAF report , or why we only received it when we brought out our biggest guns , namely completely blocking appropriations for humanitarian aid ?
It is a shame that this is the only language you appear to understand .
Yes , we do not simply have a problem , but a serious crisis in relations between the Commission and Parliament .
When there are no transparent and reliable rules ; when the Commissioners do not appear to have the courage to take action against cronyism and time-servers in the various Commission departments ; when Commissioners are mixed up with people from the demi-monde ; when Parliament is stalled for months with excuses and ' no comment ' , it is not possible to engender trust in good management .
In Germany , the people have just decided what happens to those who only want to sit out crises .
If the Commission is not sensitive to this , and does not react accordingly and send out the appropriate signals - and this does not seem likely - then it should be aware that we will have to refuse to grant it a discharge in December .
Fraud against the Community budget is one of the most serious problems in the 50-year history of European cooperation , both because of the financial loss caused by fraud and - in particular - because of the immense damage it does to the EU 's image in the eyes of the public .
The Commission 's central service for the fight against fraud , UCLAF , is therefore an EU body of exceptional importance to the Union as a whole .
UCLAF has already accomplished some major tasks since its creation , but it is clear that the lack of judicial cooperation between the Member States has made UCLAF 's work considerably more difficult .
And there is currently no prospect of any significant progress .
Thus greater independence for UCLAF may be one of the few steps that can be taken at the present time to make the unit more effective in its action against fraud involving the EU 's financial interests .
I wholeheartedly support this initiative .
I can support most of this report , but I do not agree that our goal should be to create a European criminal law area and establish a European judicial authority .
Nor do I wish to see Europol given new powers .
That is why I did not vote in favour of the report .
Our group supported the Bösch report mainly because it avoids political cant and provides a rigorous analysis of the internal corruption in the Commission .
The rapporteur does not try to hide the extent of the fraud and corruption within the Commission 's services .
In fact , we have lost count of the number of programmes run by the Commission that , over recent months , have been involved in embezzlement and the misappropriation of very substantial sums .
And yet , the rapporteur states that ' these reported cases probably represent no more than the tip of the iceberg ' .
It is therefore totally unacceptable to hear the President of the Commission , Mr Santer , describing these extremely serious practices , with black humour , as ' administrative acrobatics ' .
The work carried out over recent years both by the Court of Auditors and by Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control reveals a world of impenetrability , of cronyism , of connivance and omerta , of irresponsibility and of impunity . It is a world of forged contracts , of invented reports , of missing documents and of dubious reports associated with certain firms of privileged consultants .
The Bösch report underlines that , for the most part , when an offence is detected , disciplinary procedures are not even initiated and the offences are only referred to the relevant judicial authorities in exceptional cases .
' The clearing up of an offence is almost deliberately delayed ' , and we might wonder whether the Unit for the Coordination of Fraud Prevention ( UCLAF ) is ' actually being used to cover up the truth ' .
A regional newspaper this morning summed up yesterday 's debate with the headline : ' Disciplinary measures unlikely for widespread scandals ' .
This anti-fraud unit , one of the many cogs in the Commission 's machine , lacks independence .
It thus tends to protect officials systematically .
The proposals by Mr Bösch to strengthen this unit and to grant it as much independence as possible are therefore heading in the right direction .
The office he proposes to create will have to work in close cooperation with the European Parliament , one of whose main tasks is to monitor the Commission 's activities , particularly its financial activities .
Through the committees of inquiry appointed by the House , we have seen how effective we can be in this field , for example , as regards the way in which the Commission dealt with the BSE issue .
But in order to stop this tendency on the part of the European institutions to foster large-scale fraud , it is also important to apply the principle of subsidiarity strictly and correctly .
To limit the volume of uncontrolled appropriations , we must reduce as far as possible the proportion of funds that has to pass through Brussels .
The most effective controls are those that are carried out at the levels closest to the taxpayers .
The rapporteur highlights , too , the existence of a ' grey area ' that can conceal considerable risks of fraud in ' technical ' legislation and its countless implementing regulations and provisions , as well as in the comitology system , with its many committees and other consultative bodies .
Decisions are taken here that sometimes have considerable financial implications .
In this respect , it is typically the case that very often only a small number of officials from the institutions taking part in the decision-making process have an overall view of the dossier and the state of progress of the procedure .
Under these conditions , interest groups can quite easily exert an influence and win their case .
This excellent analysis shows that the excessive concentration of powers and the bureaucratic labyrinth which this creates represent a very significant source of fraud and corruption .
Once again , the correct response here is that of genuine subsidiarity .
But , unfortunately , the Treaty of Amsterdam proposes going in the opposite direction .
The best way of combating fraud and corruption within the Commission is to enshrine the principle of full openness and transparency .
Fraud will be uncovered much more effectively if the public and investigative journalists alike have access to Commission records .
The current system , which shrouds in secrecy what happens to taxpayers ' money , is not acceptable .
If things continue as they are , the logical consequence will be that the Commission have to cease its activities in those areas where major problems have arisen .
Sisó Cruellas report ( A4-0241 / 98 )
A European transport network offers enormous advantages in very different areas .
It is vital that we promote this development , particularly in view of the fact that the infrastructure is not interoperable .
The rapporteur makes some extremely important points about this .
We are very much in favour of developing a sustainable transport network and exploiting technological possibilities , and we were therefore happy to support the report .
However , we still have some doubt as to whether the projects under the European transport network are financially viable , calling as they do for major investment from both the Member States and neighbouring countries .
If this has to come from the public sector it will mean a heavy burden on the national budgets , so private capital will be needed .
We need to develop a climate in the Union which makes investment in such projects attractive for the private sector .
Its influence must extend beyond the purely financial : it is a major source of knowledge and know-how that must be put to optimum use in order to achieve the best possible benefits for society .
To sum up , we must use the knowledge and funding available carefully to produce a sustainable and sound transport network , and this report provides a very useful starting-point .
The main concern of the Sisó Cruellas report is that the EU should play a role in strengthening the infrastructure of Eastern and Central Europe as a precondition for trade between the EU and Eastern Europe .
The TEN programme , which has been extended to cover Eastern and Central Europe , must however be seen in the light of the political and economic pressure that the EU has put on the Eastern European countries in association with demands for certain investment in infrastructure .
This criticism is not to deny that there is a need for massive investment in the infrastructure of Eastern Europe .
On the other hand , the EU 's transport policy does call for some criticism in principle .
The infrastructure projects in Eastern Europe which the EU has supported , for example through PHARE and the European Investment Bank , cater for the interest the big industrial concerns in the EU have in opening up Eastern and Central European markets for their products by improving east-west communications .
The question is just what significance this massive input of capital will have for Eastern European trade and industry .
Even the World Bank has gradually realised that major infrastructure programmes intended to bind the centre and peripheral regions together will not by themselves boost economic development in the peripheral regions .
On the contrary , it has been shown that the increased exposure of local markets in peripheral regions to competition from the central regions can bring about economic decline in the peripheral regions .
At the same time , the EIB has maintained an almost completely closed attitude to Eastern European environmental organisations , such as ' Bankwatch ' , and to the Eastern European public in general when it comes to publicising the environmental assessments it claims to carry out before lending money for a range of infrastructure programmes in Eastern Europe .
For these reasons we cannot vote in favour of the Sisó Cruellas report .
For historical reasons , the road , rail and inland waterway networks on the European continent , as well as the ports and airports , have , apart from a few rare exceptions , been designed on grounds of national interest .
It was only during the 1980s that a debate was opened on a genuinely pan-European transport policy .
Thanks to the tireless efforts of our colleague Günther Lüttge , the European Parliament , with the help of the Commission , was able to organise Pan-European Transport Conferences in Prague , Crete and Helsinki .
These were a great success .
For the first time , elected representatives of the people of western and eastern Europe could discuss and adopt political resolutions on transport problems together .
Today , we are presented with a new proposal from the Commission on connecting our infrastructure network with that of our neighbours in eastern Europe .
The infrastructure needs assessment process is coordinated by the TINA group , which is made up of senior officials from the Member States and applicant countries and which has its secretariat in Vienna .
This is all very well , but I would have liked us to have been first given information on the state of progress of the 14 projects adopted in the common position .
As far as I can tell , of the 14 projects accepted at the Essen Council , only the link between Denmark and Sweden ( Oresund ) has been finished and the Milan-Malpensa airport is currently being completed , but without the rail shuttle and the rapid road link required by the Commission , the EIB and the European Parliament .
But how are the other projects getting on ?
It would seem that large sums have been spent on studies and on various plans , but for the rest , there has been complete silence !
This silence is difficult to understand given that Willi Piecyk stated in his report that the completion of the trans-European transport network would require investments of at least ECU 400 billion over the next 15 years and that the most urgent measures to be taken by the year 2000 already required around ECU 220 billion .

I can still hear Jacques Delors advocating these trans-European networks , which he felt would create many jobs , and I still remember the decisions taken at the Luxembourg Employment Summit , but I am now waiting to see some concrete results .
I know that up until now major national infrastructures have been financed to a large extent by public money .
National investment could have been greater still if all the taxes and duties on transport had been used for investment in infrastructure , but that has not been the case .
Indeed , we are all aware that , in order to build the trans-European networks , we need enormous financial resources , financial resources that the Member States cannot supply in the short term .
We must therefore find other sources of funding .
We assume that the European Investment Bank will certainly do all in its power to finance and promote at least some of the various cases .
Equally , we hope that financial resources from the different Structural Funds will be made available at last to begin to build infrastructure networks and , consequently , to create jobs . However , in spite of all this , I do not believe that we will have sufficient financial resources to pay for the 14 main priority projects .
In my opinion , we must try to do everything to ensure that private capital also goes into the projects . Without it , the programmes might have to continue for decades , if not forever , in order to satisfy all our hopes and needs .
Do we need to think about introducing a general European toll if the funding cannot be found from conventional sources ?
I do not know , but I sincerely believe that in practically every country it is very difficult to envisage an increase in revenue or public expenditure , and that we must find other possibilities of cofunding for certain infrastructure projects .
I am saying all this because we are faced with considerable problems in terms of making progress with the construction of Europe . But the problems are surmountable , if nothing unforeseen occurs .
However , in my opinion , the unforeseen is already on our doorstep .
The first estimates by the TINA group indicate that additional expenditure in the region of ECU 45 billion to ECU 150 billion is required .
Where are we going to find this extra money ?
Can we link aid to certain conditions , such as that 40 % of the investment in transport infrastructure , which is deemed to be the most important , must be devoted to rail transport , 25 % to road transport and 15 % to combined transport ?
These are questions that are not answered in the report by Mr Joaquim Sisó Cruellas .
Without wanting to stand in the way of aid to the other neighbouring countries of the European Union , I wonder whether we are not holding these negotiations at a dangerously fast speed .
For all these reasons , I voted against the report by Mr Sisó Cruellas .
Baldarelli report ( A4-0246 / 98 )
The continuous increase in the various forms of road traffic calls for integrated management of this traffic at all levels : local , regional , national and European .
The constant progress in information technology allows us to give serious consideration to such a hypothesis from now on .
That is why the Commission communication and the report we are voting on today are of such interest .
The foreseeable developments in road transport telematics are significant and their consequences are positive in that they are likely to have a beneficial effect on the quality of life of all road users , particularly in terms of safety and time-saving .
The possible economic and financial advantages are equally obvious : improved traffic management in terms of time and space , multimodal transport , etcetera .
A balance exists between the jobs lost in the production and marketing sectors that become obsolete due to the application of new technologies to the network and to road traffic , and the jobs created in this new area of activity . I agree with the rapporteur that whether this balance is positive or negative will depend , for the most part , on whether or not our businesses are able to take the lead in the current trend .
Consequently , I totally support the idea that we must help our businesses and , in order to do so , allocate substantial Community resources to the development and implementation of road transport telematics , in order to ensure job creation and sustainable development .
Novo Belenguer report ( A4-0247 / 98 )
We congratulate Mr Novo on his report , which deals thoroughly and in detail with what is such an important field .
I regret , and I shall continue to say so , that the minimal reference to tourism was lost from the Treaty of Amsterdam . In my view , it was needed to enable us to provide appropriate protection for tourists and the industry , and of course to ensure the quality and environmental safety of the chosen holiday destination .
It was for that reason that I also proposed the creation of a European Agency for Tourism .
Mr Méndez de Vigo and I fought hard for the inclusion of a joint amendment to this effect in the Bourlanges-Martin report , because unlike certain sectors of the tourist industry and certain other Members , we believed that tourism is much more than statistics .
We felt that , in the long term , the loss of this reference from the revised Treaty would result in more problems than benefits , even for the tourist sector itself .
Having said this , and to leave nobody in any doubt , I wish to make it quite clear that I welcome this new report , which is an effort to fill the legal vacuum somehow , although unfortunately outside the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I am pleased that the European Parliament is discussing a report relating to European Union measures for the tourism industry .
This is very important from an Irish perspective considering the tourism industry plays a very considerable role in generating jobs in the Irish economy .
In fact , according to the mid-term evaluation on the spending of EU monies in Ireland carried out by the economic and social research institute , over 30 000 jobs will have been created in Ireland during the present Community Support Framework programme 1994-1999 .
The present tourism operational programme accounts for 369 million pounds , which is over 8 % of the overall Structural Fund programme presently spent in Ireland .
I am confident that the Irish tourism industry will develop and prosper over the next few years .
The introduction of a European single currency should have a positive effect in this regard .
The elimination of transaction costs in eleven Member States within the European Union encompassing a population of over 291 million people will means that the cost of travel and the cost of holidays should reduce even further .
A single European currency brings with it a frontier-free capital zone where ' bureaux de change ' no longer exist and costs are reduced .
A single European currency will bring with it an increased number of tourists which will mean an increase in the number of jobs created in the tourist industry in Ireland over the next few years .
The Irish Government has a role to play so as to guarantee that the Irish tourism industry develops to its maximum potential .
Discussions will take place shortly between the Irish Government and the European Commission relating to the next share-out of EU Structural Funds for the period 2000-2006 .
The Irish Government will have to formulate a National Development Plan outlining our social and economic investment priorities for the seven-year period post-1999 .
In light of the fact that over 30 000 jobs will have been created between the years 1994-1999 in the tourism industry in Ireland , it is therefore very clear that substantial provisions must be included in the National Development Plan concerning future EU and national funding for the tourism industry in Ireland .
The Danish Social Democrats today voted against the Novo Belenguer report on Community measures affecting tourism .
We do not think that the Community should start harmonising the Member States ' tourism policies , as is advocated in this report .
It must be up to the individual countries to draw up sensible policies of their own in conformity with the subsidiarity principle .
There is thus no need for a directorate for tourism in the Commission , and there is also no need to appropriate more funds for this sector .
The Novo Belenguer report sounds too much like a plea for an EU tourism policy .
We think it would be difficult , if not impossible , to promote 15 countries of such diversity in one and the same campaign .
After all , Mr Novo Belenguer himself writes in his report that promotional campaigns for specific national or regional destinations in Europe ( for which read ' the EU ' ) should be left to the Member States and their national and regional tourist boards .
We could not agree more , and that is precisely why we think that the attempt of this report to get tourism covered by a common EU policy , amongst other things by setting up a directorate for tourism , entirely misses the mark .
The Commission report on Community actions with an impact on tourism carried out in 95 / 96 clearly demonstrate two essential aspects .
First , it shows the usefulness of these measures which either directly or indirectly seek to meet the needs of a sector which , despite an overall drop in demand of almost 10 % between 1975 and 1995 , continues to occupy a crucial place in the economy and in employment in the European Union ( approximately 6 % of Community GDP , over 9 million jobs ) .
The usefulness of such measures allows us also to conclude , as we have previously stated , that cooperation between shared interests may be ensured without changing the existing legal framework , which shows just how unrealistic some attempts have been to communitise policy in the sector .
In addition , it is abundantly clear that these Community actions should be continued , without changing the legal framework and with the allocation of funding to increase the capacity for direct action and , simultaneously , to enhance synergies with other Community and / or national policies ( planning , environment , culture , arts and crafts , heritage , employment policies , structural actions , new technologies ) .
This is a positive report and I would like to emphasise one aspect which we consider to be essential .
It is not enough merely to state that the tourism sector is of fundamental importance where employment is concerned .
It is essential also to guarantee the quality of that employment .
Therefore , we share the conclusion that highlights the need to draw up policies and allocate funds ( for training , among other things ) with a view to guaranteeing a maximum number of stable jobs , minimising the effects of seasonal fluctuations and ensuring that competitiveness is not achieved at the cost of low wages .
Mr President , I am on record as having said at the time when we had the strike in this House that the institution was made up of its Members and the officials .
Not everyone agreed with me but I still believe that .
This House is well served by many officials and I salute them for it .
However , in this case I want to say that there are many cases which reveal gross incompetence over many years which was rife in DG VI ( Administration ) .
That prolonged litany of negligences and errors has damaged the image of this institution .
The former Director-General for Administration Jean Feidt should carry responsibility for that deplorable situation .
I must stress that these remarks are made with no consideration of nationality or political persuasion or membership of clubs or secret societies but because over the years - and I could list them if there was more time - this House has been let down by poor administration in DG VI and Mr Jean Feidt should carry that responsibility .
Our group voted against the Miranda report because of its key element , that is , the discharge given to the section on the European Parliament for the 1996 financial year .
As regards , in particular , the famous carry-over of appropriations from the 1996 financial year to 1997 , the rapporteur has once more decided to defend the authorizing officer by blaming the Legal Service and the Financial Controller . However , the Financial Controller did his job correctly by suggesting that , in order to solve the problem of the absence of the President of Parliament 's signature within the allotted time , the non-automatic carry-over procedure be followed .
Nonetheless , this suggestion was not taken up by the administration .
It was not until the end of January 1997 that the administration learnt that the additional agreement had never actually been signed by the President .
The former President of Parliament was then asked to sign it retrospectively , more than a month after the deadline , which he obviously refused to do .
This did not prevent the Secretary-General from putting the same request , once more in vain , to his successor .
There is an even more astonishing fact . According to financial statements that were circulating between the services of the authorizing officer and the Financial Controller , the ECU 30.76 million involved did , however , form part of the appropriations automatically carried over to the 1997 financial year .
Moreover , this sum was also marked as legitimately carried over in a document dated 20 January 1997 and signed by the appropriate authorizing officer .
This document also certified for the Financial Controller and the Secretary-General that the necessary procedures had been successfully completed , while its author had meanwhile tried to get the President of the European Parliament to sign the retrospective additional agreement . The Secretary-General was perfectly aware of this .
The rapporteur is asking us today to give discharge to the administration of the European Parliament , despite the fact that this episode demonstrated the alarming inefficiency of the procedure for closing accounts : despite the absence of the President of Parliament 's signature to the additional agreement , this procedure allowed ECU 30.76 million to remain in the list of appropriations actually carried over to the 1997 financial year .
What is more , at its meeting of 25 February 1997 , the Committee on Budgetary Control approved the closing of the 1996 accounts , including the automatic carry-over of the appropriations in question .
We are trying today to play down this affair by suggesting that , strictly speaking , there was no loss of funds , and that the Member States will do what is necessary to ensure that Parliament 's budget is able to finance the D3 purchase within the allotted time . However , Parliament 's administration did not submit the additional agreement to the President for his signature , nor did it then resort to the non-automatic carry-over procedure .
Moreover , it tried to backdate the additional agreement and , finally , took for granted that the appropriations would be carried over to the 1997 financial year . In this way , Parliament 's administration completely failed in its responsibility to actually carry over the ECU 30.76 million in accordance with the financial regulations .
It is this unbelievable series of breaches and failings that we should have penalised today by refusing the discharge , in order to avoid this happening again .
In addition , my group is pleased with the decision not to give discharge to the Economic and Social Committee . Nevertheless , we are surprised that the Miranda report , while deploring the extremely incomplete nature of the information contained in the revenue and expenditure account and financial balance sheet of the Committee of the Regions and the absence of a consistent staffing policy , did not choose to do the same for that institution .
Yet certain irregularities in the running of the Committee of the Regions were brought to light in the Court of Auditors ' annual report for the 1996 financial year .
I voted in favour of the 1996 discharge report by Mr Miranda on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
It is quite right that we should be postponing discharge for the Economic and Social Committee , since serious shortcomings and irregularities have come to light .
These must be investigated internally by the EU 's Court of Auditors and UCLAF and , if necessary , externally by the competent national authorities .
Discharge cannot be granted until this has been done .
I personally think that there are problems too within the European Parliament and I would cite , among other things , procedures governing tendering and the use of consultants . There also seem to be shortages of qualified staff in the accounting and legal services .
The difficulties in the Parliament appear , however , to be structural in nature . Unlike the ESC , Parliament has not given any cause to suspect fraud .
I therefore suggest that we ask the Court of Auditors to look more closely at the problems .
Work has already begun in the European Parliament , but some assistance from ' outside ' would be useful in my view .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.55 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Colleagues , unfortunately we are not in a position to start the session because the first speaker will be Mr Santer , the President of the Commission , and we are still waiting for him to return from the lunch with the King of Spain .
He is en route and should just be two or three more minutes .
I wanted to let you know why we have this delay .
( The sitting was suspended at 15.05 and resumed at 15.10 )

Own resources ( budget procedure )
The next item is the Commission statement on own resources and the budget procedure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has just adopted its report on the operation of the own resources system .
It is an important report , not only because of its content , to which I will return , but also because of the point in time at which it is being presented .
Article 10 of the own resources decision states that the text should be presented in 1999 .
We have decided to do so earlier for one simple reason : the financing system for the Union budget is a vital factor in the negotiations on Agenda 2000 .
Without this report , we could not possibly conclude these negotiations , as agreed , in March 1999 .
Now that we have all the aspects of the problem before us , I would appeal for Agenda 2000 to be tackled with renewed determination .
The report the Commission has adopted today is comprehensive , transparent , objective and open .
It is comprehensive in exploring all conceivable avenues for a fair but also adequate future financing system for the Union .
It is transparent in hiding neither the difficulties nor the advantages of each potential choice .
It is objective in that it is based on indisputable figures .
And it is open as , for the time being , it puts forward only options .
With this report the Commission hopes to take some of the passion out of what will be a difficult and politically delicate debate and give it an objective basis .
In a new departure , the Commission is openly tackling the issue of net balances .
This is , I feel , essential as I would like the inevitable discussion on this subject to be based on clear and objective figures .
But I would add that it is a concept that must be handled with caution , as our report clearly shows .
Mr President , after these introductory remarks , I would like to present the broad lines of our document .
It is presented in two parts .
The first deals with the operation of the present system and possible future developments . The second addresses the issue of budgetary imbalances .
The development of the present system in recent years reflects the changes introduced by the 1988 and 1994 decisions on own resources .
Contributions have become fairer as they are now a more accurate reflection of Member States ' ability to pay , as expressed by their gross national product .
What is more , the existing arrangements have provided the Union with adequate resources to finance expenditure without the financial crises that the Union has experienced in the past .
In some respects , however , the present system has its shortcomings , one of which has been repeatedly underlined by the European Parliament itself .
Financial autonomy , which is fundamental to the very concept of own resources , has gradually been lost as the proportion of the Union 's budget financed by national contributions has grown .
In addition , the current system lacks transparency , partly because of the complexity of the correction mechanism for the United Kingdom , but also because of the debasing of the VAT resource which , with the capping of the base , now amounts to little more than a national contribution based on gross national product .
The present system also encounters management difficulties connected with the collection of customs duties and agricultural duties , which we know as traditional own resources .
If we are to move towards a more transparent and logical system , we have two radically different options available .
The first possibility would be to simplify the present system .
This could be done by enhancing the role of the GNP resource in the system of contributions , even though this runs counter to the very concept of own resources .
A bigger role for gross national product would no doubt make the present system simpler and fairer , but it would not give the Union greater financial autonomy .
In this context , following the Cardiff European Council , the Commission has examined the proposal made recently by Spain with the backing of Greece and Portugal to insert a progressive element in the system of contributions .
But this proposal raises problems .
For instance , the solidarity objective is currently pursued by the expenditure side of the Union budget .
This approach guarantees more effective convergence efforts than a simple budgetary transfer to the less prosperous countries .
A second option would be to introduce one or more new own resources , in order to broaden the tax base of the own resources system .
This is something that Parliament has advocated on many occasions .
Apart from the greater financial autonomy which would ensue , the main advantages of introducing new own resources in the system would be to enhance political accountability and visibility in the eyes of the public .
Our report contains a long list of proposed or suggested resources .
If we measure this list against a certain number of essential criteria , such as fairness between Member States or efficient collection procedures , we have to conclude that there are very few options that satisfy all the criteria .
Only actual VAT , as proposed by the European Parliament in 1994 , would appear to be a viable option for the medium term .
I will now turn to the sensitive issue of budgetary imbalances .
Let me begin by repeating - as the Commission has always said - that the very concept of budgetary balance is difficult to grasp and to handle .
The costs and benefits of belonging to the European Union cannot be reduced to a simple arithmetical calculation .
But Germany , the Netherlands , Austria and Sweden have referred to the Fontainebleau compromise , which stated : ' Expenditure policy is ultimately the essential means of resolving the question of budgetary imbalances .
However , it has been decided that any Member State sustaining a budgetary burden which is excessive in relation to its relative prosperity may benefit from a correction at the appropriate time . '
If we look at this from a purely budgetary angle , the budgetary balances of these four Member States have indeed , for various reasons , worsened and are now of the same magnitude , or even bigger , than that of the United Kingdom before correction .
In fact , the United Kingdom is no longer - and will probably be even less so after enlargement - in a unique position as regards its budget balance and relative prosperity .
The special situation it was in at the start of the 1980s is now becoming rather commonplace .
As regards the future size of the net balances of the four countries mentioned , excluding the cost of enlargement , Agenda 2000 may have no more than marginal , and not necessarily negative , effects on these .
But it is too early to say with any certainty what will happen on this front since so much depends on the final agreement on the reforms of the common agricultural policy and the Structural Funds .
Despite its reservations on the very concept of net balances , the Commission has not shied away from the issue .
It has considered a number of options which may allay the concerns expressed .
I would , however , like to put them in context .
Firstly , the source of budgetary imbalances is to be found on the expenditure side of the budget , as was recognised at Fontainebleau .
Secondly , if there had not been a serious effort to contain Union expenditure - in which you played your part - the imbalances would have become more pronounced .
Finally , the cost of enlargement has to be shared out fairly by reference to the ability of all the present Member States to contribute .
Should it be agreed that a response must be found to the question of budgetary imbalances , the Commission has identified three fundamental options that , in addition , are not mutually exclusive .
A first option would consist of a return to a unified and simplified financing system .
There could be a simplification of the financing system in favour of a mechanism based more , or even entirely , on the gross national product resource .
This simplification could include the gradual elimination of the existing correction mechanism .
Secondly , it would be possible to make a correction on the expenditure side .
As I have already said , the Fontainebleau agreement underscores the role that Community expenditure should play in the correction of budgetary imbalances .
A large part of the budget , intended for structural expenditure , does of course contribute to these imbalances , but this is deliberate since this expenditure is explicitly designed to strengthen the economic and social cohesion of the least prosperous Member States .
The other major component of budget expenditure is the common agricultural policy , which is not intended as a means of redistributing wealth between Member States .
Since the common agricultural policy is the source of certain budgetary imbalances , the possibility of reducing the Community contribution to direct aid for farmers could be considered .
This would clearly not amount to renationalising the common agricultural policy as farmers ' rights will remain unchanged and decisions will continue to be taken in Brussels .
A third option would be to introduce a generalised correction mechanism . This mechanism would apply for all the Member States meeting the necessary conditions .
To avoid any explosion of the gross resources , which would have to be redistributed between Member States , this option would have to involve a system of partial reimbursement of negative budgetary balances above a certain threshold .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the reason why the Commission is today presenting its report on own resources is , I repeat , because it wants to see all the cards on the table for the final stage of the negotiations on Agenda 2000 .
Having said that , the Commission continues to believe that the discussion on budgetary balances must not overshadow our reflection on an effective and fair financing system .
On this score I would once again stress that in its report the Commission presents various options but does not express any preference for one or the other .
Finally , whether we like it or not , we must allow for the differences , in terms of decision-making procedures , between Union expenditure and the financing system .
I would remind you in this connection that , in the Commission 's view , Agenda 2000 can be applied without any financial resources in excess of the current own resources ceiling . It will not therefore require any urgent amendment of the own resources decision , a process which we all know is highly complex and cumbersome from the institutional angle .
This may mean that we have an adequate margin - possibly until the next enlargement - to allow us to consider the questions raised in the report and to take the necessary decisions with a clear and calm mind .
Mr President , Mr Santer , thank you for the Commission report .
Long awaited , much longed-for !
You did say that you had drawn up the report dispassionately .
I would have liked to have seen some passion , because then we would perhaps have had a decision on the table which it was worth discussing .
Instead , we have a whole array of options , admittedly with certain qualifications , but nothing more than that .
Be that as it may , we have also had a focused discussion in Parliament and have already reached one or two conclusions in the Committee on Budgets .
We take as our starting-point the fact that we are bound by rules in the Treaties .
Thus , Article 130a states that the Community is committed to solidarity between the poorer and wealthier Member States , and establishes one of its aims as being to reduce disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and the backwardness of the least-favoured regions .
That is the first point .
At the same time , the performance of Member States ' national economies - as you also described it - is , even in the VAT system , an essential factor in determining their relative contributions to the EU budget .
If we look closely , we note that this is actually true for all Member States except the United Kingdom .
The United Kingdom generates 15.9 % of Community GNP , but only contributes 9.9 % of the budget .
You described why this is the case , namely because of what is known as the British rebate .
Nevertheless , although contributions to the budget are indeed more or less based on performance , Member States are still demanding reduced contributions !
We have already had counter-proposals for a progressive system of raising revenue , or increasing the budget above the present ceiling of 1.27 % of GNP .
All of this was reflected in the minutes of the Cardiff summit .
The Member States calling , more or less vociferously , for their contributions to be cut , base their arguments on the so-called concept of net contributors .
They have made comments on this , and so their equivalence-oriented approach - which , as a method , stands on extremely shaky ground - requires no further comments from me .
One thing is clear , however ; on closer inspection , it becomes apparent that , all the same , there are definite imbalances between the wealthier Member States .
For , example , it is immediately noticeable that Denmark , with the second most powerful economy in the Community , receives considerably more from the budget than it puts in .
At the same time , countries such as Sweden and the Netherlands , with lower GNPs , bear a much higher proportion of the financial burden than the portion of the common budget that they receive .
But if , as I have just said , the cause for these imbalances is not on the revenue side , then it must inevitably be on the expenditure side .
And here , I believe that our discussions and also our lines of argument in the Committee on Budgets were more focused than those proposed in your report .
We note , namely , that Member States ' participation in the common policies varies considerably .
This uneven distribution is particularly apparent in the common agricultural policy .
Member States with a large farming sector and a high proportion of farms which qualify for support , such as Denmark or France , receive higher returns - regardless of their economic performance - than Member States with a smaller farming sector .
Sweden and Germany 's proportional contribution to the Community budget is thus twice as large as their proportional participation in the agricultural policy .
But because 45 % of the budget is spent on the agricultural policy , it is obvious that this is where the source of the imbalances lies .
We are , therefore , rather pleased that you also examined this , our approach towards reducing the imbalances , in your report , which is for agricultural policy to be cofinanced .
An important precondition for this is that agricultural policy should tend to move away from price guarantees and towards a system of direct income aid coupled with measures to promote stewardship of the countryside and the protection of the environment .
This trend should be further reinforced by Agenda 2000 .
Already , between 50 % and 60 % of agricultural expenditure is of a structural nature .
Because these measures are applied directly on the spot in the Member States , it is appropriate to involve them in the funding , as is the case with the other structural policies .
This would not , therefore , amount to a break with the system , another point you mentioned .
That is why this scheme for national cofinancing of the agricultural policy is being proposed .
It would not only be a logical development , but would also go a considerable way towards alleviating the problem of net contributions .
Much can be said about our proposal - which we are discussing here for the first time , so have not yet formally agreed - for example , that it will propel the common agricultural policy forward , but it has one additional , indisputable advantage over all the other options you mentioned , namely that it will be possible to implement .
It does not require unanimity in the Council : only a qualified majority .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you will hear many opinions today , Mr Santer , but one undeniable fact stands out : if the Union 's gross domestic product does not grow by at least 2.5 % a year , the current ceiling of 1.27 % of own resources will not suffice to enable us simultaneously to extend Community policies , maintain the cohesion policy and finance enlargement to the East .
You must be aware - and I address myself now to the Commission , as Mr Santer is not present - that in this House you will encounter many Members who are firmly of the opinion that any financing system which does not encompass fiscal progressivity and relative prosperity as basic principles is unfair and divisive from the start .
Mr Liikanen , the Commission of which you are a member has become infected by the virus of the theory of net balances and fair returns , and you have therefore taken the political decision to recommend a redistribution of expenditure to compensate for the net balances , instead of recommending a redistribution of income based on fiscal progressivity .
It has to be said that the proposal the Commission has put before us will not solve anything .
It will not produce a single euro more for the Community 's budget , and will result in the Commission being starved of funds and unable to operate effectively .
Secondly , however you look at it , the proposal the Commission has put before us is regressive , regardless of which alternative is eventually chosen .
The proposal is also counter to financial solidarity and cohesion , and it is unfair , as the committees involved in the parliamentary procedures will tell you , along with the European farmers .
It is inadequate , as you will also be told by the European Council and , furthermore , the proposal is somewhat unworthy of a European institution which should be defending the common interest , as I imagine this Parliament will tell you .
Mr President , we have no doubt as to the importance of a detailed debate on the system of Community own resources and we will analyse this document with particular attention .
However , certain points must first be clarified .
Financial matters cannot be divorced from their corresponding economic context .
This is also true if we wish to base our thinking on a foundation of redistributive justice and solidarity .
A balance must be achieved , both from the revenue side and from the expenditure side .
Our second concern relates to the fact that we must either define objectives and find the appropriate resources and means to realise them , which is the position we hold , or we must specify the resources from the outset and immediately lay down the objectives that may be achieved with those resources , which would appear to be the Commission 's solution , on the extremely restricted basis , as we know , of 1.27 % .
Following the first line of reasoning , it is indeed possible and desirable to have a debate on the system of own resources , particularly with a view to resolving the distortions that have already been caused by the current system , those which are anticipated and others of which we are aware .
It is very difficult to operate on the current basis .
However , the Commission is distorting the discussion to some extent in that , before it has even begun , it has already opted for one of the two courses it suggests .
This is because its main concern would appear to be to settle not the problem of own resources , but that of existing imbalances .
It knows that it is not feasible to terminate the UK financial package , it knows that the system of a fair return would mean the end of the very concept of the Community and the end of the principle of solidarity ; it does not believe , as we have seen , in the possibility of a progressive system founded on GNP .
It is left with a single option which does not involve own resources but seeks to resolve the problem by reducing spending .
That is what the Commission has brought us , which is to say nothing at all , because this debate contributes nothing new .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am glad that the Commission is considering the option of cofinancing agricultural policy .
Cofinancing agricultural policy is , I believe , the right way forward .
This proposal attacks the nub of the problem , because it takes the expenditure side of the budget as its starting-point .
In addition , as has already been said , this option can be decided by a qualified majority in the Council and does not require a unanimously agreed revision of the decision on own resources .
The discussion on net contributors , led by the former Minister of Finance , Mr Waigel , can thus confidently be consigned to history , along with the Finance Minister .
If the Member States were to pay for half of the direct subsidies in the agriculture budget out of their own pockets , Germany would make a net saving of DEM 2 400 million .
The United Kingdom would also stand to benefit considerably from a reform of this kind , to the tune of around DEM 2 000 million .
The British rebate would thus be rendered obsolete .
If some of the financial burden were transferred from the Union to the Member States , then the EU budget would also have to be reduced by the same amount .
Otherwise , there would be an outright increase in the EU budget , which would meet with resistance , in Germany too , from those who then had to pay for cofinancing out of their own pockets .
In my opinion , there should be no question of using the resources released to fund trans-European networks and research policy , as a kind of European employment programme .
Responsibility for large-scale employment policy must continue to lie with the Member States ; it is not possible to fund this at European level .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you very much for your presentation .
In actual fact , for the first time in the Community , we have a document on the table which gives detailed figures and makes it clear what is realistic in this debate and what is not .
We agree with Mrs Müller that the rebate proposed by Mr Waigel was , from the very moment the idea was conceived , unrealistic .
For anyone who thinks that the Portuguese Parliament will agree to foot the bill for the cuts that the Germans want to introduce through a ratification decision , is living in dreamland .
That is why it is good that this file has been closed .
It is also good that the file has been closed on the proposal made by the Spanish Government , which thinks that there is a possibility of the net contributors forking out even more in the future , and that the current injustice can be stretched even further .
That is also nonsense ; these are just initial negotiating positions for next March .
At this stage , however , I wish to emphasise quite clearly - I have said this here many times already and I underline it once more - that the European Union is not a savings bank into which everyone pays their contributions and then receives them back with as much interest as possible .
We are , as Mrs Haug said , a Community committed to solidarity , and the system of own resources also has to be capable of bearing out this claim .
On the other hand , it has to be said that the system is unfair , and this is made unusually clear and easy to understand here .
The report also takes the wind out of the sails of those who are shouting the loudest - I shall not take those from my own country , but those from the Netherlands , who are shouting loudly with us - because if you adjust the figures to take account of the Rotterdam effect , then the balance sheet for the Netherlands as a net contributor looks quite different from that repeatedly claimed by the Dutch Government .
In that respect too , these figures are very helpful .
Incidentally , if Mr Santer had still been with us , I would have said - and the Luxembourgers should take this on board - that if staffing costs are included , they have to keep quiet .
I agree with you that they should be more accommodating , when they are taking over premises in Luxembourg and expecting us to continue paying for them ...
( Applause ) ... they should keep quiet , because there we are a kind of living structural fund !
But now to the policy itself : it is a question - and this applies in Brussels in just the same way - of evening out the imbalances between the rich Member States in the Community .
It will not do for a country such as Denmark - which , measured on per capita GNP , is the richest in the Community - to be a net beneficiary , and a country such as Sweden to be a net contributor .
Something must be wrong with the system there .
Where does the fault lie ?
Precisely where one of the three options makes it clear that it lies : with agriculture .
It lies with the repayments .
47 % of expenditure goes on agricultural policy .
A country with a large farming sector receives more money back and is thus a net beneficiary .
The amount the Danes pay in is not unfair , but our spending policies give them more back , with the result that they are net beneficiaries .
That is why I believe that the proposal made here for a corrective mechanism , based not on renationalising , but on cofinancing - and cofinancing is already the rule in the case of the Structural Funds , research appropriations and indeed appropriations in general - is a step in the right direction .
It has - as Mrs Haug said - the great disadvantage of only needing a qualified majority to become a reality .
That will put those wishing to retreat to a veto in a very bad position .
A second issue must be addressed , namely the British rebate .
It came into force in 1984 - I wish to state this clearly here - at a time when 71 % of the budget was spent in the agriculture sector , 71 % !
It came into force then because at that time the repayments the British were receiving from the agriculture sector were around 8 to 10 % .
Today , as a result of this rebate on their contribution , the British also receive a rebate on policies which have come to be of decisive importance for the Community since 1984 , for example regional and structural policy .
In the future , it will be enlargement to the East , and I say this to you , Mr Wynn : my social democrat friend , Tony Blair , will also find it hard to explain why the British , who are calling for enlargement at the tops of their voices , should receive a further rebate from the other countries .
They will find it hard .
( Applause ) Now , I know that this is a much more difficult area , because here decisions are by unanimity , and that is why I state very clearly : this Community has always distinguished itself by not making any radical demands .
But what we need to prepare ourselves for , what my British colleagues need to prepare themselves for , is the need to find a sensible way to have those parts of the rebate phased out which are not ' agricultural ' , namely regional and structural policy and thus solidarity within the Community , and future enlargement to the East .
One final sentence . I believe that the package put on the table in this House is a good package , which complements Agenda 2000 and will help us to reach a compromise next March : united backing for cofinancing on the one hand , and sound , sensible solutions for the British rebate and for reforming agricultural policy on the other .
This is the big issue , and I believe that we will find a good solution to it .
( Applause )
Mr President , it was the current Federal Government , Mr Samland , and at its head Helmut Kohl and Theo Waigel , which demanded that the existing system of own resources should be corrected .
Other Member States endorsed this demand , and it is good that the Commission is now proposing this reform and admitting that there is an imbalance .
Two points need to be considered for the future : what financial resources does the EU budget have at its disposal , and how much does each Member State contribute ?
Only on that basis will it be possible to have an honest discussion about the expenditure side , namely Agenda 2000 .
No one is calling into question the principle of solidarity , as laid down in the European treaties .
And yet , the words spoken by the King of Spain this morning are still ringing in my ears .
He stated that the EU has changed , and all of us in this House have agreed on several occasions that the EU will continue to change .
That is why we should not assume that this system should be able to operate in the future , in the same way as it does now .
In some Member States , gross output has increased constantly over the last few years .
However , the money going back into these countries has , in principle , remained at the same level .
The current system of rebates , applied to one Member State , has lost its raison d 'être - you said it yourself : they even accepted a rebate on BSE .
Traditional sources of revenue have lost their significance , and contribute more to the general confusion than to transparency .
That is why Theo Waigel proposed that each Member State 's contribution should be restricted to a specific maximum amount , calculated in terms of Member States ' GNP .
This restriction is no straightforward rebate , Mr Samland , but should , above all , be seen in the context of the spending reforms , and not only in the agricultural sector , but also in the field of cohesion and structural policy .
This is the basis for a larger Union .
And now you have it : cofinancing in the agricultural sector was the idea of our colleague , Mr Böge ; but , as always when there is every prospect of success , many people seem to have had the same idea .
( Mixed reactions ) I do not agree with the Commission 's statement , in its summary , that there is no need to reform the current system of own resources at the present time , and that the system would remain practicable even in the event of an enlargement .
I do not believe this statement , in the Commission 's summary , to be justified .
Mr President , the question now is who is going to pay for EU enlargement ?
If the Cohesion Fund is cut , it will be the cohesion countries that will pay .
If the Structural Funds are cut , it will be the EU regions scheduled for development that will pay .
If the EU funding of agricultural policy is cut , it will be the farmers of the EU countries that will pay .
If common agricultural policy funding is shifted into the national budgets of Member States , it will be the taxpayers who will pay .
If Germany pays less into the EU budget , the others will pay more for expansion .
If Britain is paid a smaller rebate from EU funds , it will be the British taxpayers who will be paying more for expansion .
If the customs revenue which the Netherlands calculates as its own share is deducted from its contribution , then it is not such a large net contributor as it claims .
As for my own country , Finland , I might point out that , if customs revenues were taken into account in the budget , we too would be net contributors .
I thank the Commission for its statement .
These matters have to be discussed frankly .
We shall not achieve a politically justified enlargement without all the present Member States putting money into future member countries .
It is impossible to accept that a country which supports enlargement should not share in the cost of it .
On the basis of this statement , we have to begin looking at who is going to pay .
Mr President , I am deeply disappointed .
I listened carefully to the Commission 's presentation and I have to say , quite plainly , that I had hoped for more .
What was uppermost in your minds , Commissioners ?
Europe or the Member States ?
The Commission has put forward three proposals which , if you look at them carefully , are really four , like the musketeers , and none of them is brilliant .
In fact , on this occasion and even more obviously than for Agenda 2000 as a whole , the Commission has put forward unduly cautious proposals , for fear of annoying the Council and , in particular , of annoying certain members of the European Council .
All Member States are equal , but clearly , some Member States are more equal than others in the eyes of the Commission .
Political realism or pragmatism should not be mistaken for shirking responsibilities which is what , in my view , the Commission 's proposal amounts to .
Europe is at a critical stage just now .
We have gone beyond Amsterdam .
The Treaty is in the process of ratification .
We shall be using the euro in a hundred days ' time , at least in the financial sector .
We are on the threshold of the ambitious project to enlarge the European Union .
Yet the standard of debate in Europe is quite simply not up to the challenges it faces .
The debate often tends to focus too much on Member State or Community budget balances , which is a more or less covert way of advocating the principle of fair returns which we all condemn loudly but insincerely .
The media and many national parliaments refer to national contributions , forgetting that not only have they been obsolete for years , but that the Maastricht Treaty itself - a good few years ago now - repealed Article 200 which would have provided for them .
Electoral fever is whipped up in national parliaments over something which does not exist either in practice or in legal terms .
In addition , we should remember that nobody is in the European Union for budgetary reasons .
If anyone were , they would be rather poor .
And since we are on the subject of balances , why not talk about other balances ?
Why not talk about trade ?
Why not talk about finance ?
These are far more complex issues than any of the possible interpretations of the budget balance .
How can one evaluate the political and economic advantages of belonging to the European Union ?
In my view , the Commission should have had the political courage to put forward proposals which would facilitate political progress .
I do not know if this is a case of short-sightedness or of political cowardice .
They have not dared to break with the nationalistic approach which is really marring the European atmosphere and , in my opinion , they should have put forward a truly European proposal .
There is talk of lack of democracy , but none of the proposals addresses it .
They are merely national contributions by another name .
We need to produce a European budget which is transparent and can be understood by the citizens .
None of the proposals goes in this direction .
It is quite unfair that each citizen 's contribution to the European budget should br determined by his country of residence , and not by his income or his wealth .
In theory , we are all agreed on this principle .
Why not propose a European mini-income tax ?
I am not talking of a heavy tax .
I am talking about a tax to finance a European budget which , translated into everyday terms , would amount to one cup of coffee a day at the University café throughout the year .
That is what the Community budget costs , ECU 240 per citizen .
Not everything would be financed through the tax I am suggesting , though .
A very simple tax would suffice .
Why not separate out the Community share of VAT on bills ?
One part would be national VAT , and the other European VAT .
The European institutions would have to become more transparent and democratically accountable .
If the political courage to do so is lacking , we should at least apply the principle of the ability to pay in Europe . This replaced the principle of benefit as a basis for calculating tax in European countries as far back as the nineteenth century , and the principle it replaced has not been applied in the Member States for more than a century .
At the very least , I should like to stress that the Commission is as little inclined to move forward as the Member States themselves . If we cannot make progress and have to restrict the debate to an analysis of these proposals , I suggest that the majority of the proposals made do not even constitute a good discussion document , but are in fact regressive .
Mr President , if I am not mistaken , the world economy is heading for recession . At the same time , the European Union is on the threshold of the difficult business of establishing the euro , under such economic conditions and while we are facing the challenge of enlargement .
Under these circumstances , what would one expect from the European Union and in particular the more powerful countries ?
One would expect some signs of solidarity and generosity .
But here , in the debate taking place in here , we are presented with a sorry picture of mean self-interest and nationalism , and we see Denmark opposite Germany and the United Kingdom opposite the Netherlands , representatives of some of the Union 's most powerful countries , and what are they interested in ?
What message are they broadcasting ?
How we can keep more money in our own pockets than we give to the European Union 's budget .
I believe this is an unacceptable situation , one which fails to respond either to the climate or to the great challenges facing the European Union .
From this platform , I simply wish to appeal to the Greek Government , the Greek Prime Minister , when faced by the risks in particular of nationalising agricultural policy and burdening the national budgets with the costs of the agricultural policy , to adopt a serious approach to these challenges instead of publicising the non-existent Santer packages which are on the way .
Mr President , I too believe that the virus of net financial positions could spread a lethal disease throughout the European Union . We must all bear in mind the net gains that we have all made from Europe , particularly the strongest among us .
Some are now suffering , however , and I do not think that the fear of evoking a lethal virus should lead us to ignore this problem completely .
On the contrary , Commissioner , I am convinced that this discussion should have been initiated rather sooner , because it has been smouldering beneath the ashes for too long .
The dangers are now becoming clear . Clearly there will be much discussion of this second option , the one concerning agriculture , because - if nothing else - it has the advantage of not requiring an immediate unanimous decision .
The danger is that this proposal will completely bypass the discussion of CAP reform contained in Agenda 2000 .
Consideration of the proposed reform of the COM has already reached an advanced stage , including in Parliament , and I wonder whether some people might take this as an opportunity to say : ' Let 's throw our hats in the air and start all over again ; there 's nothing else to be done ' .
The risk then is that decisions on the CAP will be postponed for even longer , whereas in my opinion they are more urgent than ever .
The imbalances in the CAP have not been invented today , but have existed for a good while . They were not ordered by the doctor , but are the fruit of political decisions .
I remember Commissioner MacSharry , when he proposed the reform in 1992 , saying : ' We must redistribute the effects of the agricultural budget among countries , among producers and among regions ' .
Specific decisions were taken in the Agriculture Council - where the ministers often resort overhastily to their calculators when taking decisions - which have prevented the original goals from being achieved .
If , by opening this discussion now , we can at last raise the quality of the whole debate on how to build more solidarity into the CAP , then I very much welcome today 's discussion .
But if the final outcome is to hand money back to the Member States , just to redress the net positions of certain countries , then I have serious objections .
Instead , I believe that the whole approach to the CAP should be reviewed .
There are also other , alternative means of giving greater scope to high-quality policies - the structural policies - which are the missing second pillar of national farm policy , rather than constantly harping on about the risk of national rebates .
As we all know , national rebates are a real threat , but this road is already being followed implicitly even now , and in my opinion an inverted form of solidarity is the worst possible form of fair returns .
That is what we should be discussing .
Mr President , it really is true that I always speak in front of Mr Liikanen with the feeling that it is not my turn .
I think that this is a bad omen for the general report on next year 's budget and I would simply like to say a few words on the proposals we have just heard from the Commission .
I believe that the Commission is doing some very interesting work in trying to resolve a problem that is totally unsolvable - in other words , it is trying to square the circle .
How can you satisfy all the contributors to the European Union budget with a budget such as this ? On the one hand and quite rightly , it is a budget based on vertical distribution , which benefits the less developed countries but which the more developed countries see as penalising them .
On the other hand and also quite rightly , it is a budget based on transferring resources between sectors , from 97 % of the population to 3 % of the Community 's agricultural population .
When you have a budget of this nature , it is obvious that everyone , or a least a large majority of people , are going to be dissatisfied . The solutions envisaged by the Commission are based on a paradox worthy of Lewis Carroll : the tax that each of us must pay to the Community varies according to what we receive from the Community .
The fundamental principle behind both capping budgets and cofinancing agriculture , is : I will give you what you need , as long as you pay for what I give you .
Such an approach is obviously unsatisfactory , but the Commission is forced to carry out this exercise .
The only real solution is to get out of the contradiction into which the Member States have thrown us , in other words to unblock Community expenditure .
As long as we do not have a true Community policy , involving the 15 Member States in objectives such as environment protection , transport networks and town and country planning , the taxpayers in the European Union will not receive full recognition in the Union 's budget , but this is something the Member States must do for themselves .
Mr President , I just want to say one thing .
It is very important that the Commission come forward at this particular time with a communication on resources .
As President Santer said , it is the condition for a proper discussion on enlargement .
My group 's point of view is that it is very important that we fundamentally attack the concept of the juste retour .
A juste retour based on net contributions only cannot resolve the problem .
Obviously the approach should be to achieve a more equitable solution but that requires a north / south balance and also progressivity in the budgetary contributions from all Member States .
That is the approach we will take .
It is up to the Member States to take up their responsibility but we would compliment the Commission for taking a position at this time .
Probably you were wise to simply sum up various alternatives but it is these alternatives which must now be politically on the table .
Mr President , perhaps it is good to remember that this report represents an obligation which was given to the Commission to a large extent already in Edinburgh .
The Edinburgh Summit decided that the Commission must , first of all , give a report on the operation of the financing system , on the own-resources system .
That is one part of this whole report .
Secondly , we are under an obligation to give a report on the British rebate system , which is also a part of this report .
Thirdly , the Commission was given an obligation to give a report on the potential new own resources .
There is a wide-ranging annex on this subject .
I hope we have time to pay attention to that - it is about 30 pages .
You received the papers very late .
The decision was taken by the Commission just before 12 .
So take your time , study it all .
As to the question of the fair return and transparency , we have two objectives which are not always easy to reconcile .
Firstly , we are against the concept of fair return .
There is no concept whereby every country should get back what it pays .
Of course we are against it .
Europe and the European Union generate a lot of added value which is shared by all the countries .
You cannot make it just an accounting exercise .
That is one side , and that is clear .
Secondly , we are in favour of transparency .
We cannot play a game of hide-and-seek where the figures are not all out .
Now we have released all the figures and also there is a separate annex on that explaining how difficult the question of defining different net positions is .
There is no simple solution to that issue ; we present them all here .
As to the character of the report , I wish to emphasise that we have proposed three options with a great number of variations .
Today the Commission decided that the options presented in the report are interchangeable , can be added to and can be spread over time .
So if there are new options which are well founded , and get the support of the European people and Member States , discussion is wide open .
I shall make just one remark on the elements of some proposals .
In our decision today and in our report we state that the shifts in the burden of financing implied by some of these options present regressive elements that might need to be redressed in the context of our solution .
That is clear and , before any other solutions are implemented , this element of certain regressive features must be solved .
We cannot do it before we have reasonable consensus to go forward .
The Commission has now opened the debate .
This has been the first public debate on the matter .
I am sure it will continue in the Member States and , in good time , we can draw the conclusion whether it is possible to submit a proposal .
This has not been a proposal : this is a presentation of the report and options .
The debate is closed .
Migrants
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0484 / 98 by Mrs d 'Ancona , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Council , on migrants entering the EU from Mediterranean ; -B4-0485 / 98 by Mrs d 'Ancona , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Commission , on migrants entering the EU from Mediterranean ; -B4-0486 / 98 by Mrs Schaffner , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Council , on entry into the European Union of immigrants from Mediterranean countries ; -B4-0487 / 98 by Mrs Schaffner , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Commission , on entry into the European Union of immigrants from Mediterranean countries ; -B4-0488 / 98 by Mrs Roth , Mr Orlando and Mr Voggenhuber , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Commission , on immigration from the Mediterranean area
Mr President , the oral questions about the uncontrolled waves of migrants from Mediterranean countries are primarily an expression of our concern for human beings who are seeking a better life , fleeing civil war or natural disasters and driven away by violence and oppression .
But often , instead of finding freedom , they end up dying a horrible death , becoming victims of the trade in human beings or finding that they are not welcome in their ' promised land ' .
It is a human drama , but one which cannot and should not have to be resolved by the Member States most affected by this type of immigration .
It is the concern and the responsibility of us all , and this is why , as we have so often said , we need European solutions and a European immigration policy .
The Council 's ' couldn 't-care-less ' attitude here stands in stark contrast to the panic that is typical of all the Member States ' refugee policies .
The Austrian Presidency is to be applauded for having the courage to put this issue on the agenda , but it was hypocritical of the Justice Ministers to refuse to deal with it because it would conflict with the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees .
This is indeed the case , and Amnesty International , the ECRE and the UNHCR were right to criticise , but the position adopted by the Member States simply hides the fact that their own asylum policies parted company with the Geneva Convention a long time ago .
There is now a huge gap between principles and reality .
Europe 's approach at the moment is making nimbies of us all , the burden is not being shared but pushed on to the next country , and asylum-seekers are shown degrading treatment in the way they are detained and expelled .
This cannot go on .
We need to introduce a single European asylum and immigration policy immediately .
Austria 's revised strategy paper must be used as the basis for concrete plans , and we need to consider whether we can organise common reception and asylum procedures at or just outside Europe 's borders so that refugees can then be directly distributed among the Member States .
This plan , which was put forward this week by a Dutch MP , will certainly require a European approach because , as we have already said , the Mediterranean problem requires a European solution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one day the right to choose where to live will be recognised as a fundamental human right .
In the meantime , we should like to make a few remarks on the documents under discussion this afternoon .
We believe in particular - I myself , like the Green Group - that a motion for a resolution is unacceptable for the following reasons . First of all , migration is not a problem relating to the Mediterranean alone .
The Socialist Group 's document refers solely to a problem which seems to come exclusively from the south , as if migration cannot come from the east , west or north .
The second point concerns Europol .
We are not convinced by the reference to Europol and its involvement , because there is still no proper protection of data ; nor is there a clear legal context for Europol 's activities in this sector .
Our third point relates to the need to step up the fight against the illegal exploitation of immigrants and against the criminal organisations which exploit the right to migrate .
Lastly , migration cannot be regarded as a police or border problem ; it is an overall cultural and economic problem , which calls for an EU policy of development in the migrants ' countries of origin .
Finally , I hope that the mystery over the Austrian Presidency 's strategy document has been solved . As announced , it should have borne the date of 1 July , but it now seems to have been replaced by another document which has still not been forwarded to this House .
This does not set our minds at rest as regards the Austrian Presidency 's intentions in this area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since the Austrian strategy paper was one of the first things to be mentioned here , I should like to say a few words on that , before I go on to make some comments on the question of relations with the Mediterranean countries .
There is something I would like to say right at the outset , as there have been a few misunderstandings here . The Geneva Convention on the Status of Refugees , and its instruments , should not be considered as in any way irrelevant as a consequence of the Austrian strategy paper .
On the contrary , the paper is concerned , amongst other things , with complementary systems for protecting persons fleeing from war zones , exceptional humanitarian cases , and other areas not included in the Geneva Convention .
I should also like to say that the subject of asylum and immigration is not actually a new one at all as far as cooperation in the EU is concerned , because in 1991 , the European Commission was already giving some thought to establishing a strategy on migration policy at European level in two communications on immigration and the right of asylum .
But I am not going to go into what was a historic initiative at the time , I would prefer instead to set out some of the essential details of the strategy paper .
There is , in fact , a 1992 declaration of principles on migration policy , which included some specific strategic points which should now be useful for guiding future European policy on the subject .
Among these are the common desire to reduce the causes of migration through appropriate measures relating to the regions of origin , the development of a common policy for the temporary protection of the displaced , the fight against illegal immigration , the conclusion of agreements with countries of origin and transit , the ratification of the Dublin Convention and the adoption of the convention on external borders .
This declaration of principles did not exert any lasting influence on the migration and asylum policy of the European Community at the time .
The actual declarations of intent were also hardly implemented .
Then , in 1994 , the European Commission made an extensive new attempt at developing a plan for migration policy , by submitting a very comprehensive and substantial communication to the European Parliament and the Council on immigration and asylum policy .
The purpose of the migration plan , which was seen in isolation in those days , was to come up with an integrated and coherent answer to what was happening on the ground , to identify the key elements for effectively regulating migration and to define a new framework for the Union 's action .
The main elements were defined by the Commission as measures to stem the tide of immigration , effective supervision of immigration and strengthening the position of legal immigrants .
As for the degree to which this concept has been implemented , we find that today , after four years , clearly visible and measurable success has been achieved in only three areas .
In this regard , we should not overlook the result of work in the third pillar , which has resulted in some 70 legal acts from the Council in the area of migration .
Perfectly respectable work has been done .
But the European Union has not really succeeded in learning any lessons from its experiences of the reality of migration .
We believe it is necessary to approach this subject once again now , and that is the reason for the Austrian strategy paper .
It will be forwarded to Parliament at the earliest possible moment after a first round in the K4 Group .
I should like to say a few words now about the Mediterranean countries .
Over the last few years the Council has adopted a series of legal acts on illegal immigration , which also apply to relations with Mediterranean countries .
Particular attention was paid to issues associated with the return of illegal immigrants to their homeland and to transit countries . The following legal acts were adopted : a standard travel document for the return of third country nationals , a specimen draft of a bilateral agreement for repatriation between a Member State and a third country and standard clauses that in future are to be included in various agreements .
In addition , I would also like to point out that , in accordance with its decision of 16 December 1996 , the Council regularly examines the actual implementation of the legal acts it has adopted in the areas of illegal immigration , repatriation , the illegal employment of third country nationals and cooperation in enforcing deportation orders .
The Council knows that the standard EU travel document is being successfully used by some Member States in their relations with third countries .
Moreover , the standard clauses for repatriation are presently serving as a basis for negotiations on the Euro-Mediterranean association agreements with Egypt , Lebanon and Syria .
Now a final word to Mr Orlando on Europol and the problems he raised .
The Council and the Council Presidency are also aware of these problems and solutions are being worked on .
As far as development cooperation with the Mediterranean countries is concerned , this is included in the MEDA programme .
Of course we have our contribution to make here but this is one of the main elements of the Barcelona process , and a great deal is being done in this regard too .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission shares Parliament 's concerns on the influx of migrants from Mediterranean countries trying to enter illegally the territory of the Member States .
As has been made very clear , on behalf of the presidency , this phenomenon not only affects the southern Member States ; migratory pressures constitute real and complex challenges for the whole of the European Union .
Very often organised crime stands behind this phenomenon .
These would-be illegal immigrants are recruited among those who are desperately looking for better conditions of life and they sometimes become victims of the trafficking in human beings .
The fight against this shameful crime deserves urgent and specific attention .
I entirely agree that the only viable response is to adopt a comprehensive and long-term strategy , as stated in the Commission 's 1994 communication on migration and asylum policy , to which reference has already been made .
That document identified three types of measures : actions addressing the root causes of forced migration , actions to manage migration flows , and actions to integrate legally resident third-country nationals .
It is clear that we need a multi-disciplinary approach involving all the relevant actors .
Law enforcement actions are essential but not enough .
We have to combine coordinated actions in the field of judicial and police cooperation , foreign policy , trade policy and development cooperation .
Some activities have already been developed at European Union level .
In 1996 the European drug unit 's mandate was extended to cover the fight against trafficking in human beings .
When Europol is fully operational , it is our hope that these activities will be strengthened .
A specific programme on the training and exchange of persons responsible for combating trafficking in human beings , the STOP programme , was adopted by the Council in November 1996 .
The Commission has also tabled two proposals dealing with temporary protection and solidarity amongst Member States in cases of mass influxes of displaced persons .
These proposals will enable the Member States to cope more efficiently with situations like the one that we now face in Kosovo .
The need to give international protection to persons fleeing from war zones is , of course , a different issue from illegal immigration and Parliament itself took the initiative for two new budget lines concerning the reception and repatriation of such people .
The first preliminary report on the implementation of these budget lines has already been transmitted to Parliament .
In order to tackle these migration flows , improved cooperation with the third countries concerned is essential .
The framework for this cooperation , having regard to this part of the globe , is the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
One of the basic purposes of MEDA is indeed supporting economic transition and socio- economic development in the Mediterranean region .
By doing that we contribute to increased prosperity in the region and hopefully reduce the pressures for migration .
In addition , MEDA can support specific measures under the Barcelona Declaration to help cope with illegal immigration .
We shall , for example , be financing a seminar in Spain for police training on this subject .
We are also supporting a meeting in the Netherlands on a whole range of migration issues .
It must be understood that , under its own regulations , MEDA cannot be used to finance measures in Member States to fight legal immigration .
That would be against the regulation and , more important , it would send a wrong political signal to our Mediterranean partners .
The Commission shares the view that improved cooperation at European level is crucial to manage immigration flows .
The entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty will provide a good opportunity to enhance our efforts further and develop new and more efficient tools in all these areas .
I can assure you that the Commission will make the most of these new provisions in order to help manage immigration flows , to improve the fight against trafficking in human beings and also to improve the situation for victims .
I was glad to hear the replies from the Council and the Commission before speaking myself .
I agree that we need to take medium-term and global measures .
However , that should not prevent us from taking other measures , immediately , to deal with the problems we are experiencing and those looming before us .
Some parts of the European Union are not much more than ten kilometres away from the north of Africa , and that narrow strait is becoming a gigantic common grave for some of those who try to cross it .
They die in the attempt , having first paid their undertakers handsomely .
Hundreds of human beings have died this tragic death .
They only appear on our television screens if something extremely serious happens , as it did on the coast of Italy .
The catalogue of deaths that take place every day goes quietly unnoticed , and is rarely in the news .
Other people are detained and placed in camps which are more or less well equipped to receive them .
The Algerians , for instance , whose situation is not so very different from that described by the Commissioner when referring to Kosovo , leave their homeland , which is now a powder keg , yet we in the European Union do not notice or do not want to notice what is going on .
They end up herded together , living in cramped conditions in Ceuta or Melilla , for instance , two cities which are not far from their own country .
I believe that the European Union does have the resources to deal with this situation , more resources than we sometimes draw on .
I am referring , as did the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council , to the mechanisms provided under the third pillar for the control of cross-border traffic .
I am referring , of course , to police cooperation , and dialogue with third countries to enable us to make a joint attempt to fight against trafficking in human beings , and to fight together against everything with contributes to this disaster .
Nevertheless , Mr President , we must also take appropriate measures here and now to respond to the victims ' plight . We need to deal with the situation of those who , through mafias or through their own initiative , leave their homeland in search of a better life and try to reach our shores .
Very often , they do not intend to live in the southern European countries , but plan to continue travelling north . Some of these people have been arrested near my home - in Catalonia , which is in the north of Spain - as they attempted to enter France , in the hope of reaching the countries of northern Europe .
We need to deal with them , and we need centres where this can be done .
Measures must be taken to control the Straits of Gibraltar , the Straits of Messina , and the most popular crossings . Above all , however , we must not look the other way , waiting for press headlines on large or small numbers of corpses washed up on our shores , waiting to have to regret the situation all over again .
Mr President , the problem of illegal immigration deserves specific attention because of the intense human suffering involved .
Not only are lives lost , but many people also fall prey to gangs of organised traffickers , who run criminal businesses , risking the lives of desperate people .
Faced with this situation , we need to increase cooperation within the European Union , strengthening , as has already been stated , the regular exchange of information on the criminal networks organising illegal immigration .
The fact is that the illegal immigration these gangs are involved in is essentially - I would stress - a crime . We need to target the organisation of these networks .
Sanctions will have to be effective , however , and the various administrations will therefore need to cooperate .
The legislative work undertaken by the Member States and the administrations themselves constitutes a great change .
Nevertheless , in order to resolve this problem we must speed up the creation of a common judicial and police area , and of a coherent and homogeneous policy on immigration and asylum in the Union .
This problem affects us all and , as we have often emphasised in this House , it can only be successfully resolved through cooperation .
Such cooperation should also include the administrations of third countries . If necessary , European aid should be made conditional on strong government action against illegal immigration in those countries .
The Council and the Commission should warn the Maghreb and the Mediterranean countries that unless they take action against illegal immigration , the European Union will , regrettably , be forced to reconsider Community aid to those countries when the MEDA programme is reviewed in 1999 .
Of course , countries which make a greater effort to stem the flow of immigrants will benefit from more favourable treatment by the European Union .
The same applies to commercial and association agreements .
The European Union - the Austrian Presidency has already commented along these lines - should not sign any more agreements in the region unless they include the clause on the repatriation of illegal immigrants , which in my opinion will be of considerable help in resolving this problem .
The solution lies in control and collaboration , and if the administrations do not collaborate , the situation will not be resolved . I very much fear that if we do not take appropriate measures , we shall have to mourn more tragic victims in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to begin by congratulating the authors of this import and laudable initiative , which is highly topical in the light of current events now and in forthcoming weeks and months .
The migration of peoples is part of world history .
There has never been a time in the history of this continent when peoples have not been moving from one place to another as a result of famine , war , scarcity , poverty or persecution .
So to think that migratory flows can be checked by building fortresses or barriers - which this time would have to go through the middle of the Mediterranean Sea - seems to me altogether illusory and over-ambitious , not to say stupid .
Clearly the problem must be tackled not as a problem but as an opportunity , because migration will be our future in the next century .
Public opinion in our countries would do well to understand this , and therefore all xenophobic campaigns , or ones based on keeping foreigners out , are a huge mistake which will rebound against us .
So we must make a major effort : convey the fact that there are , nowadays , many jobs which our fellow citizens no longer wish to do , and that immigration can therefore be a major opportunity , not least an economic one .
So let us no longer consider immigration as an uncontrolled influx of labour supply - and it is clear that controls are important here - but as being driven by demand , in line with the future requirements of our economies .
If we can alter our mind-set in this way , we shall give hope for the future not only to citizens from the other side of the Mediterranean , but also to our own fellow citizens .
Mr President , despite the sad tone of some of the preceding speeches , I feel obliged to point out to you that immigration into Europe from the southern Mediterranean countries is becoming a wide-ranging problem with dreadful consequences for those who attempt to reach Europe . It is a problem which has much to do with the European Union 's present approach to north-south cooperation policies .
Immigration is on the increase , as a result of the worsening social , political and economic situation in the countries of the southern Mediterranean , and international criminal gangs trafficking in immigrants are expanding . At the same time , immigrants are dying in flimsy craft trying to reach the shores of Europe , and the Member States are introducing ever more repressive measures to protect their borders and often mete out inhuman treatment to the refugees .
This is the situation with which we are faced .
I believe the time has come for the European authorities to take swift and effective action to resolve this problem .
Above all , the European Union must formulate , once and for all , a policy of genuine cooperation with these Mediterranean states .
Such cooperation must be honest and fair and not be based solely on economic interests . Rather , it must attempt to deal with the structural and immediate causes of the migration flows .
In the context of such a policy of north-south cooperation , based on a quite different philosophy from the present one , the European Union must combat illegal immigration , its networks and traffickers in an effective manner . It must put in place a common immigration policy based on principles of cooperation and solidarity with those states , and not on principles which are essentially economic and repressive , designed to protect fortress Europe .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would like to quote some words spoken yesterday in Madrid at the launching of Sami Nair 's latest book , entitled : ' Mediterráneo hoy , entre el diálogo y el rechazo ' .
At the launch , Joaquín Estefanía said , and I quote : ' The belief that these matters can be dealt with through recourse to economics alone is false .
Europe must return to politics in the search for a solution to the Mediterranean situation ' .
Let us hope that this will be the case , and that history does not find us wanting yet again , for failing to live up to our responsibilities .
Mr President , for many years now thousands of people from North African countries have been trying , by taking risks that are well known , to cross the Mediterranean and gain a foothold in our continent .
They ask for asylum , they ask for jobs and they ask for lives for themselves and their families .
The attitude adopted by all our institutions up to now has been appalling : we turn them back , we send them back , we try to contain them , we make things up as we go along , we improvise ad hoc rules , we guess what the Geneva Conventions say , etc .
Even here , nationalist hypocrites are thriving , wrapped up in their sense of belonging to a bogus Christianity .
That is quite convenient ; the whited sepulchres are not there today !
But meanwhile , the smugglers and crooks are making a fortune and dozens of drowned bodies are being recovered between Tangier and Algeciras .
Men and women , who have already been victims of these gangsters , are then locked up , deported , humiliated and murdered by policemen in aeroplanes , in front of dazed passengers , who had no idea that things like that happened in our countries .
For them it is a matter of survival .
It is a matter of eating every day , of working , of existing and of being able to send their children to school .
Europe , which is beset by its own problems , must not just sit back and build ramparts , in case it becomes a fortress .
Our society obsessed with profit , our society of the cautious and short-sighted , might one day easily bring calamity to us all .
Madam President , the European Parliament is beginning to show concern at the influx of illegal immigrants from the southern Mediterranean , and it is right to do so .
But in the joint motion for a resolution , it proposes as a solution the reform of the immigration policy provided for in the Treaty of Amsterdam and , in this respect , it is wrong .
This reform , which has not yet been debated in France , has three main negative aspects .
The first is the abolition of all controls relating to the movement of persons at internal borders within five years , including those relating to nationals of third countries .
Such a measure would make illegal immigration from the South a great deal easier : the immigrants would only have to look for a weak point somewhere to be able to enter and then scatter throughout the rest of Europe .
The second is the European Commission 's monopoly over the right of initiative , which would also become automatic after five years .
This measure would be dangerous and even dictatorial , because it is unthinkable that in the future national parliaments and governments might no longer have any right of proposal in the field of immigration .
The third is the move to qualified majority voting on a simple decision of the Council , which would also be a mistake .
In fact , the abolition of sovereignty and national frontiers would remove all sense of responsibility from the Member States .
No-one would gain from that . On the contrary , we must rely on the present Member States to negotiate a common immigration policy , to make our territory secure again while respecting the will of each nation and , if need be , to establish different forms of cooperation between the countries involved .
Madam President , as I only have 90 seconds of speaking time , I shall have to confine myself to just three points .
Firstly , the countries of Europe are not immigrant countries , yet they are currently facing enormous problems with foreign nationals and are simply not in a position to take any more immigrants .
As I see it this has to be the bottom line , the central principle of our policy here .
Secondly , it is in the interests of all the countries of Europe to maintain the best possible relations with the countries across the Mediterranean , which is precisely where political and economic circumstances could trigger a new wave of migrants at any time .
We need to focus our development aid as far as possible on those countries and conclude agreements not just to rule out further migration , but to leave the door open for both illegal and legal immigrants already in Europe to return home .
Thirdly , I still think that a territoriality principle must be introduced for political asylum-seekers , so that genuine political refugees - and these make up only a very small percentage of the total - are not given asylum in Europe , but in neighbouring countries on the same continent , preferably countries which have basically the same culture as the country of origin .
Most people in every country in Europe and every section of the population would be glad to support such a humane policy , which is certainly not the case with the ' open borders ' policy .
Madam President , the problem of migrants coming in to the EU from across the Mediterranean affects us all .
Most come by sea but some come by land .
Few Members , I imagine , except the Spanish Members of Parliament , were aware that the European Union has a land border with Morocco and I had the opportunity recently to visit the two Spanish towns in Morocco , Ceuta and Melilla , with my colleague , Terrón I Cusi .
Hundreds of migrants from both sub-Saharan Africa as well as from Algeria are increasingly coming into these two Spanish towns .
The former are economic refugees and the latter are asylum seekers .
Groups of them build up in the two camps , the one in Ceuta , which is very sub-standard , and the more well- established camp in Melilla , which has been funded partly by the EU .
From time to time the economic refugees , most of whom are French or English speaking , are decanted over to Spain where they are issued with temporary papers and then promptly disappear northwards .
That is something that should concern us .
Equally , however , we have the problem of the asylum seekers .
Some of them are in my view genuine asylum seekers , suffering repression from the authorities and others in Algeria , and they of course are not allowed in .
They are sent back to Algeria where they suffer oppression , torture and even on occasion death .
What we need is a common European policy on these issues , as Sir Leon mentioned .
It is a European problem - it is not just a Mediterranean one .
We need to make sure that Europol helps to catch the criminal organisations that are engaged in this vile trade .
We need to ensure that we have asylum legislation that actually works and that those who are in fear of torture or death can come into the European Union and seek our protection .
We equally need to put pressure on the countries of origin and countries of transit to make sure that they play their part in helping to staunch this flow .
Finally , as a number of speakers have stated , we have to help remove the causes .
We have to help make sure that we get economic development in the countries of origin .
We have to ensure that the political situation there is such that its people can remain there rather than have to flee , abandoning their homes and , in many cases , their families .
These are difficult issues .
In the climate of xenophobia we have in Europe , they are increasingly difficult ; but they will not go away unless we tackle them .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party calls on the Commission , and above all the Council , to ensure that this problem is tackled thoroughly , in political and practical terms - under the third chapter of the Barcelona Declaration , and more generally under the European Union 's third pillar - by introducing specific actions for the monitoring and assistance of clandestine immigrants and by negotiating specific measures concerning readmission .
What I would stress is the essential need for coordination at European level on a problem which , although it has an immediate impact on the EU states bordering on the Mediterranean , in actual fact also affects continental Europe , which in most cases is the ultimate goal of most immigrants .
It is pointless to leave it up to the individual Member States to handle a crisis which is in no sense bilateral - it cannot be handled by EU countries individually - but is global and European .
It would therefore be advisable to institute a form of multilateral cooperation , perhaps based on cooperation between the Council of Ministers and third countries , and on Community framework legislation designed to tackle the repatriation of all clandestine immigrants in the same fashion , always with due regard for their basic rights , and helping at the same time to consolidate democratic , social and economic development in the countries of migration .
Only by means of such an approach , which should be incorporated into both the MEDA programme and the Schengen Agreement , will it be possible in future to protect the rights of immigrants , who should no longer be clandestine but sought out by Europe on the basis of a new employment policy and new , clear , social legislation enabling them to be integrated into Europe 's social and economic framework and to develop their own potential to the full .
Madam President , our colleagues ' questions , and in particular the one from Mrs Schaffner , once again raise a question of substance : how is it possible to handle in a humane and civil fashion a migratory flow coming from poor countries , in some instances ones torn apart by ethnic wars , without there being a common policy in the European Union ?
A common policy would prevent individual Member States from passing the buck or implementing dissimilar , contrasting policies both in terms of reception , expulsion or insertion into the world of work - with the ensuing social prerogatives - and in terms of the concomitant and much-needed policy of developing economic activities and production in countries where people are still today dying as a result of famine and warfare .
The Commission 's umpteenth listing of figures today is pointless . What is needed is a firm stance , leading to the immediate introduction of a common policy on immigration .
We need cooperation projects and measures to combat organised crime , which is causing a real exodus of desperate people who are destined to become the foot-soldiers of these criminal organisations themselves and the victims of prostitution rackets .
Madam President , I do not think that we should be discussing immigration policy in general terms today ; we should be considering new approaches , such as those outlined just now by Mr Caccavale .
Above all , we should be focusing our attention today on what is happening in the southern part of Europe , the region which on the one hand is the most exposed to migratory flows - including illegal ones - but on the other is most encumbered with the burden of repeated refusals to take in the numerous immigrants and refugees .
This can lead to dreadful tragedies at sea , as has already been recalled . All of this results from a lack of coordination with the North African countries and from the pressure of highly organised , highly efficient organised crime .
Last year I visited the Kurdish refugee camps in southern Italy , and almost all of those to whom I spoke - Kurds from Sri Lanka and from Pakistan - told me how many millions of lire they had paid to middle-men to be brought to Italy , from where they would set off for Germany or the Netherlands .
We must bear all of this in mind - the worst possible exploitation of dreams , hopes and needs - and we must realise that it is more than just a matter of numbers and monitoring : of course monitoring is required , but cooperation is required too , and this should not be left to the countries on Europe 's southern flank .
Whereas it is fair to expect us - Italy , Spain , and Greece when it joins the Schengen area - to carry out careful surveillance of our coastlines , it is also fair to equip us to fulfil our tasks properly , not only of monitoring but also of cooperation and humanity .
With regard to reception centres , for example , if immigrants are to be housed in dignity and with respect for their human rights , there is a pressing need for many more such centres , ones that are far superior to the existing ones in Italy and other countries .
The substantial investment which is needed in this area must at the same time be directed to improving cooperation .
I would also stress one further point : agreements with the countries on the opposite shores of the Mediterranean .
Some interesting agreements have already been drawn up in this area , for example by our government .
We urge the Austrian Presidency , or at the latest the German Presidency , to implement all the measures being called for during this debate : humanitarian assistance , joint monitoring , funding and cooperation . They should do so before next summer - which will soon be here - because that is when there is an increased risk of deaths in the Straits of Gibraltar , and an increased likelihood of the inhuman conditions that we have seen in the Sicilian Channel .
Our mission , and the possibility of future humanitarian cooperation , would likewise be jeopardised .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are all agreed that the pressure of immigration from or via North Africa to Europe is dramatically increasing .
We are also agreed that it is the southern Member States that are most affected by it .
The reasons for the migratory pressures are sufficiently well-known - I do not want to go through them here again , as we are all aware of them .
But the southern Member States are not the only ones affected , all the European countries subsequently are , because as a rule , the destination countries lie further north .
Germany and Austria are the first in line , and their ability to take people in and to integrate them are limited.But what is the Union doing ?
At present , we still do not have uniform or adequate instruments to meet the full extent of these new challenges .
We have the Geneva Convention , but we know that this is no longer enough , because only 10 % of those who come to us are treated as asylum-seekers in accordance with it .
We need other instruments and concepts for the remainder , in order to be able to help both them and ourselves .
Here , I would like particularly to thank the President-in-Office for presenting a very comprehensive concept , developed with total responsibility .
I am glad that you have mentioned the need , for instance , to reduce the pressure for migration through intervention in the crisis regions , to combat trafficking in human beings , and to regulate immigration .
We are not a fortress , but in the interests of eventual integration , immigration must be limited and controlled .
Legal checks on entry were mentioned as a general concept for the Union , and so was new protection for refugees , because first and foremost , we need a division of the burden to enable integration and transitional entry to Europe .
We need a completely new overall concept that will produce these solutions .
I am confident that this is the beginning of a discussion that will end positively for the whole of Europe .
Madam President , all the Member States of the European Union have contributed to the Euro-Mediterranean policy , and they should also all contribute to helping the Member States who have to deal with these problems .
In no way are the illegal bodies washed overboard from these flimsy craft the responsibility of one Member State alone .
We must all play our part in dealing with this problem .
As we know , this problem has arisen as a result of the immoral differences in earnings between the northern and southern Mediterranean countries , which can be as much as tenfold .
The southern Mediterranean countries are begging us to make a determined effort to come up with solutions quickly .
Yet the levelling-out - if that is indeed our aim - has to be achieved through favourable treatment of those southern countries , giving them advantages , making their task easier .
Promises of financial aid alone are not enough .
We have to be seen to act .
We should make use of those very television channels through which we have created the myth of a European wonderland , making many young people from the Maghreb believe in a European dream .
We should use those same television channels to broadcast information , dissuading these young people and informing them of the very real risks they run , telling them about the slavery which awaits young people in Europe if they do not possess the necessary documents .
It is both laughable and incredible that the European Union as a whole should declare itself powerless to fight against these mafias which exploit human beings , namely impoverished youngsters .
We need to create opportunities for temporary emigration , with offers of jobs and training .
Madam President , were you aware that the very doors we are opening to young people from the CEECs are being closed to young people from the Maghreb ? We need to give them a better reception , showing greater respect for their dignity .
After all , we are decent human beings . Those young illegal immigrants whose corpses are washed up are , in the main , the victims of a European dream we are creating here , in the European Parliament , as we use empty words to describe a non-existent European wonderland .
Madam President , nowadays , the European Union is a prime destination for many who , travelling from the Eastern countries , Latin America , and northern and central Africa , wish to cross its borders in search of solutions to the most pressing problems in their daily lives . What we are discussing today , however , is a flow of migration into the southern flank of Europe .
Spain and Italy are being besieged by migrants fleeing from the conditions in their home countries .
Highly dangerous methods of crossing from Africa are resorted to , some of which have been referred to earlier - these flimsy craft - and , as a result , thousands of corpses have been washed up on the coast of the south of Spain or the north of Africa , and a shameful traffic in human beings has developed . Clearly , we cannot remain indifferent to it .
Ladies and gentlemen , this problem will not be resolved through a debate on whether the Union 's borders should be open or closed , or through repressive or police action . It will not be resolved either through the Geneva Convention or regulation of the right to asylum .
The problem has to be approached from a position of human solidarity , through the economic and social development of the migrants ' home countries . The political stability of those countries must be promoted , and they should make the best use of their human and natural resources to transform the Euro-Mediterranean area into a balanced , stable zone .
The association agreements - the negotiation and ratification of which is unacceptably slow , the Barcelona Conference - full of good intentions but with few practical results , and the MEDA programmes are valid instruments through which to express our solidarity with the development of the people of the Mediterranean .
Countries such as Morocco , Algeria or Tunisia must receive special priority treatment where the Union 's foreign and cooperation policies are concerned .
The Commission and the Council must include meetings and ongoing studies of migration flows in their schedules .
As I live in Melilla , a town on the border between the European Union and Morocco , I have witnessed the Spanish Government 's determined effort to make a serious attempt to resolve these problems . The Commission itself has gained first-hand experience of the work under way during its visits to the town of Melilla , and also to Ceuta .
However , resources are needed .
In this area too , an effort must be made to help the European countries responsible for policing and controlling our borders , a task which is often unrewarding indeed .
I should like to leave you with a final thought on illegal immigration .
We should stop talking about the fight against illegal immigration .
Instead , we should talk about the fight against those who traffic in human lives , and about the fight against drug traffickers .
We should not and must not give the impression that we think of the migrants as invaders or criminals , because that is not what they are .
Thank you , Madam President , for allowing me to speak at the end of this debate .
As I am sure you are aware , the Liberal Group has signed the joint motion for a resolution .
We had no problems in doing so but I would , however , like to raise several points that I feel strongly about in relation to the debate on immigrants from the southern Mediterranean .
We must emphasise that it is essential to put a stop to this influx of immigrants . What is more , there is no doubt that the misery that has just been described affects us all deeply ; we have to find a solution to it .
We must also take account of the fact that immigration is due to deep-seated causes that go beyond the purely technical aspect of crossing external borders that has been mentioned today .
I believe that , in this respect , we need to highlight the despair of the immigrants who have no hope of a future in their own country and who therefore believe that the only solution to their sorry fate is to flee to the countries on the other side of the Mediterranean .
We must hope that the authorities in the southern Mediterranean countries will cooperate fully with the Member States of the European Union in implementing measures to control illegal immigration .
We believe , too , that the police treatment of illegal immigrants and the legal provisions relating to them are inadequate .
Community policy must focus more on improving development in the Mediterranean countries and , consequently , the future prospects for their citizens .
Allow me to add one comment in conclusion .
These policies are in direct competition with other policies for which budgetary assistance from the European Union is desired . Therefore , we must highlight the importance of a systematic evaluation of the European Union 's policy concerning the Mediterranean with a view to making this policy more effective , rather than useless .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have followed this discussion and debate with great attention .
I have observed that many Members from the Mediterranean region have spoken here and that is why the issue of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership is an essential part of this debate .
I would like to point out that this partnership includes three areas : political dialogue , the economic issue ( which of course includes socio-economic elements ) , and then the additional question of culture and other related items .
In the European Union of course , we very much try to provide support for countries south of the Mediterranean Sea , i.e. North African countries .
I would point out that we are also trying to conclude free trade agreements with them .
But we should also be aware that , unfortunately , many of these agreements fail because of the quota problem .
I do not want to go into detail here but I think you all know what I mean .
Secondly , of course you are right that improving the economic situation is of fundamental importance when it comes to seizing the problem of migration by the roots .
It is something that we are all aware of and are working on .
In the MEDA programme , especially , there is a lot of money for this purpose .
On the whole , there are enough funds and I would like to emphasise that .
Thirdly , I believe - and I said this in my statement at the beginning - that , on the question of migration , we must tread a new path .
The instruments that the Geneva Convention made available to us are no longer enough today on their own .
We must find a way of deterring criminals , especially traffickers in human beings ( whom I shall discuss later ) , on the one hand , and accepting legitimate humanitarian refugees on the other .
We must also , however , show solidarity , and that is something that I would call for especially as President-in-Office from a country which has done a great deal for refugees , without always being able to count on the solidarity of every Member State in doing so .
This issue was raised by one Honourable Member only in relation to the Mediterranean region , but I would point out that in the case of Bosnia , for instance , we have as you know accepted between 85 000 and 90 000 refugees .
That is almost equivalent to 8-9 % of the Austrian population and is the largest per capita share .
That is why we must call upon solidarity from all other countries as well .
This is the basic idea behind our strategy paper , which does of course still need to be debated and revised , but on which we can ultimately reach a consensus .
I agree with what was said in the debate - it is also true that we should , of course , tell countries that they are not just going to find a paradise here , that we also have unemployment and that they cannot automatically expect to be taken in .
But I would also like to say that exactly the same applies to the central and eastern European countries .
My country harbours the same fears about those countries as Spain probably does about the Maghreb countries .
Finally , I would like to mention the despicable trade of trafficking in human beings .
The Austrian presidency has tabled a draft for a convention on this within the UN General Assembly , partly in cooperation with Italy .
But this question is being worked on very closely in the European Union context too , as we consider it to be important not only with respect to the Mediterranean countries but also for the whole of the central European region .
It is not for nothing that this issue was also a subject at the European conference yesterday , but as I talked about this in detail earlier on , I will not repeat myself .
Thank you , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
EU / Hong Kong
The next item is the report ( A4-0312 / 98 ) by Mr Cushnahan , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication to the Council on the European Union and Hong Kong ( COM ( 97 ) 0171 - C4-0214 / 97 ) .
Madam President , when the handover of Hong Kong took place on 1 July 1997 many fears were expressed as to how the situation would develop .
It was widely acknowledged that if the transition was unsuccessful there would be far-reaching implications for political and economic stability in the region and for relationships between world powers .
Having closely monitored the situation for 15 months , including a visit to Hong Kong to meet and listen to a wide cross section of viewpoints , I believe that the transition was more successful than many of us would have dared to hope .
However , I have a number of concerns in relation to the implementation of democracy , the operation of the rule of law and the protection of human rights , which are detailed in my report and which the European Parliament must continue to observe closely .
The holding of elections on 24 May this year marked an important milestone in the development of democracy .
The relatively high turnout is an emphatic answer to those who would argue that Hong Kong residents are not interested in democracy .
However , this satisfaction is tempered by the fact that the electoral system is less than fully democratic with too much power vested in the hands of the elitist functional constituencies .
Suffice to say that as a consequence 140 000 functional constituency voters elected half the Members of the 60-member LegCo whereas 2.8 million voters were able to elect only 20 members for the geographical constituencies .
It is unacceptable that despite winning a clear majority of the popular vote , pro-democracy parties obtained a mere third of the seats on the Legislative Council .
It would be reassuring for Members of this Parliament , and others elsewhere including in Hong Kong itself who are committed to democratic principles , that a firm and unambiguous timetable was put in place for holding all elections on the basis of universal suffrage .
Additionally , a free and democratic society cannot exist unless the rule of law operates , untrammelled , within its borders .
The rule of law requires that all laws apply to all citizens equally , that they are enforced impartially , that they are justiciable in open courts accessible to all .
The implementation of the rule of law requires that the powers of government , judicial , legislative and executive , be separate from and independent of each other so that each is a check on the others , thereby ensuring that none can abuse its power .
In the unusual , indeed unique , HKSAR constitutional arrangements where autonomy is threatened by surrogacy , the independence of the judiciary assumes extra importance in discharging its role of upholding the rule of law and if necessary drawing attention to any democratic or constitutional deficit which is inhibiting the application of the rule of law to the citizens of Hong Kong .
Any objective observer must worry that a number of recent cases , notably the Xinhua case , the Hong Kong Standard case , the Ma Wai Kwan case and the right of abode case call into question the efficacy of the rule of law in the Hong Kong SAR .
These concerns have been intensified with the passage of the Adaptation of Laws bill .
As regards the protection of human rights , a number of issues perturb me .
The introduction of the concept of national security is a worrying development .
We must ensure that it is not used to curb political dissent as has been done in the People 's Republic of China .
The suspension of labour laws , attempts to undermine the editorial freedom of the press and the implications of the introduction of laws under Article 23 of the Basic Law are all warning signs confirming the need to monitor the situation and to guarantee that there is no erosion of fundamental human rights and freedoms .
The European Union has a very important role to play in the evolution of Hong Kong .
The EU must fully support by deed and action the continuation of Hong Kong 's international autonomy in economic and trade matters .
We must pursue cooperation at all international levels , particularly as a partner in the WTO .
We must strengthen existing links and establish new ones and it is of fundamental and symbolic importance that all Member States should grant free access to HKSAR and BNO passport holders .
Our strategy must at all times consistently and continuously underpin the ' one country , two systems ' concept .
I hope the Commissioner , who I am glad to see here for this debate , will take on board the recommendations included in this report when he produces his own annual report .
I look forward to receiving that report and our committee will respond in due course .
Finally , I would like to thank all those who contributed to the drafting of this report .
I welcome the cooperation from all political viewpoints on the committee .
Of most significant importance were the views I received from within Hong Kong itself .
I hope we have advanced the debate .
I hope this is a balanced report and I hope it charts the way forward .
Madam President , it is customary on these occasions to congratulate the rapporteur on his work .
What is perhaps less customary is the fact that I actually mean it when I congratulate the rapporteur on his work .
This is a good , thoughtful and thorough report .
I would particularly like to thank the rapporteur on the way he went about producing his report and the cooperation he showed with others in the committee .
The report has taken on board many of the observations we made in discussion in committee .
That has meant that we have managed to keep amendments to the minimum and thereby kept the cohesion of this report .
I think that is important .
I should like to thank him for that .
This report emphasises the importance of Hong Kong to the European Union and indeed to the global economic system , as we have seen in the last few weeks .
But our main message has got to be , quite frankly , that we have to recognise that the hand-over of power has gone very well .
The worst fears of many people , expressed in this Chamber , have not been realised .
The idea of ' one country , two systems ' appears to work .
There has been political , press and religious freedom .
There has not been widespread corruption as was feared .
Indeed the high quality of the Hong Kong civil service continues to shine through .
Of course there are areas of concern and Mr Cushnahan has outlined some of them .
There have been questions about political influence being used for appointments to statutory advisory bodies such as the housing authority .
That is an area that needs to be watched .
There were rumours that Chinese security advisors were to be installed in the Chief Executive 's office .
I am glad to see that was denied by the government .
There was the attack on Radio Television Hong Kong by a member of the Chinese Peoples ' Political Consultative Conference .
While the Chief Executive , Tung Chee-hwa was somewhat dubious in his response , President Jiang Zemin was very clear in condemning any influence in Hong Kong affairs .
I am very glad to see also that the new guidelines that will be introduced for Radio Television Hong Kong will be based on those applying to the BBC and other international broadcasters , thus helping guarantee its neutrality .
Our main concern was always about the existence of the provisional legislature .
We must recognise the positive step forward reflected by the elections to the Legislative Council .
We should celebrate the high turn-out in those elections and the fair way in which they were conducted , although we should still register our concern at the severe reduction of the franchise in the functional constituencies and the possibilities for abuse of corporate voting in the functional constituencies through the registration of shell companies .
We therefore look forward to full democracy in Hong Kong as soon as possible .
There have been concerns about some of the decisions taken in the Hong Kong courts , which Mr Cushnahan describes in detail in his report .
One particular issue is the question of the immunity of state bodies from prosecution and whether this applies to the New China News Agency .
That worry has been accentuated by the case of Emily Lau , who has been involved in dispute for nearly 12 months with the New China News Agency .
The precise status of the New China News Agency should be clarified as a matter of priority .
The rule of law , as Mr Cushnahan has said , is crucial to the future of Hong Kong .
One further area which will need to be watched carefully is the need for the new Legislative Council to pass legislation on issues such as subversion and treason under Article 23 of the Basic Law .
How Hong Kong handles that will be a key to the continuing success of ' one country , two systems ' .
The best sign of the success of ' one country , two systems ' has been that Hong Kong has been able , so far , to weather the Asian crisis , and to do so without interference from China , but with support from China .
I would be interested to hear Commissioner Brittan 's observations on that aspect .
Clearly Hong Kong has to have autonomy in its own economic affairs but it also has to have the support of China .
Finally , I would endorse Mr Cushnahan 's remarks about granting visa-free access to residents of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region .
I believe this would be an important step forward in developing greater commercial ties between the European Union and Hong Kong .
In conclusion , I would say so far so good ; in fact , better than we had hoped for .
Let us hope that we can continue to work closely with the authorities of Hong Kong to develop a better future for the residents of Hong Kong and to develop Hong Kong 's important status as a keystone in the Asian economy .
Madam President , this high-quality report from Mr Cushnahan should serve to enhance the profile of the European Parliament .
The background information provided in part B is illuminating and offers a sound basis for the proposal for a resolution .
Hong Kong 's economy grew rapidly thanks to extensive economic freedom , a culture of individual enterprise , generalised private saving and free trade .
Per capita GNP is now higher than in some EU countries .
Hong Kong 's success story demonstrated early on the advantages of a market economy system over old-style socialist economic planning .
The country came more and more to be seen as a role model by developing countries fighting their way out of poverty - a factor which certainly contributed towards the spirit of economic reform in China .
In the run-up to the handover to China , there were many who felt that , ideologically , Hong Kong was taking over China .
Be that as it may , few would dispute that China has - so far at least - broadly respected the agreement it entered into regarding Hong Kong . Economic freedoms ultimately form the basis for freedom in the wider sense and the system guaranteeing those freedoms has remained intact .
As Mr Cushnahan says , a number of worrying things have nonetheless been happening recently .
Elements of the democratic structures that were built up have been undermined .
This Parliament and the European Union as a whole must keep a watchful eye on developments .
By adopting this resolution , we will be putting down a marker in that regard .
We need also to take steps in our own countries to alleviate the situation , for example through generous visa policies and a commitment not to introduce trade restrictions .
For many years , Hong Kong was a refuge for large numbers of people fleeing repression and dictatorship .
Let us use our influence to maintain it as a home for freedom in the future .
Madam President , the Commission communication is called ' Beyond 1997 ' .
Well , we are beyond 1997 and the sky has not fallen in .
I organised a visit of MEPs to Hong Kong at the time of the elections to the new LegCo in May of this year .
It was the fourth such visit in four years .
We concluded that the elections were free and fair , that there is no very tangible change in Hong Kong and that by and large the citizens continue to enjoy the freedoms to which they have become accustomed in recent years .
Hong Kong retains economic autonomy too : its high-rise economy has withstood the pressure of the financial turmoil from Typhoon Thailand .
The actions of the Hong Kong monetary authority may not have pleased classical economists , but their response bore the hallmark ' made in Hong Kong ' and not ' made in China ' .
Yet , as this excellent report shows , it is important not to be naive .
A democratically elected Parliament has been abolished and replaced by a new Legislative Council rigged in favour of Beijing and against the free will of the Hong Kong people .
A sometimes supine judiciary , and suspicions of self-censorship , give grounds for concern .
There has been a gradual but consistent repeal of human rights laws and undermining of institutions essential to their protection .
The new police guidelines on demonstrations , issued a week ago , are just the latest example of this .
Hong Kong people must speak out against every potential abuse , and we must support them in so doing , not just by giving them visa-free entry to the European Union but by supporting education in democracy in Hong Kong .
There is an unseemly haste in Europe 's new approach to China .
Tony Blair , as the Prime Minister of a Member State , is visiting China this week and almost ignoring human rights .
President Santer must not show the same myopia when he visits Hong Kong for the Commission next month .
We live in a time replete with political possibility .
If we are to feel our way towards a new relationship with China , let us welcome China 's signature on Monday of the ICCPR ; but we shall know them also by their actions .
Our watchword must be vigilance .
Madam President , we have all been surprised to see that Hong Kong has remained one of the most free and open markets in the world since the UK handover .
Last week one of Hong Kong 's most powerful men , Sir Donald Chang , visited my country , and while in The Hague gave a further illustration of how Hong Kong , as a special administrative region in China , is determined to maintain transparency and the strict application of the laws of the market .
Last month the authorities did , admittedly , intervene in the share markets to prevent speculation - successfully , according to reports I have read - but in my view this was a one-off measure .
There was just one thing that Sir Donald Chang was seriously concerned about , and that was the extremely slow and ineffective measures that Japan is taking to restore order in the Asian crisis and in the crisis at home .
Finally , it would be extremely useful to hear how the EU bureau has expanded its activities and in particular to receive a report on its human rights monitoring .
I have talked to colleagues who know Hong Kong better than I do , and they are extremely uneasy .
I think we should ask for a report as soon as possible .
Lastly , I congratulate Mr Cushnahan on his report , which has the support of my group .
Madam President , the historic and decisive fact about the issue we are debating is that after 100 years of forced British colonialism , Hong Kong has rejoined and is an inseparable part of the vast nation of China .
Whatever happens from this point on in that province of China cannot but be influenced in one way or another by that historic fact .
While that is the situation , I fear that Mr Cushnahan 's report , in the ten recitals and 19 paragraphs of its motion for a resolution , is governed and permeated by suspicion and mistrust , and not , I would say , by good faith in what is happening .
There is something wrong with everything , everything must be regarded defensively and with doubts .
He goes so far as to say : elections for the legislative body are all very well , but they are suspect , undemocratic , because the electoral system is not democratic .
Mr Cushnahan , what kind of electoral system is there in your country ?
In my own ?
In all the European countries ?
Are we happy with those systems ?
Are they supremely democratic or are they anti-democratic ?
But beyond that , Madam President , I fear that this report wishes to appoint the European Parliament , the European Union as a joint detective agency , inquiring into what is going on and what must happen in Hong Kong as if it were populated by Belgians , Germans , Englishmen , Greeks and other Europeans .
But Hong Kong is populated by Chinese , and what goes on there is mainly if not exclusively their business .
There is even a naive view that what happens in Hong Kong in one way or another may become a springboard for changes all over the vastness of China .
That is naive and indeed suspect , because it shows that all the concern about what is happening in Hong Kong is just viewed as a springboard , a tool for us to meddle in China 's internal affairs and bring about changes which suit our own purposes .
That is not the right attitude , it does not help relations between the European Union and China ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , the most important message emerging from Mr Cushnahan 's excellent report is that China has fundamentally respected the agreements it entered into on Hong Kong . We find that this former British colony de facto enjoys a greater degree of democracy today than it did during a large portion of its time under British sovereignty .
This confirms the impression I received when the China delegation visited Hong Kong in June this year .
I am not saying that there are no problems .
Reference has been made to Article 23 of the Basic Law , which could be used as a tool for infringing democratic freedoms .
This is a point that requires careful monitoring . The ILO is currently looking at trade union rights , which for me are of vital importance .
We must draw attention to any problems in that area .
Lastly , let us not forget that Hong Kong is an integral part of China . Developments in Chinese policy will affect the former colony more than ever before .
The EU must not start pushing reform in a way that will trigger mass unemployment in China . We do not want to see Russian-style social chaos overtaking the country .
That would be disastrous and put a halt to any form of democracy . Hong Kong 's relatively positive position would also be threatened .
Madam President , up until now China has , at least formally , fully honoured the commitments it had made regarding Hong Kong . We should be pleased about that .
However , the establishment of a form of parliament such as exists in democratic countries is not likely to happen before 2008 .
Universal suffrage for the election of all of the citizens ' representatives will not come into effect for another 10 years .
We must be extremely vigilant over these 10 years and show great solidarity with the democratic forces at work in that country .
The public authorities have until now maintained Hong Kong 's reputation as an open and incorrupt business centre , as Mr Cushnahan very rightly pointed out .
But this seemingly exemplary attitude , this openness to the world must be supported and encouraged in an environment which is far from favourable .
We must stress in passing that it is important to grant entry to those holding a passport from the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region without requiring a visa , just as the citizens of the European Union have access to Hong Kong without a visa .
The high volume of trade and movement of people , ideas , capital and goods is of vital importance for Hong Kong .
We must be committed , active and supportive in these areas .
It is not only the wellbeing of this advanced region of China that is at stake , but also our own wellbeing .
Madam President , the Asian , and particularly the Chinese , economic area holds immense potential for the European Union .
Without a doubt , Hong Kong plays a key political as well as economic role as regards links with the region .
That is why good relations with the government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region are of great importance for the European economy .
The EU must undertake every necessary effort to foster appropriate contacts , and above all to speak out against the alarming anti-democratic tendencies cited in the report , and the lack of constitutionality which has been justifiably criticised .
Only a democratic order based on the rule of law can be regarded as the guarantor of a permanently independent Hong Kong economy .
On the issue of visa-free access to the Schengen area , I cannot agree with the rapporteur 's current request for this to be given to all HKSAR and BNO passport holders .
In my opinion , this question should be treated separately , as the Commission has suggested .
Madam President , we all have good reasons for following developments in Hong Kong - which are examined in great detail by the rapporteur , whom I congratulate - for itself , for its inhabitants , and for what it can mean for a country as important as China .
In my own case , being Portuguese , the situation is of particular interest given its inevitable implications for the integration process for Macau .
That will take place , a quarter of a century after the Portuguese revolution of 25 April 1974 , under conditions that are much more favourable from every point of view .
On the one hand , it has been possible over these years to provide the territory with infrastructure and services which have been particularly important for its development and for the quality of life of its population , including the airport , the university , the new port , the waste processing plant , etcetera .
Moreover , and of particular significance , the Legislative Assembly has been approving the territory 's own legislation , in complete freedom and in accordance with universal values that are also the values of its population .
Having already had an identity of its own - Macau is a member of the World Trade Organisation and has a cooperation agreement with the European Union - we have every interest in its continuation in the future .
But over and above our own interests and those of Macau , we consider that the interests of China are at stake here , which has in Macau an area of openness and development of which it may be proud .
It is important , therefore , that the Commission - and for that reason , I address the Commissioner - should give Macau a higher profile through its representation in Hong Kong or , preferably , by opening a representation in Macau , whose administration , we are sure , would not fail to offer whatever support was needed .
Madam President , I am one of those who have visited Hong Kong since the transfer .
Things have developed very differently from what we expected just over a year ago .
At the time , the thinking was that in economic terms maybe things would be fine in Hong Kong , but that in political terms things would go very badly .
As my colleague Mr Watson and many others have said , we must remain very vigilant .
That is the usefulness of this report on the political side .
In practical terms one must acknowledge that in the Hong Kong situation , overall , the development of - albeit a limited - democracy has been scrupulously observed .
At the present time the concern is rather with economic developments taking place in that part of the world .
If things go wrong economically they will certainly have a negative political impact .
I should like to ask the Commission one specific question , touching also on the visa issue .
Of course we should not only be concerned about visas .
That is quite true .
Nevertheless it is one of the few specific things where Europe as a whole can do something more .
I am still concerned about this , particularly when I hear some speakers say that the visa question is something we do not take seriously , and that only eight countries admit visa-holders to Europe .
The Commission can play a role because Schengen will be incorporated in the Treaty of the European Union .
I hope that the Commission will say that it will take an initiative on this point .
This is the kind of concrete solidarity which we must maintain .
I hope that with next year 's report we can say that things are better than they are at the present time .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , may I too welcome Mr Cushnahan 's admirable report and the motion for a resolution .
I would like to comment on some of the key points .



Firstly , a number of speakers , of whom Mr Titley was one and Mr Watson another , also Mr Gahrton and most recently Mr Brinkhorst , have commented generally on the nature of the handover and on the broad adherence by the Chinese authorities to their political commitments .
I would welcome those statements and I entirely agree with what has been said .
I really want to underline the remarkable nature of what has occurred because it is true to say that the introduction of the one country / two systems arrangement is unique , and to introduce it as successfully as has been done is a remarkable achievement ; tribute is due both to Hong Kong and to China itself for that fact .
Nonetheless , a number of critical points have been made and Mr Brinkhorst summed it up by saying that we must continue to be vigilant .
And so we shall be .
The resolution calls for the acceleration of the introduction of universal suffrage .
In his visit to Brussels last February the Chief Executive Tung Chee-hwa said : ' It is up to us , the people of Hong Kong , to decide for ourselves the further development of the democratic process with the ultimate aim of universal suffrage ' .
I can assure you that the Commission will continue to pay close attention to the development of democracy in Hong Kong .
During my own last visit to Hong Kong I stated publicly that Hong Kong would earn credit at little cost by announcing as early as possible that it intends to introduce universal suffrage by a reasonable and specified date in the future .
We should recognize , however , Hong Kong 's efforts so far , as Mr Cushnahan has done , while keeping up the pressure for a clear timetable to full democracy , as he urges us to do , and as Mr Pradier has also urged us to do .
There are signs that the financial crisis to which Mr Brinkhorst referred is already emboldening those calling for more democracy in Hong Kong .
I can assure you that is a point on which President Santer and I will not be silent when we visit Hong Kong at the beginning of November .
Referring to the visa question , the European Parliament resolution urges Member States to grant visa-free entry to SAR passport holders , and Mr Burenstam Linder has drawn attention to that .
While the Commission has no direct responsibility over EU visa policy , which is still intergovernmental until a common visa list is introduced under the Amsterdam Treaty , we strongly support Hong Kong 's efforts to secure visa access .
That is one key way in which the European Union can support Hong Kong 's economic autonomy and reinforce the one country / two systems concept .
In fact - and Mr Brinkhorst has perhaps been a shade too generous to the Member States in his statement of the position - it is the case that the eight referred to admit visa-free only BNO passport holders , but there are only two Member States that allow visa-free SAR passport holders , who are of course in the majority .
It is equally important that Hong Kong should convince European countries that its immigration , policing and customs procedures are efficient and reliable .
We have urged them to run special visitors ' programmes for European national officials with that in mind .
Such programmes now exist and I hope they will help to persuade those Member States who have yet to be persuaded of the merits of visa-free entry for SAR passport holders .
With regard to the WTO , the EP resolution advocates close cooperation between the European Union and Hong Kong within the WTO , and I would agree with what Mr Porto said about applying that to Macao as well .
The Commission is convinced that Hong Kong 's liberal economy , not least its open trading regime , underpinned by WTO membership , will act as an example and a spur to continued economic reform in China , notwithstanding the current problems related to the Asian financial crisis .
Within the WTO there is good cooperation between the European Union and Hong Kong .
Hong Kong is one of the staunchest supporters of our initiative to launch a new millennium round , and the Commission regularly discusses Beijing 's WTO membership bid with Hong Kong .
Hong Kong of course supports it , and provides a unique example to China of the benefits of WTO membership .
The resolution also calls for wider cooperation in order to strengthen EU-Hong Kong relations and reinforce Hong Kong autonomy .
We believe that stronger bilateral ties are vital to the underpinning of the one country / two systems concept .
We are on the verge of concluding a customs cooperation agreement with Hong Kong which I hope President Santer will be able to initial when in Hong Kong , while also exploring the possibility of more ambitious agreements .
We need to take account of the delicate division of responsibilities between Hong Kong and Beijing in the foreign relations field but we need , nonetheless , to explore what Hong Kong can do to the maximum possible extent .
The European Union continues to pursue deeper bilateral relations in other areas , notably by encouraging business-to-business links ; the first plenary session of the EU-Hong Kong Business Committee took place last year in Brussels , and the second will take place in Hong Kong during our visit there at the beginning of November .
The motion calls on the Commission to monitor the autonomy and financial stability of the Hong Kong market .
The Commission is monitoring the financial and economic situation from our office in Hong Kong , but also by means of frequent visits from officials in the SAR and through visits of high-ranking officials to Brussels .
That monitoring will be reflected in our first annual report on Hong Kong which we will be publishing shortly .
Mr Titley is right , in my view , to say that Hong Kong 's problems have been formidable but nonetheless the crisis has been weathered there very much better than in many other countries in the region , and I would agree wholeheartedly with what Mr Burenstam Linder has said about the fact that it is liberal economic policies which have brought about that situation , for all the difficulties that Hong Kong is currently undergoing .
During the year Hong Kong has acted to increase liquidity , for example by cutting the savings tax and by expanding its repo market .
Lately it has resorted to more drastic measures , to curb speculation by traders seeking to depress the currency in order to hike up interest rates and benefit from the resulting fall in share prices .
The measures which were referred to by Mrs van Bladel are three-fold in character : a decision to buy shares in the stock market which boosted the share index by 19 % over two weeks ; further measures to strengthen the currency board , increase liquidity and calm the volatility of inter-bank interest rates ; and , thirdly , measures to improve transparency and enforce greater discipline on the stock market .
We are analysing those measures closely and will comment on them in our first annual report .
Parliament 's resolution declares that the EC office in Hong Kong must be able to play a significant role in the development of EU-China relations and suggests that staff resources should be increased .
I entirely agree with Mrs van Bladel that an effective and well-staffed EU Office in Hong Kong is essential , and staff deployments have recently been made to strengthen the resources of the office .
Finally , the EP resolution welcomes our intention to produce annual reports ; we are now finalizing the first one and hope to transmit it to the Council and Parliament by the end of October .
As I mentioned , President Santer and I will be visiting Hong Kong at the beginning of November , so the publication of our report will be timely .
It will look closely at the full range of relevant economic , political , judicial and other issues that have characterised Hong Kong life during the first year of the SAR .
Needless to say , we will take account of , and greatly benefit from , the observations and recommendations made in Parliament 's reports and resolutions , and particularly Mr Cushnahan 's excellent report and the points made during this debate .
Thank you for that very comprehensive reply , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0483 / 98 ) .
I should like to welcome Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , President-in-Office of the Council .
Question No 1 by Patricia McKenna ( H-0832 / 98 )
Subject : Mistreatment of journalists in UK
Is the Council aware that the UK police are mistreating members of the National Union of Journalists , especially freelance members , by not recognising their press cards , arresting them for trespass or obstruction or even under the Harassment Act ( intended for preventing ' stalking ' ) , assaulting them , holding them until their deadlines have passed , preventing them from taking pictures , confiscating their photographs with court orders and erasing their video material , as well as restricting their public access during protests ?
Is the Council further aware that , although written police guidelines do exist for relations with the press , journalists have not been allowed to see them ?
Do such activities breach the Treaties , including the Treaty of Amsterdam , in particular the articles relating to Justice and Home Affairs , for which the Council is largely responsible ?
If it wishes to be taken seriously outside the EU on such matters , will the Council instruct the Commission to ensure that journalists may operate freely within the EU before pursuing that issue elsewhere ?
Mr President , may I say the following in response to the Honourable Member 's question : the ruthless treatment and the harassment of freelance journalists is a matter which unfortunately does not fall within the Council 's remit .
I can therefore tell Mrs McKenna that the Council has not discussed this matter at any time .
Upholding public order in the sovereign territory of a Member State is actually , as I should also point out at this time , the sole responsibility of the police authorities of the country concerned .
Also , I should stress that respect for human rights and democratic freedoms , and also of course the preservation of press freedom , form the cornerstone of the entire construction of Europe , of that there is no doubt .
It is true that the Council cannot rule out occasional shortcomings at local level . However , it is truly convinced that in their actions the governments of Member States will always be guided by the basic principles mentioned above , principles without which the Community would have no future .
I just wish to point out to the President-in-Office that there is written and video evidence concerning this harassment .
When you say that you cannot prevent occasional shortcomings as regards freedom of the press , you have to ensure that it is prevented because Article F of the Maastricht Treaty states that the European Union shall respect the European Convention on Human Rights .
This is an abuse of that Convention .
These journalists were covering social justice and environmental issues .
They have been harassed by the police , their offices and homes have been raided , equipment has been confiscated and the pictures they have taken at protests have been used against protesters in evidence .
This is a gross abuse of the freedom of the press and of the freedom to report what is going on .
If you allow it to happen in one Member State , it is the thin end of the wedge : it is going to happen in other Member States as well .
There is an onus on the European Union , if it adheres to the EU Treaties and respects the European Convention on Human Rights , to do something .
It is not enough to say that sometimes , as the President-in-Office said , the Council cannot prevent occasional shortcomings .
Perhaps you cannot prevent what has happened , but you can ensure that it does not happen again and that this will not be a signal to other Member States to follow suit , because freedom of the press is an extremely important aspect of democracy .
Mr President , Mrs McKenna , our remit is clearly laid defined . I have just explained - and I would like to stress this once again - that the Council is not authorised to say anything about the conduct of police forces as regards measures to uphold public order in the sovereign territory of a given Member State .
I would emphasise again , if it is necessary to do so , that only the competent authorities of the individual state have the power to judge police behaviour in that Member State .
Mrs McKenna 's question would therefore probably meet with a greater reaction if it were to be asked in the UK House of Commons .
However , there is something I can add : there is the Council of Europe and the European Convention on Human Rights , and complaints can also be made to the European Commission of Human Rights .
Mr President , I listened to the first answer given by the President-in-Office and to the one she has just given .
I am struck by the fact that her answers are inspired by the ' Pontius Pilate ' tactic , whereas it was pointed out to the President-in-Office that even the Treaties provide for some kind of intervention by the Council .
But I would like to put a supplementary question .
Would she answer in the same way if such incidents of flagrant violation of the freedom of the press were to happen in Hong Kong , for example , which we were debating a little while ago ?
The report refers to such matters and we considered that we were fully competent to intervene , debate and criticise , and the Commissioner praised those points .
So how can we be Pontius Pilate in one case , while in the other we jump in with both feet , as it were , into the internal affairs of a country ?
I should like the President-in-Office to explain her view , and perhaps she could forgive me for my attitude , but such occurrences and such answers are very vexing .
Mr President , Mr Ephremidis , I have to tell you once again that we only have certain powers .
The Council is indeed responsible for external relations and that is why it can talk about a lack of press freedom in a third country .
It is not responsible , however , for internal matters , such as the conduct of police forces in a Member State .
I can only repeat the answer that I gave a short while ago to Mrs McKenna .
Question No 2 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0836 / 98 )
Subject : Funding of the Almendralejo-Oviedo gas pipeline
What level of funding have the EU institutions provided for the construction of the gas pipeline which is to go from Almendralejo ( Extremadura ) to Oviedo , in Spain as part of the programme for the distribution of natural gas in that Member State ?
Mr President , Mr Camisón Asensio , the gas pipeline that the Honourable Member refers to is part of Project E4 listed in Decision No 1254 / 96 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 1996 on a series of guidelines concerning trans-European networks in the energy sector .
E4 is part of the ' Introduction of natural gas into new regions ' section , and deals with the development of gas networks in the regions of Galicia , Extremadura , Andalusia , the south of Valencia and Murcia , and also with a liquefied natural gas facility in Galicia .

In accordance with Article 6 ( 2 ) of this decision , following an opinion from the committee provided for in Article 9 of the Decision of 11 July 1998 , the Commission laid down the specifications for projects of common interest cited in Decision No 1254 / 96 / EC , so that financing could be provided .
In the Decision of 14 May 1998 for the years 1997 and 1998 , the Commission made a sum of ECU 103.16 million available from the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) to support the entire Western Gas Pipeline project , of which this pipeline is a part .
In this case , the President-in-Office of the Council has not responded like Pilate .
In fact , she has replied very succinctly , and I am very grateful for the information she has provided .
This gas pipeline is of great socio-economic importance .
We should not forget that this is a corridor , all covered by Objective 1 of the Structural Funds , and with hidden potential for development which has to be exploited .
However , I do have some supplementary questions .
Does the programme outlined to us complement the Interreg IIB Community initiative concerning trans-European energy networks ?
Further , does it also complement the Straits of Gibraltar - Córdoba gas pipeline , through which Spain receives natural gas from the Maghreb ?
Finally , have these programmes allowed for the current tendency towards a reduction in the consumption of natural gas , evident in many Member States of the European Union ?
In other words , had the Council foreseen this tendency towards reduction ?
Mr President , Mr Camisón Asensio , these are questions of detail that you are putting to the Council .
In view of the explanations already given , I would refer you to the Commission , which will provide you with more precise information on exact amounts and specific questions , especially as to whether or not this also falls under INTERREG .
I cannot , unfortunately , provide any oral information on this but if you wish , I would be happy to answer in writing .
Question No 3 by Roy Perry , which has been taken over by Mrs De Esteban Martín ( H-0838 / 98 )
Subject : Petitions
Can the representative of the Council of Ministers indicate how many times representatives of the Council have attended meetings of the Committee on Petitions of the European Parliament ( either since the start of the year or the start of the Austrian Presidency ) and what additional procedures the Council has available to monitor petitions to Parliament , especially as frequent allegations are made concerning the failure of Member States to honour their Treaty obligations ?
Mr President , in response to Mr Perry 's very interesting question on petitions , I should stress that the Council regularly takes note of Parliament resolutions , including those concerning the right of petition .
As far as possible failures on the part of Member States to comply with the Community 's legal provisions are concerned , let me refer you also to Article 155 of the Treaty , which says that one of the duties of the Commission is to ' ensure that the provisions of this Treaty and the measures taken by the institutions pursuant thereto are applied . '
Madam President-in Office of the Council , I appreciate your reply , but I am sorry to say that I am not happy with it .
The question was on measures to be adopted by the Council and , in particular , we queried whether the Austrian Presidency has any plans to ensure that the Council will indeed be present at meetings of the Committee on Petitions .
As you are aware , the right to petition is a fundamental right of European Union citizens . Unfortunately , it is frequently the case that the Member States fail to comply with many Community rules , and no proper mechanisms exist for the Member States to reply in an appropriate way to such justifiable petitions from Community citizens .
I would therefore be grateful , Madam President-in-Office , if you could tell me whether arrangements are being made to ensure that the Council will be present at meetings of the Committee on Petitions , and when this might happen .
Mr President , Mrs De Esteban Martin , in replying to this supplementary question , I cannot really add anything of substance to what I said a moment ago , namely that the Council takes formal note of all the resolutions approved by Parliament .
In addition , I can say that in a case where the responsibilities in question are the Council 's own ( something that is purely hypothetical , as I said ) , then it would carry out a careful analysis of each element of the dossier , and take appropriate measures if necessary .
Of course , the Council is very concerned with the application of the provisions of the Treaty and the secondary legislation .
However , in this matter , I would refer the Honourable Member to the division of powers between the different institutions established in the Treaty , according to which it is primarily the Commission , and where necessary the Court of Justice , that ensures that Member States are correctly applying Community law . That issue has already been addressed in this case .
I am a very experienced and active member of the Committee on Petitions .
In the past , a few years ago , an official from the Council used to attend the committee regularly .
This lady just took notes , which was not very satisfactory , but it was better than nothing .
In the past few years , all we have had is an occasional visit from a representative of the Council , sometimes when the Ombudsman was present to give a report to the committee - which is welcome - but very rarely when there was a matter of particular concern to one of the Member States .
Most of Parliament 's committees are regularly attended by representatives of the Council .
We are not talking about ministers but of a civil servant from the representation of the government holding the presidency at that particular time .
Could the same apply for the Committee on Petitions so that we can have dialogue between the Council and the members of that committee , as happens in other committees of Parliament ?
That will help our petitioners and it will be in accord with the Treaty of European Union and the rights of the citizen under that Treaty .
Mr Newman , thank you for that comment , we shall ask the Council Secretariat to look into it .
I shall talk to Secretary-General Trumpf about this , and if it is as you say , then a solution can certainly be found .
That is very kind of you .
Question No 4 by Olivier Dupuis ( H-0849 / 98 )
Subject : Results of the Dayton agreements
According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( UNHCR ) , when the Dayton agreements were signed in December 1995 , more than 1 million Bosnians were displaced within the territory of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina , while nearly 1 million were refugees in third countries .
Moreover , again according to the UNHCR , only 400 000 of these roughly 2 million refugees and displaced persons have returned to date to their place of origin .
Does the Council not consider that , nearly three years after the signature of the Dayton agreements , the fact that only 20 % of all the refugees and displaced persons have been able to return to their place of origin means that the Dayton agreements have essentially failed , confirming , de facto , the project for ethnic partition that was conceived , wanted , planned and implemented by the regime in Belgrade - a project which , we should remember , entailed war crimes , crimes against humanity and genocidal crimes which are now known throughout the international community ?
Mr President , the Council agrees with Mr Dupuis that far fewer refugees have returned than the international community had been expecting for 1998 .
That is true .
The return of refugees constitutes one of the main challenges facing the international community in the implementation of the Dayton / Paris Peace Agreements .
It has never been problem-free , and the fact that most refugees who have not yet returned must go back to areas in which they will form a minority complicates the situation still further .
Many refugees are disinclined to return to Bosnia , or at least to their original homes and villages , often even where they will be part of the majority .
Apart from the obvious political constraints , other key factors are the absence of a sense of personal safety , and the availability of jobs and housing .
Consequently , the strategy of the international community has been aiming at the longer term , and its most important task consists of improving the local security situation , such as by improving the police service , and of creating a sustainable improvement in economic prospects , thus encouraging refugees to return to their country for good .
The Council will never accept the ethnic partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
It entirely supports the ideals envisioned by the Peace Agreement of pluralism and multi-ethnicity as the key to full democratisation and lasting peace .
The Council would like to reaffirm the fundamental right established in the Peace Agreement of all refugees and displaced persons freely to return to their homes of origin .
It continues to support fully the use of the High Representative 's authority to remove any public official who infringes this right and attempts to prevent refugees from returning .
The state of progress in Bosnia will be measured in October , when the EU Commission carries out its regular six-monthly review of compliance with the criteria laid down in the EU 's regional approach , which was established in April 1997 for all countries in the western Balkans region .
At the last review in April , the Commission ruled out establishing cooperation agreements with Bosnia , Croatia , and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , citing overall concerns on democratic reforms , respect for human rights and minorities , and the slowness in helping refugees return .
Madam President-in-Office , you stated that the Council would never recognise the partition of Bosnia .
We have heard so many false promises and repudiations from the Council that it may be rather risky to say such a thing .
But on the subject of the refugees , your comments are more like wishful thinking than an actual policy .
In fact , given that it is now three years since the Dayton agreement was signed , I think that we should be starting to learn our first lessons from the situation .
We should also ask ourselves what exactly Bosnia is today .
It is certainly not a state in any real sense of the word .
Mr President , Mr Dupuis , I believe that there is one thing in particular that you can say about Bosnia-Herzegovina , and this is that if the international community had wanted to break its promises there , as you suggest , then it would certainly not have sent multinational troops , and would not have such a heavy commitment there to this day .
It is precisely because we want to implement the Dayton Agreement that we have all agreed on involvement and it will continue .
For the first time since the Dayton Peace Agreement was signed , moderate parties in favour of the Dayton Agreement are in control of the legislative branches in both territorial areas and at all national levels of government .
For the first time the whole of the State Executive was able to support the Peace Agreement .
Although the result of the presidential elections in the Republika Srpska does constitute a symbolic defeat , it is compensated for by the substantial gains for parties supporting Dayton at all levels of government .
It remains to be seen over the next few weeks whether the Sloga coalition in the Republika Srpska will be able to retain control of the Parliament and whether they will still be putting the prime minister forward .
As for the Croats , the new member of the State Executive , Antejelavic , is going to organise a meeting of the party in October in order to reform the HDZ .
The EU has the following thoughts on these developments . Firstly , measures need to be taken to guarantee the coherence of the Sloga coalition .
Secondly , the Republika Srpska should be shielded from the effects of the Kosovo crisis .
Thirdly , at the HDZ party conference , more specific reforms should be decided upon .
Fourthly , the preparations for the local elections in 1999 should be taken in hand . Finally the integrity and transparency of the financial conduct of elected bodies should be ensured .
These considerations should enable us to be prepared when we go into the next Peace Implementation Conference in December in Madrid , where we will continue to advocate a multi-ethnic , pluralistic Bosnia .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , I have to be honest with you - I have one specific problem with the entire Dayton Agreement , and it is that one of the parties to it is Mr Milosevic .
In the course of the last few years we have seen that he is not at all willing to keep to any part of the agreement .
There has been very minor progress in a few areas .
The greatest advances by far which , while not being enough , at least represent progress have come from the Croats . They have set up a consulate in Banja Luka and made rapid changes to the law , especially as far as the right of abode of certain persons in Krajina and West Slavonia is concerned .
Big concessions have been made on the Croat side .
But basically , as long as the other party is Milosevic - and we are seeing at the moment what is happening in Kosovo - I have to say honestly that the Dayton Agreements have no real value , aside from the symbolic . We should consider the possibility of deferring certain elements of the agreement as long as he is one of the parties to it .
Mr President , Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , there are a good number of areas in which the Dayton Agreements have certainly brought advantages .
The most important is probably that , through the Agreement , we have managed for the first time to consolidate the ceasefire and give the different parties the chance to live with one another again .
But of course not everything is perfect , particularly as far as Milosevic is concerned , and we are aware of that .
I just think that there were hardly any other alternatives under the circumstances . To suspend the Dayton Agreements now is , to my mind , not a good alternative either .
The civil society and democracy must be strengthened .
For that , I think that both the media and the electoral system need to be reformed and , as you know , there is a whole series of projects which are designed to do just that .
The continuation of the economic reforms is another reason why Bosnia and Herzegovina should still receive support from the international community .
As for the constitutional state , the creation of an independent multi-ethnic judiciary , a professional multi-ethnic police force , and resistance to all forms of parallel structure are also prerequisites for a democratic Bosnia and Herzegovina , and here I think that the international community has achieved something in the last few years .
I do not say everything , and I do not say that the situation there could not be improved a great deal in a few years time , but I think that we must continue the fight to strengthen the joint institutions and reform the Council of Ministers , and to set up an authority to monitor the revenue of the state and of the territorial units .
Mr President , I would like to ask the President-in-Office if she would agree with me that the small number of refugees returning may surely also be put down to the fact that the host countries have offered them a new home , in a truly generous and remarkably humane manner .
I know that in Austria , many Bosnian refugees have found housing , work , and integration into society , and that is also another reason why they do not want to go back home .
Mr President , Mrs Flemming , of course it is true that some countries , like Austria for instance , have taken in refugees , not only from Bosnia , but also elsewhere , and have done so quite generously .
Today , in the discussion on migrants , I told you that 85 000 to 90 000 have been admitted to Austria .
That is equivalent to 8-9 % of the Austrian population .
Nevertheless , our goal must be to return the refugees as far as possible .
It is their home and they must rebuild their own country .
Of course , the return depends on how fast we are able to build up the economy there , so that they can find work , and how quickly we can create security so that they have some guarantees when they go back to their country .
Question No 5 by José Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra ( H-0853 / 98 )
Subject : US-Cuba relations
Is the Council aware of the letter of 3 August sent by Mrs Albright , United States Secretary of State , to Mr Helms , Chairman of the US Senate 's Foreign Affairs Committee , which was published by newspapers and other media ?
Does the Council intend to respond to this letter or take a stance on this matter ?
Does the Council consider that the interpretation placed on the terms of the declarations of 18 May by the US Secretary of State is in keeping with the spirit of the remarks made to the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs in May by the Commissioner responsible ?
Does the Council agree that this agreement represents an extraordinary reaffirmation of the principles underlying the Liberty Act ?
Mr President , Mr Salafranca Sanchez-Neyra , the Council is of course aware of the letter sent by Secretary of State Mrs Albright to the chairman of the US Senate 's Foreign Affairs Committee , Jesse Helms , on the ' Understanding with Respect to the Disciplines for the Strengthening of Investment Protection ' . This is a part of the important package agreed at the EU-US summit meeting in London on 18 May .
The letter was not , however , addressed to the Council and therefore it would not be appropriate for the Council to respond .
The Union 's position on the matter is set out in the EU unilateral statement , which also forms part of the London package , and which was confirmed by the Council on 25 May .
The Council accordingly looks to the US to take the necessary steps arising out of the London summit package .
The EU will similarly respect its political undertakings .
The Union does not accept that anything in the London summit package in any way vindicates the principles underlying the Liberty Act , particularly not the imposition of secondary boycotts and retroactive legislation with extraterritorial effect .
This is the position of the Commission and the Member States .
On the question of expropriation , in a letter to Mrs Albright of 18 May which is also part of the London package , Sir Leon Brittan has accepted that according to information from the United States it appears that , having regard to the discriminatory provisions of Cuba 's Law 851 , the expropriations in a number of cases were contrary to international law .
Thank you very much for your reply , Madam President-in-Office .
Obviously , I had not expected the Council to reply to this letter .
It is a letter addressed to the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the United States Senate by the Secretary of State .
The problem is that in the interpretation of the agreements between the European Union and the United States set out in that letter , it is stated that this interpretation serves as a basis for the philosophy and general aims of United States legislation .
I should like to know whether the presidency agrees with that interpretation .
I am aware that the European Union does not agree with it , at least not according to the unilateral declaration issued in May .
The first question I would therefore like to put to you is this : what reaction does the content of this letter produce in the Council ?
My second question is : what time period does the Council consider is needed to implement the terms of the agreement , and in particular for the amendment of Title IV of the Act to take place , since this requires the approval of the US Congress ?
I have the impression , Madam President-in-Office , that in view of the present situation in the United States , President Clinton will not be able to count on the majority required to ensure the amendment of Title IV of the Act .
So , in brief , I would like to know , firstly , whether the Council shares the philosophy of the letter and , secondly , what would the Council consider a reasonable period of time to elapse before some other measures are taken . Indeed , if Congress does not amend Title IV of the Act and the United States therefore does not keep its part of the bargain , what action would the European Union contemplate ?
It is all very well to seek an amicable solution , but as I see it , this is not altogether appropriate , given that this Act lacks an acceptable legal basis .
Mr President , Mr Salafranca Sanchez-Neyra , allow me to start by saying that I myself first met Cuba 's Foreign Minister in New York , both as President-in-Office of the Council and also of course as Austria 's State Secretary .
On that occasion , it was noticeable that Cuba seemed willing - and I deliberately say ' seemed ' because it remains untested - to accept a type of dialogue similar to the EU-China human rights dialogue if necessary .
We are currently considering this .
I believe that a new form of dialogue could naturally have positive effects on EU-Cuba relations , and also perhaps on the EU / US / Cuba triangle .
As to the detail of your question , I have to tell you that at the moment a change in the position I have outlined is not likely .
But as I said , if I have interpreted things correctly , I can see some fairly positive opportunities for the future .
I should like to ask the President of the Council , in the event of the agreement of 18 May coming into force - which appears unlikely at present - if the Minister can assure the House that this will not lead to the creation of serious obstacles for European traders seeking to carry on business activities in Cuba , those being implicit in Mrs Albright 's letter ?
Can she assure us that we will stand by the statements which have been made on a number of occasions in this House , at least by Sir Leon Brittan ?
Mr President , Mr Newens , the European Union is greatly interested in improving transatlantic relations and especially in foreign policy cooperation , and differences in opinion on Cuba should not impair the effectiveness of these . The EU 's policy here consists of two main features .
Firstly , dissuading the US from internationalising bilateral problems - in this case between the US and Cuba - by applying extraterritorial legislation . Secondly , persuading the US that the critical-but-cooperative dialogue between the EU and Cuba is more successful in the longer term for the international community 's relations with Cuba than the US approach of bringing pressure to bear and of threats .
That would be my response to your question .
A number of questions have in fact already been put to the President-in-Office .
There is probably little more she can say in reply , but I do share Mr Salafranca 's concern , in the sense that the Commission and the Council should reply to a letter Mrs Albright has written to Mr Helms .
In fact that letter is surprising , to put it mildly .
It states that the European Union has undertaken not to award loans , subsidies , grants , tax advantages , guarantees or political risk insurance , or to give any kind of favourable treatment to European businessmen wishing to invest in Cuba .
We were present at a hearing organised by the Committee on External Economic Relations at which European businessmen voiced their serious concern and explained how this very agreement , which is not at all clear , has disrupted investment in Cuba .
The letter goes on to state something even more surprising , namely that the European Union must refer to the information which the United States holds on expropriated assets before helping any business wishing to invest in Cuba .
We still think this is a cause for great concern , and I appreciate the reply from the President-in-Office . However , leaving everything else aside , if only for the sake of the large number of businessmen - many Spaniards and other Europeans who have interests in Cuba - we would like the situation to be clarified .
Mr President , Mrs González Álvarez , allow me to state my view on this once more .
At the end of May 1998 , Cuba claimed that with the summit agreements the EU had in fact accepted the principle of extraterritoriality it had always previously fought against .
Most importantly , the provisions of the Helms-Burton Act which had resulted in numerous restrictions on trade and transport remained in force and therefore the extraterritorial nature of the US embargo was essentially intact .
According to Havana , the only thing which the US offered in return was a vague undertaking to the EU by the US Administration that they would try to have Titles III and IV of the Helms-Burton Act waived .
Cuba also warned the EU at the beginning of June 1998 against inciting opposition groups and human rights activists .
Such subversive activities would not be accepted by the Cuban administration and could result in appropriate measures being taken .
But the US is increasingly asking for this type of commitment , to demonstrate to the US Congress and to the American people that the EU is not distancing itself from the central statements of the common position .
Of course the EU will not accept that anything in the package of measures agreed at the London summit in any way vindicates the principles of the Liberty Act , particularly not the imposition of a secondary boycott and retroactive legislation with extraterritorial effect .
This is the position of the Commission and the Member States .
As I have already mentioned , the issue of expropriation has been commented on by Sir Leon Brittan .
Question No 6 by Gerhard Hager ( H-0854 / 98 )
Subject : Strategy paper on EU migration and asylum policy
On 1 July 1998 the Austrian Presidency tabled a strategy paper on EU migration and asylum policy .
What progress has been made in the discussions on the strategy paper tabled by the Austrian Presidency ?
Which delegations have already made written submissions to the K4 Committee ?
What is the content of these submissions ?
Has the current Presidency already dissociated itself from many areas of the proposal ?
If so , from what areas , and why ?
Mr President , Mr Hager , let me first of all repeat what I said during the discussion on migrants today , that the Presidency 's paper is a discussion document which aims to promote further thought and consideration about how to get to grips with problems in the areas of migration and asylum .
It does not claim to provide an overview of future EC-policy in these areas , but does - as similar initiatives earlier ( like the Commission 's communication of 1994 ) - try to ensure that in determining such policy , the decision-makers have at their disposal as broad a basis as possible on which to take their decisions .
As stated in the paper , the Presidency invited delegations to submit comments in writing by September and has received contributions so far from the German , Greek , Swedish and UK delegations and from the Commission .
In the light of these comments , and also of observations made by all delegations at the K4 Committee in September , the Presidency is revising the document .
This revised version will be forwarded to the European Parliament through official channels as soon as possible .
This will also be the first version that we have been able to forward , because the opinions of the fourteen other delegations have not previously been included .
But , just to repeat this , I would like to dispel any misunderstandings that might have arisen from incorrect reports in the press and some of the other media .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , I regret the fact that my question has lost some of its relevance since it was submitted - this has all become common knowledge in the meantime .
Of course I have followed the discussion here this afternoon , and I am glad to have the information available at present confirmed by an authoritative source .
But let me ask a supplementary question .
If I take what you have said and what you explained in detail this afternoon about withdrawing parts of the paper , and turn the argument on its head , can I assume that the wording used in Articles 41 and 132 is still valid ? They say that a shift towards less constitutional and more politically-oriented concepts of protection in the field of asylum would also be perfectly feasible .
If this is the case , then I would very much like to know what the Council position is .
Mr President , Mr Hager , I cannot now respond in detail on each piece of drafting , because I do not have the text in front of me .
I can only tell you that we gave a discussion paper to the press and another paper was discussed in the press even before it was made official .
That led to certain misunderstandings .
A paper which is to be officially debated by various bodies is of course not going to contain wording that could be offensive in any way .
I have already explained that there was a certain misunderstanding - we clearly never intended to do away with the Geneva Convention .
But it needs to be expanded in certain areas , as I explained in our discussion today .
Secondly , this is not a new subject .
In 1991 it was discussed for the first time , and in 1992 and 1994 it was taken up by the Commission .
As our discussion has shown , this question is certainly extremely complex today . On the one hand we have to find a way to combat the despicable trade of trafficking in human beings , while on the other we must also find a way to create humanitarian possibilities for refugees , and take in those people who are most in need of help .
I have the document we are discussing in front of me , and I was both surprised and disappointed to see what it contains .
Plenty of repression and very little humanity characterise this Austrian proposal .
Practice at the EU 's frontier points is already somewhat brutal and this would only make the situation worse . Illegal immigration is effectively being encouraged and we see hundreds of deaths every year as a result of illegal attempts to cross the borders .
If the policy advocated in this minutely drafted text were to be implemented , refugees with a justified claim to asylum would not even reach the EU . Tighter visa rules and more stringently enforced carrier liability would prevent them from filing their claim .
Unfair demands would be placed on our neighbouring countries , with the EU expecting them to apply unbelievably restrictive measures . Relations between the various Central and Eastern European countries could well become disrupted if they were forced to close their borders .
I have one question for the President-in-Office .
Reference is made here to the SIS register , which is currently used to check asylum-seekers .
Yet we know that this register lacks elementary legal safeguards .
Asylum seekers have no right to see the information recorded and cannot therefore verify whether it is correct .
Might the presidency consider taking steps to enhance legal certainty for refugees by allowing for more effective scrutiny over the SIS register ?
Mr President , Mr Sjöstedt , I do not think it is very sensible for us to enter into discussion on a paper that is not even officially before us , and in which the positions of the other Member States have only just been included .
We really must wait until the paper is officially forwarded to the European Parliament and then we can hold a discussion on it .
I appreciate that perhaps there has been some confusion about this report , and that it is simply a discussion paper .
Nevertheless , there is great concern in Parliament , in particular in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , that Parliament seemed not to have been involved as we would have hoped from the earliest stages .
I hope that I can have an assurance that the revised document will be made available in time for Parliament to consider it and to express any views before the next meeting of the Judicial and Home Affairs Council .
Further to that , I wish to say that I am sure the President-in-Office will be aware that there has been a lot of concern expressed about some of the suggestions - admittedly no more than suggestions - within this draft paper , to the effect that we should modify in a major way the existing Geneva Convention and possibly remove the individual right to seek asylum .
Of course many of the refugees coming into Western Europe today are coming in a different way to that perceived 50 years ago at the time of the Geneva Convention .
However , it seems to me that their plight and the problems they suffer are the same , whether they are being persecuted by a government or simply fleeing disorder , civil war or chaos in society from which the authorities of their country are unable to protect them .
Many of us feel the individual right must be preserved .
Mr President , Mr Elliott , on your first point , the Geneva Convention on the Status of Refugees is not to be encroached upon in any way .
In the first draft , and especially in the version passed on to the press , there may perhaps have been some unclear wording , but the revised version does not contain any passage which could honestly give rise to such an idea .
Secondly , the procedure we have followed is entirely in keeping with the usual practice of not putting a first draft , which does not take into account the general positions of all the Member States , before the European Parliament until it has been handled by a Council working group .
That is precisely our procedure here .
After the first revision , this text will be made available to Parliament as soon as possible .
Question No 7 by John McCartin ( H-0860 / 98 )
Subject : Cost of motor vehicles and vehicle insurance in Ireland
Is the Council aware of the wide divergence within the EU of the cost of motor vehicles and the cost of motor vehicle insurance and does the Council consider that this contributes to a distortion of competition in the single market and are any initiatives being taken by the Council to resolve this situation ?
Mr President , Mr McCartin , as the Honourable Member rightly points out , the creation of a single market for motor vehicle insurance has been a priority for many years .
The third coordinating Directive on non-life insurance ( Council Directive 92 / 49 / EEC ) basically completed the internal market in the insurance field .
Alongside the non-life directives designed to safeguard both the right of establishment and freedom to provide services , the Council has in addition adopted legislation concerning compulsory motor vehicle insurance .
The aim of the general and specific legislation is to ensure that all Community citizens have access to the widest possible range of insurance products .
This increases competition in this sector and should in time lead to reduced costs for insurance .
As regards the cost of motor vehicles , reference should be made to Regulation 1474 / 95 / EEC which is a Commission Regulation laying down certain rules applicable to distribution contracts in the car sector .
Its aim is to ensure a better balance in contractual relationships between manufacturers , dealers and final consumers .
On the subject of possible distortion of competition in the single market regarding the cost of motor insurance and / or motor vehicles , it is up to the Commission to take whatever steps it deems necessary to ensure the proper application of the relevant legislation and to ensure the smooth running of the internal market in general , as well as in this specific field .
I thank the President-in-Office for that very detailed reply .
Perhaps I made a mistake in putting this question to the Council rather than the Commission , because there is immense frustration in Ireland , with young people in particular .
Young men looking for their first job , if that job involves driving a car in Ireland , have to pay something like ECU 50 for insurance per week .
If they were in Brussels or in a city in the UK , they would probably pay only a quarter of that .
So it is felt that the European Union has failed to bring about a single market in the whole area of insurance .
The fact that we have failed , and the Council has failed , to harmonise taxation , creates a situation in which motor vehicles cost a lot more in the first place , and this has some knock-on effect in the insurance sector , but it is not sufficient to explain it .
The fact that insurance companies in the UK , Belgium and Germany are not competing in the Irish market was due , I felt , to a failure of the European Union to enforce the right of establishment and the right to equal access to the market .
Mr President , Mr McCartin , as I have already explained in my earlier reply with particular regard to the car sector , the Commission has adopted a number of rules to ensure that there is transparency in car prices across the whole of Europe .
In this connection , it would be useful to point out that under Chapter 5 of the Treaty , common rules on competition are the particular responsibility of the Commission , and as you rightly suspected , it would be in a position to answer your questions considerably better and in more detail .
In the insurance field , I would refer the Honourable Member to Directive 92 / 49 / EEC , which aims to regulate activity in this sector and ensure greater competition .
If it is established nevertheless that distortions in the car market are occurring , then of course the Council will devote its full attention to any proposals the Commission deems necessary to remedy matters appropriately .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , do you think that the introduction of the euro will lead to more transparency in the cost of cars and motor insurance ?
Mr President , Mr Rübig , the only thing I can really say to that is yes , of course .
I think it will certainly increase competitiveness .
It will naturally also mean stronger competition and lower prices , because better comparability will allow consumers to look all the more carefully at where they actually buy .
I believe that the introduction of the euro will definitely have positive effects for the consumer in the long term .
Mr President , the discrepancies between the different prices are so great that we have instances such as this : people who work in Germany , young working people who bring to Greece a car which their parents have bought , are in the end forced to give it up to the Greek state because they cannot afford the huge tax imposed by Greek law .
There are many such examples , which are dramatic at a personal level .
I agree with Mr McCartin .
So I would like to ask : can anything be done for this special category ?
And , in any event , is there a date beyond which we will be able to say that the prices of cars will be comparable throughout the European Union ?
Because the fact is that we have been talking about this in the European Parliament for decades .
Mr President , Mr Alavanos , I quite understand the problem you have raised here like the honourable Member who spoke before you .
Let me point out once again that it is the Commission 's job , not the Council 's , to see that the single market functions smoothly and that the rules on competition are respected .
Allow me also to remind you that fixing insurance premiums falls within the remit of Member States .
As for the completion of a single market for insurance , I would once again request the Member to contact the Commission , because that is the body responsible for ensuring that individual rules on competition are complied with .
Incidentally , I would be happy to pass this on to them .
Mr Posselt has a point of order .
Mr President , I only have one question .
You have been very politically balanced in whom you have called upon to speak , but I wanted to ask why , when we were on the very thorny issue of the Austrian strategy paper , you only gave the floor to two representatives of the Socialist Group , although I was the first to raise my hand the very second when you took requests for the floor and before you stopped taking them .
The President-in-Office may therefore have received the inaccurate impression that there were only critics of the paper here .
There are also strong supporters of it !
But that was not reflected here at all .
I am sorry , Mr Posselt , but I gave the floor to the Members who asked first .
I am sorry you were not called , but under the Rules of Procedure I can only give the floor to two speakers .
Question No 8 by Anna Karamanou ( H-0862 / 98 )
Subject : Role of the media in the increased sexual exploitation of women
According to a recent statement by the Council of Europe , women are the main victims of sexual exploitation using the networks , which constitutes a serious violation of human rights .
The way in which women are depicted by the mass media is contributing to the increased sexual exploitation of women in Europe , while those involved in the white slave trade are making increasing use of modern media and new technologies .
What action does the Council intend to take and what measures will it adopt in response to this serious problem ?
Mr President , Mrs Karamanou , in response to your question , I would first like to stress that the Council is fully aware that this issue and the points you have raised are an extremely serious problem .
The Council 's position is that everything should be done to prevent international criminals working in prostitution from making increasing use of the latest information and communication technologies .
The Austrian Presidency shall therefore try to the best of its ability to bring to an early conclusion the consultations currently underway on issues such as the joint action to fight child pornography on the Internet , the Community action plan on encouraging the safe use of the Internet by fighting illegal and harmful content , and the Community action programme on measures to combat violence against young persons , women and children ( DAPHNE ) .
The presidency is confident that , with the impetus it gives , Member States will be able to find a joint basis for adopting these instruments .
You must however know how far-reaching the influence of these criminal organisations using prostitution is - this abhorrent business , which disregards the individual freedom of victims , operates at an international level .
Because of the international nature of the Internet , the Council 's view is that the fight against organised prostitution must take place at an international level , and for this of course the United Nations is in a good position .
I am therefore certain that the Community and the Member States will devote their full attention to initiatives taken under the auspices of the UN .
These involve in particular a plan to end crime organised on an international level , a protocol on trafficking in women and children and a draft voluntary protocol to the agreement on the rights of the child , which deals with the sale of children , their sexual exploitation and also child prostitution and pornography .
I thank the President-in-Office for her answer , although I think it falls far short of satisfying not only me but even herself , since so little has been done by the Union about such a vast problem - tragically little .
The European Parliament has repeatedly called for the Council and the Commission to adopt drastic and effective measures to do something about the international networks of modern white slavers , the slave traders of today .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office what the Council has done to create new , appropriate and effective European institutions , capable of developing joint action at international and European level and of establishing common sanctions and penalties that fit the seriousness of the crime .
International criminal networks certainly call for an international and multi-dimensional response , as the Minister herself recognised .
In other words , I would like to ask : does the Council intend to apply Community law and measures across national borders , to suppress a phenomenon which is steadily taking on more explosive dimensions and which is an affront to our very civilisation ?
And also , Minister , I would like you to tell me how far we are along the way towards ratification of the Europol Convention by the Member States , and what resources are available to enable that service to fulfil the increased workload it is undertaking .
Mr President , Mrs Karamanou , allow me once again to point out that the matter you have raised is an especially important one for the Austrian Presidency too . We have also taken a series of initiatives in this area .
Before I go into more detail , I should like to tell you that this very issue was discussed at the European conference which took place just yesterday in Luxembourg , and which I reported on this morning .
We are beginning to discuss this important problem and look for solutions not only in the EU context , but also with all the applicant countries .
Significantly , Europol 's powers have been extended to include this area .
The aim is not just to create more bureaucracy , but to try to fight this evil that you correctly identify together and effectively .
I would point out that in the last two years the Council has already adopted countless decisions that are now being applied .
I would just mention the following : two joint actions , from 29 November 1996 and 24 February 1997 , for an exchange programme and measures to combat trafficking in people and the sexual exploitation of children ; extending Europol 's mandate to include the prevention of and fight against trafficking in people , as I said before ; the 28 April 1997 action plan for fighting organised crime ; the EU-US common initiative against trafficking in women ( it seems to us important that this issue has now been taken up in the transatlantic dialogue ) ; and finally the Council conclusions of 19 March 1998 on 10 principles for an action plan proposed by the G8 to combat crime in the leading sectors of technology .
I have here a cutting from a Finnish newspaper which came out last week .
The article describes in detail the methods cited by previous speakers for changing women 's identities , dyeing their hair and branding them with tattoos once they have been recruited .
I note with satisfaction that the Austrian Presidency believes this to be a priority issue and commend its action to date .
Yet I worry that we may be taking too many decisions and doing too little to follow them up .
You cited the DAPHNE programme , Madam President-in-Office , and I wonder when the Council intends to adopt it .
I am also keen to hear whether the Council and the Austrian Presidency support action to rehabilitate young girls .
Bulgaria , for example , has introduced a programme called La Strada .
And are the rumours we sometimes hear in this Parliament true that hundreds of thousands of young girls and children are being brought illegally into the EU from the candidate countries ?
Mr President , Mrs Thors , I believe that I have tried to underline how much this Presidency in particular sees this problem as related to the larger one of the fight against organised crime .
On 1-3 October the Austrian Presidency organised a conference in Vienna for eastern and western countries on the trade in women , which the EU Commissioner for Immigration , Home Affairs and Justice , Anita Gradin , attended . Its aim was to inform the public about the basic and country-specific organisation of trafficking in women , and to offer the representatives of NGOs and of national and international institutions the opportunity to exchange experiences in the field of prevention and intervention and to develop further strategies to fight trafficking in women in eastern and western Europe .
The European Parliament and the Commission are to run a campaign next year against violence against women .
The Austrian Presidency has also organised a conference on the work of the police against violence against women . It will be held from 30 November to 4 December of this year in Baden and aims to contribute to the preparation of Member States ' activities for 1999 .
The conference intends , in the light of international experience , to raise the issue of standards which are in keeping with the times and to look at good examples of measures taken to combat acts of violence perpetrated by men against women .
It will looked in particular at the situation women are faced with in criminal proceedings when they have become the victims of domestic violence , the specific aspects of violence against female migrants and their special need for protection because of their legal and economic situation as foreigners , and the impact of each of these on the work of the police .
I have already explained how important this subject was at the European conference , particularly in view of the need for future EU member countries to find joint solutions to this problem .
Mr President , as you know , many criminal acts are now perpetrated on the Internet .
This is also true of child prostitution and trafficking in women , and the trade in organs which often goes with them .
We now know that the DAPHNE programme is to be launched for a longer period up to the year 2004 , and that it is to be quite generously funded .
My question is , since so much crime goes on through the Internet , can we think about setting up a kind of cyber-police to monitor communication on the Internet and take appropriate countermeasures as a remedy and to combat crime ?
Mr President , Mr Pirker , you have indeed raised a very topical problem here , to which the Austrian Presidency is devoting great attention .
Since the Internet is a completely new medium , every possible measure must be examined closely .
We have to look at what can be done on the Internet .
Maybe we should be thinking in terms of some type of code of conduct for the user , because it is going to be very difficult to develop specific legislation .
But at the moment , we are in the process of looking at this in detail with experts , and we hope that either during this Presidency or shortly afterwards , we shall have something ready for presentation .
Question No 9 by Astrid Thors ( H-0867 / 98 )
Subject : Reduced VAT for labour intensive activities
Commissioner Monti at one time proposed that the Member States reduce VAT on labour-intensive activities to encourage job-creation .
The Commission recently carried out an analysis of the impact of VAT on the internal market , employment being one of the aspects covered .
When does the Austrian Presidency intend to have this matter discussed by the Ecofin Council ?
Mr President , Mrs Thors , the problem you raised is currently being examined by the Council 's services , particularly with a view to obtaining an expert opinion on the questions raised by some delegations on the subject .
On the basis of this review the Council will then judge whether the Commission should be requested to present a proposal on the area referred to in Mrs Thors 's question .
I regret that I cannot give any further information on this at the moment .
I too am sorry that the Council cannot provide more information , especially since the newspapers have been reporting over the past week that the Member States have sent in their replies to the Council working group .
I wonder why it took so long before they were given a proposal to which to respond .
The Commission produced its communication on 13 November last year .
It is now October 1998 , one year on , but the timetable has still to be set .
Why the delay ?
There are rumours that no conclusions will be drawn in the Council working group until the end of the year at the earliest . Yet we have 18 million unemployed .
Many of us are convinced that the measures being discussed could be the answer to reducing tax fraud and increasing jobs . Our current self-service society might then shift towards a proper service society .
Mr President , Mrs Thors , firstly of course I share your concern about the level of employment and about the need to combat unemployment wherever possible .
That is not in question .
At this time of economic globalisation the Council is particularly aware that everything must be done in order to maintain the level of employment and if possible to raise it even further .
In fact , the Council is of the view that the employment issue constitutes the greatest challenge for the EU at the turn of the millennium .
I personally am deeply convinced that the future generation of Europeans is going to measure Community policy by the success it achieves against the scourge of unemployment .
That is why for the time being , I can only reiterate that this is of course an extremely complex and multifaceted problem , which needs to be very closely examined in relation to all the implications tied up with it . That is what is presently happening .
It is currently under review , and a suitable proposal will be put forward at the appropriate time .
But because of the complexity of the situation it is too early at the moment to make specific statements on content .
Taxation offers us a way of dealing with our desperately high levels of unemployment and creating more jobs .
Fiscal policy is primarily a national matter , however . We all know how sensitive people are to being told by the EU what tax policies they should adopt .
I should like to take up the second part of the President-in-Office 's answer .
Perhaps we could hear what types of general measure the presidency plans to introduce before the end of its term . The President-in-Office referred to what she described as the biggest challenge facing us in the run-up to the millennium : bringing unemployment down for the next generation and providing more jobs .
Has the presidency any plans to come forward with specific proposals before the end of the year ?
Mr President , Mr Lindqvist , you know that the Austrian Presidency in particular attaches the greatest importance to fighting unemployment , and that we intend to draw up specific guidelines for the European Council which should be approved at the European Council in Vienna .
I do not have all the details in front of me right now , but these are primarily based on the best practice , as it is called , of the different countries . In other words , we learn from each other .
At the moment we are also looking at how additional jobs have been created in the various countries . I am thinking here of the great flexibility and mobility in Holland and the Austrian model of ' dual training ' which involves both an apprenticeship and vocational school - theory and practice alongside each other - and which has made us the leaders in youth employment .
Similar ideas are being looked at very closely by experts , so that models that other countries have found useful can also be taken on by others .
This is the direction which the Austrian Presidency 's guidelines on fighting unemployment take .
Mr President , in relation to the labour-intensive industries the problem is competition from third countries , the cheap labour countries .
If we reduce VAT we do not improve competitiveness since there is VAT on the imported as well as the home-produced goods .
So we probably only expand the market a little bit and give a bigger opportunity to the cheap labour areas .
I have this problem in my own constituency .
A very big multinational company - Fruit of the Loom - is pulling out of a labour-intensive industry with thousands of jobs because they want to get the product manufactured in Morocco .
I would suggest that the direction to take - if the President-in-Office could comment - is to reduce our income tax and social charges which are too high , thereby improving the competitiveness of European industry .
Is it a question for Member States or is it an initiative that must be taken by the European Union ?
Would it be in violation of our obligations under GATT ?
Something needs to be done or we will have no clothing , footwear and such labour-intensive industries .
Mr President , Mr McCartin , thank you very much for that comment .
You are right of course that the measures that are now being discussed will have an impact within the whole context of globalisation .
On the issue of reducing labour costs - how would this be passed on ?
These questions are also particularly important in the framework of the Lomé negotiations that we have just begun .
Of course I cannot go into details on this question now - I am not really an expert on these financial negotiations - but I can tell you that you were right in making the point that every aspect of tax management naturally has a major effect on the entire global economy .
Thank you , Madam President-in-Office .
It is now 7 p.m. and I am afraid I have to bring Question Time to an end .
I commiserate with those Members who have been waiting patiently , but that is the way of things here in Parliament .
We also owe it to the President-in-Office to stop at this point , so that she can catch her flight home .
Thanks to her once again .
Questions Nos 10 to 29 will receive written answers .
These which will be put in Members ' pigeon-holes this evening .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Pollution-related diseases
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0333 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0340 / 98-97 / 0153 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Decision adopting a programme of Community action on pollution-related diseases in the context of the framework for action in the field of public health ( 1999-2001 ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Cabrol ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have the task of considering the common position established by the Council with a view to adopting a programme of Community action on pollution-related diseases .
In order to understand the exact context in which the amendments may and should be voted on , it is essential to realise that the purpose of this programme is not to take direct action to combat the emission of pollutants , nor to combat pollution-related diseases , as has already been the objective of other directives .
The current programme aims to review existing knowledge of pollutants , to collect all available data on pollution-related diseases and to draw up a list of these pollutants . In this way , we can inform the Member States , which must collect the data , and the citizens of the European Union , so that they are aware of the pollutants and can protect themselves as far as possible against them .
It is therefore essentially a programme to produce a list of pollutants and the diseases they cause .
It is also an information programme for the public on pollutants and related diseases .
That is what we want to reassert in the amendments tabled : the first part of Amendment No 5 and Amendments Nos 10 , 12 , 13 and 14 .
But this programme does not contain anything else , and that is why , to stay within this ambit and to avoid encroaching upon the direct action to combat pollutants and pollution-related diseases , I personally will not support the last paragraph of Amendment No 5 , nor Amendments Nos 9 and 16 , which go beyond the scope of the present programme .
This programme also aims to pool the experience of the Member States , international organisations and various third countries .
Naturally , a programme of this nature will need to be evaluated while it is in operation and any follow-up monitored .
On the whole , we believe that the common position is satisfactory .
We welcome , in particular , the fact that it covers diseases related to all forms of pollution , as we had requested at first reading .
Nonetheless , there are certain points on which we take issue with this text .
We had called for the information on pollution-related diseases referred to in Article 1 ( 2 ) ( a ) to include clear information on those diseases , a point that has not been incorporated in the common position .
Furthermore , the duration of the programme has been reduced to three years , although it was set at five years in the original proposal .
Consequently , the financial framework , which is set at ECU 1.3 million per year , is now limited to an overall total of ECU 3.9 million .
We could accept these changes in the duration and funding provided this proposal was actually , as the European Commission claims , only a first step in this field .
But if that is not the case , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection asks , in Amendments Nos 2 and 4 , for the duration of this programme to be extended once again to five years , and for the overall financial framework to be set at ECU 7 million .
This is the basis of Amendment No 7 .
Once the programme has had its duration and funding reinstated , we will have to go a stage further , in other words , we will need to conduct coordinated epidemiological studies on pollution-related diseases .
That is the aim of Amendment No 11 .
We must also take action to promote knowledge of the behaviour patterns , ways of life and eating habits that make it possible to reduce the risk from various forms of pollution , as we stress in Amendment No 15 .
We must also point out that , in the Commission 's view , the reference to Article 228 in Article 6 on international cooperation is inappropriate , as the text relates to technical cooperation rather than international agreements as such .
Finally , I would like to highlight , in particular , the evaluation and follow-up of the programme .
The European Commission takes the view that it would be premature to draw up a report during the third year of a programme 's operation .
In Amendment No 8 , we ask that the report be drawn up once the implementation of the programme is complete .
With regard to follow-up , we call on the European Commission to report to us , in the six months following the adoption of this project , on the measures taken to ensure that this programme is consistent with and complementary to the other programmes in the field of public health , the environment and research .
That is the aim of Amendment No 6 .
This should also help us to make the necessary adjustments , as requested in Amendment No 1 .
We hope , in this way , to provide the final touches to the proposed programme and increase its effectiveness while , finally , stressing that we believe that it is essential for the programme to be followed by other , more ambitious proposals setting out the measures to be taken to combat effectively the formidable consequences of pollution .
Madam President , I will begin by saying that the proper speaker this evening , Kirsten Jensen , is ill .
I hope it has nothing to do with the pollutants which we do indeed notice here in Strasbourg .
We are confronted with a classic dilemma where the EU and health policy are concerned .
The real powers to implement health policy lie with the Member States and not the EU .
It is the Member States which decide what taxes and insurance rules should apply in this area .
We also know that a large part of health policy is further decentralised .
At the same time , with a programme like this , we arouse expectations as regards active measures on the part of the EU to deal with pollutants and diseases related to them .
Yet it is not really the EU 's business to solve these problems .
Of course the EU does have a role to play , partly by pledging money for research , partly by facilitating the exchange of experience in the field of health and partly - most important of all - by ensuring that its own policy is healthy , integrating health aspects into both transport and industrial policy .
The Treaty of Amsterdam enables us to do this .
As regards the programme we are now debating , we can choose between either letting it die of its own accord , which one might easily think is the likely outcome when one reads the Commission 's budgetary proposals , or strengthening it so that at least it meets the expectations it awakens .
Our choice is for the last option - hence the amendment from the Environment Committee calling for a bigger budget .
For me , this choice is also underpinned by the fact that the patients ' associations in the field which carry out work on pollution-related diseases actually consider the programme to be worthwhile .
For that reason , we propose that ECU 7 million be set aside for this programme .
As Mr Cabrol has quite rightly pointed out , the programme does not in itself prevent the emission of pollutants , but it calls attention to the fact that there is a link between pollutants and diseases .
It may , we hope , lead to more effectively integrated policy on the environment and health .
It is one thing to explain to people that they should not go out when there is smog , but it is another matter to prevent smog from arising .
It is one thing to treat babies with hormone ointments for rashes , but it is another matter to try to locate the link between the rashes and pollution and hence eliminate the exposure which causes the rashes .
It is further necessary to develop a better understanding of diseases such as multiple chemical syndrome or damage caused by hormone-altering substances .
These diseases and their links with the modern chemical world are an uncharted problem area .
I therefore look forward to the Environment Committee 's health hearing later in the autumn , which will be dealing with the field of health impact assessment .
We know that it is worthwhile to link policy on the environment with that on health .
We can see that lead and sulphur emissions are gradually disappearing from our cities .
We hope that this will also have an effect on the related diseases .
In other words we have everything to gain from integrating health aspects into policies .
Madam President , these programmes aimed at improving the European dimension of public health as always receive the support of Parliament and , in particular , that of the Group of the European People 's Party .
At the same time , we must remind the Commission that , although we are offering our full support , we are still in need of more documentation .
In other words , Parliament should have access - especially in view of the next stage in which this Parliament will have greater legislative power - to the Commission 's background documents on the basis of which it drafts its proposals , so that we perhaps might be able to avoid some inappropriate interpretations or interventions .
We are all aware that European Union competence in public health policies is of a complementary nature - as stated in the Maastricht Treaty and again in the Treaty of Amsterdam - , but we need to let all the citizens know that the European Union is concerned about these issues and is launching complementary methods of working and of organisation .
We are not claiming that these programmes will completely solve the problem , but we do want to ensure that all the entities involved , be they health sectors , regions , or states , are working to guarantee consistency and complementarity in all their policies .
I therefore believe that we must be positive in the message and support we give to this programme .
At the same time , however , we must provide information for the citizens and explain to them why we are undertaking such programmes .
This gives the impression that the actions that we are going to undertake are at an initial stage when we actually have sufficient information , and the necessary premises exist , to take decisive action .
This is because when they see that all the atmospheric pollution and other forms of pollution that we are suffering from have done more damage in the last 20 years to buildings such as cathedrals , that are centuries old , than they have in previous centuries , they will be aware that something is happening .
If our forests have decreased by 30 % , it is because something is happening .
In short , we cannot imagine humankind being able to put up with more damage than cathedrals and forests .
This therefore gives us a clear - and I would say urgent - reason to act .
And , of course , everything related to respiratory diseases and allergies gives cause for alarm .
Over the last ten years , the number of allergies has multiplied by 120 .
In short , we support the complementary proposals , Professor Cabrol 's amendment and the general proposal from the Commission .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Liberal Group supports the Cabrol report , but we have two comments .
Firstly , at first reading I proposed that the Member States should be encouraged to introduce a register of environmentally-related health problems , since this is a phenomenon that is causing people increasing concern .
Having a notification centre for these problems would give people confidence that there was somewhere where they could report their suspicions about illnesses or allergies .
The Netherlands already has a notification centre and my country , Flanders , is also looking into the subject .
I regret the fact that neither the Council nor the Commission are in favour , and I am surprised to see that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has apparently accepted their position .
When we talk about environmental health problems in my country we are mainly thinking of air pollution , such as near incinerators .
The disturbing incidence of children with genetic defects and cancers brings home the fact that there are serious and even life-threatening diseases involved .
This action programme must make the authorities , industry and the general public realise how certain pollutants can affect human health .
We need to learn the necessary lessons for the future , such as that incinerators must not be located in built-up areas such as Drogenbos on the outskirts of Brussels .
Finally , we wholeheartedly welcome this action programme and we hope that it will promote greater knowledge and better prevention .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our group agrees with Mr Cabrol 's report and thanks him for his excellent work .
The process of forming a correct and comprehensive European Union public health policy has a number of gaps that are gradually being filled .
What is more , we believe that we are moving in the right direction since the action programmes are actually meeting this need of the population and the citizens .
In the context of this particular issue , these diseases appear to act as a kind of warning signal and a point of reference in trying to understand what is happening to the model of industrial development that exists in the European Union .
This is why we think that the proposal being put forward is highly relevant , as are all the amendments tabled by Mr Cabrol .
We support the amendments on extending the programme to five years and on its complementary funding , and those concerning the need to acquire more overall knowledge and to initiate coordinated epidemiological studies .
We also support those aimed at improving public awareness and perception , because it is in this way that individual and collective behaviour will gradually begin to change . Finally , the European Parliament must carry out the necessary follow-up work to ensure that this is effective .
However , we are still concerned .
We are taking action , but our growth model is the cause of these diseases , and this cause must be attacked at its source .
Madam President , firstly I am rather surprised that our rapporteur Mr Cabrol has said that he is not supporting Amendments Nos 5 , 9 and 16 .
These were accepted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and represent the committee 's position .
Furthermore , these points are extremely important because one relates to actions to prevent pollution-related diseases , one to combating pollution-related diseases and , finally , one to the whole issue of allergies .
I would like to point out to the Commissioner that in the original Commission proposal these were all included .
After the Council met it was decided to exclude these extremely important requirements .
I would hope that the Commission will take on board Parliament 's position , which is the position of the Environment Committee .
There is no point in carrying out research to find out what pollution is related to pollution-related diseases , and what is causing pollution-related diseases , if these findings are only going to be put on a shelf and nothing done about them .
It is extremely important that action is taken to ensure that we reduce the amount of pollution-related diseases .
In any city in Europe you can see the amount of respiratory and allergy problems caused by pollution in our cities .
We have to reinstate Parliament 's original position and the original Commission proposal .
It is no good carrying out studies which we are not going to follow up .
The onus is on the European Union to tackle the pollution which is causing health problems and which could be avoided .
This must be tackled ; without ensuring that action is taken , it will not be effective .
Furthermore , a timescale has to be brought in .
Three years is not enough .
We need at least five years .
As well as that , funding is extremely important .
We need to increase the amount of funding .
Madam President , in welcoming this report I should like to pay tribute to the rapporteur .
Mr Cabrol has certainly earned the respect of this Parliament for his commitment to protecting our people from the effects of pollution .
I recognise that the common position adopted by the Council is an advance in this field but , like many other Members , I do not feel it goes far enough .
By reducing the duration of the programme from five to three years , financing for it has effectively been cut .
Consequently we must question the Council 's sincerity in seeking to address what is a major area of concern throughout the European Union .
We need a more ambitious programme .
I worked on the proposal for a sharing of resources amongst Member States , international organisations and third countries .
I firmly believe that the views of the sufferers ' organisations should also be included .
Many of these organisations are doing valuable work by collating information on the effects of pollution and related diseases .
Such an organisation in my own area has drawn attention to the use of organaphosphorous sheep-dip .
Information which can only be provided by such organisations should be taken on board .
The more information available from all quarters , the more the aim of the programme to enable citizens of the European Union to protect themselves as much as possible against pollution will be realised .
Preventive action must be the primary aim of the programme , but this must be coupled with the recognition of the needs of those who contract the diseases too early to enjoy the protection now planned .
Mistakes have been made in the past .
We must now take the opportunity before us .
The chance is there to put those mistakes right .
Many diseases , and particularly many cancers , are caused by the presence of pollutants in the air , in water and even in food , without a relation of cause and effect being clearly established or even quantified .
This prevents , for example , justice from working effectively .
People die but no-one is responsible and no-one is to blame .
We must not only focus on just the concept of pollution .
Various technological methods are used whose impact on health has not been seriously analysed .
This is true for electromagnetic fields , for the microwaves used for mobile telephones , for the glutamate used in food and also for the agricultural chemicals that have caused human fertility to fall over the last 30 years in western countries .
It is outrageous to hear a European Commissioner state , here before the House , that the market will decide whether a product is good or bad .
That negates the essential nature of research and prevention , and , in particular , is an admission that we are treating people like guinea pigs .
I would like to thank Professor Cabrol for shedding a little light on this rather nebulous world .
And I would like to thank Mrs McKenna for trying to make the report even more effective .
Madam President , this programme is practical proof of support for the efforts being undertaken today to investigate and prevent diseases caused by pollution , i.e. by environmental conditions and hazards .
The effects of pollution not only contribute to the manifestation of respiratory diseases , but extend to disorders of other systems which can become apparent after prolonged exposure and as a result of probable synergism between various pollutants .
These effects may be toxic , infective , allergenic , carcinogenic , and indeed they may be acute or chronic , reversible or not , local or systemic .
Exposure to these reactions may take place by breathing , by ingesting food , by absorption through the skin , or directly , as happens with radiation .
We should also note that through the placental route , harmful substances from the environment may pass from the mother to the embryo and do it harm .
Consequently , all environmental hazards that have adverse effects on human health and produce diseases ought to be monitored epidemiologically .
Indeed , if we bear in mind that we are not at risk from just one harmful factor but from many simultaneously , then we can surmise that their cumulative effect may even have an impact on the resistance , ageing and life expectancy of the human organism .
The phenomenon must therefore be investigated for pathogenic interactions between two or more environmental pollutants , as mentioned in Amendments Nos 12 and 13 .
The quality of nutrition is also inseparably related to the content of various chemical compounds in foods , and a systematic study is needed of the consequences of food pollution , so that these risks to the health of Europe 's citizens may also be reduced , as envisaged in Amendment No 15 .
On the basis of the exchanges of information and experience which it is proposed should take place between the Member States , I am confident that new and useful data will be recorded and that conclusions will emerge concerning effective ways to combat diseases caused by or related to environmental pollution .
This is bound to bring action which will include the dissemination of the data , and information of the public and consumers , as mentioned in Amendments Nos 10 , 14 and 16 .
To conclude , Madam President , I believe that Parliament ought to vote for this programme because it will contribute directly towards improving the health of European citizens .
Madam President , the issue of pollution-related diseases is a really important and topical one , as the Commissioner well knows .
Diseases caused by pollution are on the increase in all the industrialised countries .
Combating these diseases cannot , however , be just a matter of health policy , but their prevention requires action in all areas of social policy .
I can give you one example of a Finnish success story regarding the reduction of lead in the atmosphere .
Lead is one of the most dangerous heavy metals , causing , amongst other things , retardation in the physical development of children .
In one decade in Finland we brought about a dramatic fall in the lead content in the atmosphere by reducing the tax on unleaded petrol , i.e. through a policy of taxation .
An important aspect of the programme now under discussion is passing on to one another any useful experience we have had of the matter , as in our case .
I give my enthusiastic support to the rapporteur 's view that the original length of the programme should remain at five years .
I also support the suggestion that the financial framework for the programme should be increased toECU 7 million .
Madam President , after the decision on health monitoring , for which I myself was rapporteur , and the one on the network for the epidemiological surveillance of communicable diseases , also tabled by Professor Cabrol , this decision , adopting a programme of Community action on pollution-related diseases , sets out to provide the Member States with a catalogue of data relating to diseases caused by pollutants , and to do so independently of direct action to combat pollutants of the air , water and ground , which falls under other programmes .
In the short time available to me , I merely wish to say that I can endorse in full Mr Cabrol 's excellent report , and I hope that the 16 amendments seeking to improve the draft decision , unanimously adopted by all the political groups within the Committee on the Environment , will also be adopted by the House .
This is an initial step towards the adoption of more ambitious programmes in the increasingly tough fight against growing pollution in our society , which has such an impact on the state of health of the EU 's citizens .
Let me thank you , Mr Cabrol , for your work on the proposal and , indeed , for your support for the common position .
The proposal is a key element of the Community 's overall approach to the prevention of pollution-related diseases .
Pollutants persist in our environment because it is not always feasible to reduce or limit them for technical or economic reasons .
It is therefore necessary to complement our actions on emission controls and exporter limits with activities in the area of public health aimed at reducing the health risk caused by the various forms of pollution .
The prevention of pollution-related diseases through better understanding of how the pollutants cause or aggravate them is one of the objectives of the proposed programme .
Emphasis is also placed on improving knowledge .
This is a key point made by Mr Cabrol - how health risks are perceived , assessed and managed .
Respiratory diseases and allergies , which are of increasing public health concern throughout Europe , are an area which the Commission considers should be given very special attention .
I agree with Mrs Ojala there .
We propose sharing the experience that exists right across the Union , reviewing the effectiveness of preventive measures undertaken and reinforcing and promoting successful actions .
I note that Parliament is particularly supportive of this activity .
At the first reading the Commission accepted four of Parliament 's amendments .
Subsequently the Council adopted a common position and to avoid any ambiguity I will say immediately that the Commission has accepted the common position .
But I will not hide from the House that the Commission does not consider the common position to be perfect .
I address that to Mrs McKenna .
The curtailment of the scope and the duration of the programme is particularly regrettable to me , to say the least .
A statement to that effect was placed in the Minutes .
However , the Commission considered that the political compromise in the Council was the best that was available at the time .
Consequently the Commission is only able to accept two amendments today : Amendments Nos 1 and 15 , since these do not have legal or budgetary consequences for the common position text .
The Commission is unable to accept the other amendments for the following main reasons .
Amendments Nos 2 and 8 imply a duration for the programme beyond the three years set out in the common position .
Amendments Nos 5 , 10 14 and 16 extend the scope of the common position beyond policy development .
Amendment No 6 is not considered workable with the timing envisaged ; in broad terms its objective is covered by the general obligation on the Commission to ensure complementarity and coherence .
Amendment No 11 cannot be accepted because the nature of the duration and , indeed , the financial resources and the scope of the programme do not allow for the support of meaningful , large-scale epidemiological studies .
Amendments Nos 3 , 12 and 13 would lead to omissions or inconsistencies in the text .
I should like to emphasise that the Commission considers that we need to have this very important programme on pollution-related diseases in place as soon as possible .
Then we can look forward to some extremely useful work on a subject of growing public concern .
What we are trying to do here is to get ready for the new framework programme .
The aim of this particular programme is to see how we can influence policy in that public health framework .
I should like to say that to Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens and Mrs McKenna since they also make the point very strongly .
We really are now trying to develop policy initiatives so that after the three years we can move into the mainstream and do better in the new framework .
I also agree with Mrs Hulthén that we need better links with research .
That is being taken on board .
All in all I have to thank everybody who contributed .
We are now going to make the best use of this programme , and put together all the benefits of the research so that we can move into the mainstream in the new framework .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Rare diseases
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0336 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0341 / 98-97 / 0146 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Decision adopting a programme of Community action on rare diseases within the framework for action in the field of public health ( 1999-2003 ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Viceconte ) .
Madam President , several thousands of people in Europe are affected by rare diseases , some of them of genetic origin and extremely serious .
In some ways , these thousands of European citizens seem to have been left to their own devices .
Research by the pharmaceutical industry is utterly inadequate : in these cases the profit motive obviously does not apply for pharmaceutical firms , given that the market for these drugs is limited by the relatively small numbers of people affected .
Hence the importance , from a humanitarian and health point of view , of the programme of Community action on rare diseases , which is one of the proposals being made in the field of public health in Europe for the four years 1999-2003 .
At our first reading , the European Parliament considered this action programme to be of undoubted benefit , and greatly improved it through 28 amendments , which among other things provided for the people most directly affected - the sufferers themselves - and their families to be involved in the programme .
This could be a good opportunity to establish real Community cooperation by setting up a programme on rare diseases , pooling knowledge and then taking the best possible action .
Indeed , it is necessary to avoid duplication , which wastes time and money and leads to inefficiency .
Very few of the suggestions contained in the amendments tabled at first reading were accepted by the Council : of the 28 adopted by this House , the Council took up only two in full and four in part .
At the initiative of your rapporteur , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has adopted 20 amendments for the recommendation for second reading .
These are now being tabled again and will form the basis of discussion at conciliation .
The situation in Europe varies from country to country .
In some Member States , data are collected and measures are more or less well organised ; in others this does not happen .
Here , as in other sectors , we must centralise the gathering of up-to-date data and all necessary information as to the development , number and clusters of cases of the rare diseases concerned .
These data must be fed into a central European database and made available to everyone .
We are pleased with the Council 's decision to fund the programme for the entire five-year period , bearing in mind that the original proposal provided for funding for the first year only .
Nevertheless , your rapporteur draws attention to the inadequacy of the budget .
The Committee on the Environment has once again proposed the sum of ECU 14 million , as opposed to the ECU 6.5 m proposed for the five years of the programme 's operation .
It is likely that , at conciliation , the usual clash will occur with the Council on this matter .
There is no point in salving our consciences by presenting a programme of great value in health and humanitarian terms , unless it is endowed with adequate funding .
This is not a way of either saving face or salving our consciences and , above all else , it will not meet the expectations of sufferers and their families .
Nor does the committee agree with the Council on the subject of comitology .
We prefer an advisory committee rather than a mixed advisory / management committee , which would ultimately restrict the Commission 's activities .
It is true that similar mixed committees are envisaged in other public health programmes , but in this specific one , considering the type of measures intended , we find the position adopted by the Council to be entirely inappropriate and unwarranted ; it would appear , moreover , that the Commission too has reservations in this regard .
We are therefore retabling the amendment concerning the requirement that one of the two representatives nominated to the committee by each Member State be a representative from a patients ' help group or other directly relevant NGO .
Further , it is very important to involve specialist doctors and general practitioners ; the latter can make a vital contribution , since they are the families ' first port of call and the principal agents of accurate , early diagnosis .
By the same token , in the draft regulation on orphan medicinal products , the Commission also proposes to involve general practitioners .
In essence , therefore , your rapporteur is inviting the House to reiterate the position expressed at first reading , by approving all the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , which have been accepted by all the political groups .
Madam President , there is probably no one among us who has not , at least once , had to listen with great regret and a touch of shame to reports of the solitary conditions experienced by patients , but also their families , who are afflicted by these diseases , the rarity of which entails difficulties , delays and sometimes even initial errors in diagnosis , as well as expense , travel and inconvenience for treatment .
The rarity of these conditions has made it very difficult until now for each Member State to collect data and information , and of course to engage in prevention and cure .
Therefore the Commission 's initiative of proposing a programme of Community action on rare diseases has been very well received by the European Parliament .
Moreover , we had pressed for it several times , especially since the Commission had also announced - and has now presented - a proposal on orphan medicinal products .
For this reason , on the basis of Mr Viceconte 's excellent report and amendments , the European Parliament has merely sought to strengthen the Commission 's proposal in a few respects : in particular concerning centralised data collection , training and information for health workers and patients ' families , the funding of the programme , as well as the involvement of patients ' families , their associations and , more generally , NGOs in various countries which are funding research into different rare diseases , and all bodies likely to follow through this action programme .
Let me dwell just for a moment on funding .
It is always very upsetting , Commissioner , when the European Union chooses to save money on the health of its citizens , but whereas this is true in all cases it is much more so in this one .
The rarity of these diseases does not admit of a proper , thorough approach in any one of our Member States .
It really can be said that the serious problem of rare diseases can only be tackled on a European scale , so as to create the necessary critical mass .
It is very short-sighted of the Member States not to wish to fund adequately this European programme , which could lead to results that are unimaginable in an individual country .
The Party of European Socialists , on whose behalf I have the honour of speaking , lends its full support to the Viceconte report and to all the amendments adopted in the Committee on the Environment , and endorses the call for this programme to be better financed .
Europe should not let this major opportunity pass it by .
The European social model offers opportunities which are not offered by the system in the United States , but our internal divisions also sap our cultural and economic energies .
For the sake of these most unfortunate citizens , the Member States should welcome Parliament 's proposals , which I very much hope the Commission will support .
Madam President , we fully support the proposals put forward in Mr Viceconte 's report as well as Professor Poggiolini 's remarks .
And for our part , we believe that the Commission is aware that with a proposal of this type , which is aimed at tackling a very scattered problem - and this is precisely the reason why it does not have any sponsors - , we need coordination at all levels , and all aspects will certainly need to be examined in depth here .
Similarly , I believe that a flexible approach to the application of these programmes would enable the Commission , through its three main lines of action - informing people , helping patients ' support groups and implementing actions to deal with clusters of rare diseases - , to tackle what I believe are the two most fundamental issues . These issues are the initiatives designed to increase the number of specialist doctors and those designed to strengthen high-level reference hospital centres .
And in this context we will be unable to fully extend such initiatives to all countries and regions . We will therefore have to bring all the patients together and concentrate our efforts on these two issues - which , in my opinion , are essential - , leaving aside the rest of the proposals and initiatives that are provided for in the programme .
Madam President , I think that all of the speakers support Mr Viceconte 's report on the programme of action on rare diseases .
And we are prepared to support it because he was very flexible in the debate and discussion on his draft report and accepted all the amendments tabled by the various groups .
These are amendments that were relevant but that were not finally accepted by the Council .
As Mr Poggiolini says , out of a total of 28 amendments , only two were totally accepted and four partially accepted And the rapporteur is perfectly right - and in doing so is supported by the Committee on the Environment - to include the amendments in this second reading that he deemed to be of particular importance .
In the short time I have available , I will focus on four of these amendments that are of particular importance to both the rapporteur and the Committee on the Environment .
Firstly , I should naturally like to stress the issue of funding .
We are always aware that money is scarce , but if a programme is set up to address these rare diseases and does not receive sufficient funding , it will not be effective .
Therefore , the rapporteur proposes - and the Committee on the Environment approved his proposal - an increase in funding from ECU 6.5 million to ECU 14 million .
Secondly , a central database is very important .
Information is collected in the various countries but we need a centralised data base that allows for the exchange of information .
Thirdly , we propose that a consultative committee be set up .
We always have disagreements in this Parliament with the Commission over comitology .
And fourthly , we need to encourage the participation of non-governmental organisations and of relatives who experience at first hand the seriousness of a patient 's disease and the difficulties he has in coping with it .
Madam President , the action programme on rare diseases which we are debating supplements a series of efforts to improve public health in the European Union .
The field on which the programme focuses is in itself a particularly important area in which to adopt Community measures .
This is not simply because we do not have accurate statistics about the number of people suffering from rare diseases , but even more so because there is a complete lack of appropriate means - in other words resources , networks and organisations - for the identification , monitoring and effective combating of these diseases .
The programme 's objectives are , firstly , to improve the data , information and knowledge concerning rare diseases ; secondly , to reinforce the teams that provide assistance ; and , thirdly , to create a rapid-reaction group for the contingency where several cases of rare diseases occur all together , as happened for example in the case of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease or new-variant CJD .
The programme concerns rare diseases , i.e. those with fewer than five cases per 10 000 people .
Since these diseases have to be combated by a combination of efforts , the programme we are voting on should be promoted .
Rare diseases form a sensitive category because each of them affects just a certain number of people and , because of the impacts and social consequences to which they give rise , there is a need to support action to cooperate with the sufferers and their families and with organisations that are active in the context of those diseases .
It is also essential to support measures which encourage and promote the provision of information to doctors and health science professionals , so as to improve the early diagnosis , recognition , treatment and prevention of rare diseases .
An essential factor for the coordination of these efforts is to create a network for the monitoring and control of rare diseases , which will provide data and information to the public but must also include the potential to provide immediate assistance .
To achieve the programme 's objectives , we consider that the budget for the period from 1999 to 2003 should be set at ECU 14 million , and not ECU 6.5 million as proposed by the Council .
To conclude , Madam President , I should like to ask Parliament to vote for this programme , as formulated by the Committee on the Environment .

Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Viceconte for his efforts , Mr Poggiolini for standing in for him this evening and all the members of the committee who helped to prepare the report .
The added value of the European Union 's action is particularly obvious in this area .
The low prevalence of these diseases and the limited means for scientific research into them make it less likely that swift progress will be made in their diagnosis , treatment and cure .
On the whole they have a limited impact on public opinion .
However , they are far from insignificant either in human or economic terms , and providing effective advice and diagnosis in health intervention tends to cost disproportionately more than similar provisions for more common conditions .
Thus , it is clearly sensible for the Member States to come together through a Community mechanism which will coordinate the actions , which would otherwise take place in isolation .
Mr Valverde López 's point is very well taken here .
The Commission has proposed that the programme would run for the five years with three targets , namely , to provide knowledge about rare diseases especially for patients and their relatives , health professionals and researchers .
This is the very point made by Mr Traketellis and I support his point of view .
It is one of the main ideas behind the programme .
We also want to foster measures to strengthen the voluntary organizations involved in supporting people directly and indirectly affected by rare diseases .
This corresponds exactly with what Mrs Marinucci thinks is important and we agree .
We have in place an effective system of monitoring in order to ensure the rapid identification , assessment and handling of rare diseases and disease clusters , and they would be an important matter also .
This is consistent with ongoing activities in biomedical research , and with the recent proposal for a regulation on orphan medicinal products used for the treatment , prevention or diagnosis of these rare diseases where the commercial return is insufficient .
You first saw this proposal last March during the first reading .
At that time you adopted 28 amendments of which 16 were accepted either fully or partly by the Commission 's subsequent amended proposal .
Since then the Council has adopted a common position on the programme which reflects fully only some of the amendments from the first reading , but the Commission has entered a reserve on the common position with specific reference to the Council 's treatment of these amendments from the first reading .


As regards the 20 amendments under consideration today , the Commission can accept 11 either fully - that is Nos 3 , 12 and 16 - or , partially - Nos 1 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 15 , 17 and 19 .
Of the remaining nine amendments , Nos 4 , 8 and 13 are not acceptable for legal reasons ; Nos 5 and 20 are not acceptable for internal consistency ; Nos 2 and 10 are considered to be unacceptably limited ; No 18 is covered elsewhere , and No 14 is unacceptable because of budgetary reasons .


I shall elaborate a little on the reasoning behind the two key amendments , No 14 ( the budget ) and No 15 ( the committee ) .
I know that the budget is an issue that Parliament feels very strongly about .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has voted again for ECU 14m for the years 1999 to 2003 .
The financial perspectives as they currently stand simply do not allow for such a sum of money .
Some progress has been made since the first reading .
The common position has introduced a financial envelope of ECU 6.5m over the five-year period .
And that gives the programme at least a clear budget situation and certainly goes beyond 1999 .
So the amendment concerning the programme committee is partially acceptable .
The Commission agrees with Parliament as regards the preference for an advisory committee , rather than a mixed advisory management committee as favoured by the Council .
This is part of the Commission 's reserve on the common position .
The experience gained from the implementation of the existing programme shows that a mixed management advisory committee is inappropriate and excessive especially considering the limited budget allocation .
However , the Commission cannot accept that one of the two representatives from each Member State must be drawn from voluntary organisations .
We say that from a legal point of view .
This is not in line with the comitology decision and would affect the right of Member States to appoint the delegation .
I would end by saying that I hope that Parliament will give a favourable vote on the programme .
We share the desire to put in place Community action for this neglected and often forgotten area of real human suffering .
On the point raised by Mr Poggiolini , Mrs Marinucci and Mrs Gonzalez Alvarez concerning the database , the wording of the common position does not exclude the possibility of creating a European rare diseases database .
The problem will be dealt with and addressed during the implementation phase .
Thank you for that reply , Commissioner , and for answering all our colleagues .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Activities in favour of consumers
The next item is the report ( A4-0334 / 98 ) by Mr Whitehead , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing a general framework for Community activities in favour of consumers ( COM ( 97 ) 0684 - C4-0077 / 98-98 / 0028 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , we all welcome Commissioner Monti into the Chamber to reply to this debate .
When the historians look back on the fourth elected Parliament and its relations with the Commission between 1994 and 1999 , I think there will be a significant chapter on consumer protection .
It is a chapter that will begin with the creation of DG XXIV and the arrival of the formidable Mrs Bonino .
It will cover the hideous tragedy of the BSE crisis , which brought Parliament to the brink of a vote of no-confidence in the Commission on issues of public health and safety .
It will cover President Santer 's response in January 1996 to that crisis and the consequent undertakings written into the Treaty of Amsterdam .
It will see the establishment of a firm legal base as a framework for consumer protection , and as a necessary entrenchment in an area where , as we all know , the Community will benefit from common action for all its citizens .
I say to Commissioner Monti that a healthy countervailing power is a thing that , more than anything else , will make the single market not only efficient but also an informed and healthy market and community .
In urging the adoption of my report I should properly declare a non-financial interest myself , as an elected Council member of the Consumers ' Association of Great Britain .
I also want to thank some very staunch allies , some of them present here today in Parliament : the representative on the Committee on Budgets of our own committee , Mr Eisma , and most notably Mr Pimenta - I am glad to see him present today .
Mr Pimenta flits between the parties , but his heart is always in the right place as it is in this debate tonight .
I should especially like to thank my assistant , for whom this report was the culmination of four years of specialised work in this area .
It is for her an appropriate introduction to her new life in the Commission .
We have no time to lose in debating the Commission 's proposals .
They need to be accepted by Parliament and the Council by the end of this calendar year .
Much has already been imperilled by the lack of a legal base after the European Court of Justice ruling , including the special measures with regard to food safety , which were rightly adopted after the BSE disaster .
As my report states , we are dealing here with only one-quarter of one percent of Community spending and yet this , unlike a good deal of other Community spending , directly benefits all of the 375 million citizens of our Union .
I may be told that I cannot take the ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty , and therefore of the draft Article 153 , for granted .
Maybe .
But I think it would be grossly irresponsible for this Parliament and for its partners in the Union to approach the budget for the next five years without at least an apprehension that these responsibilities will come to the Council - the heart of what was agreed at Amsterdam , taking consumers ' interests into account across the broad range of policies and activities , extending monitoring , promoting consumer information and education .
Indeed the last of these is at the heart of what the Commission is now doing , in alliance with long-established and embryonic consumers ' NGOs throughout the Union .
The coming of the euro adds to this need for greater consumer awareness .
It is a common feature of the opinion of Mr Pimenta and of my own report that we note that the traditional role of the Commission in supporting activities within the Member States - particularly those in the south of Europe where consumer movements have not been widely developed - has been imperiled by the transfer of resources needed by a Commission which has been strapped for the money to do what is necessary .
BSE has already loaded a very heavy burden on DG XXIV and on the Commission as a whole in terms of the expanded inspectorate and the information campaigns that it has had to launch .
We have to will the proportionate means to match these pious ends .
Otherwise , this Parliament is just an empty vessel .
We have to be able to say what is necessary .
That is why , in my own amendments , I propose an increase over the next five-year period to prevent a real deterioration in consumer protection .
This amount would be ECU 130 million over five years , as opposed to ECU 114 million from 1999 onwards set out in the original proposals .
That is not there for some grandiose increase in spending or empire-building , but simply to maintain both the Commission 's well-proven support for consumer movements and the new responsibilities in health protection , the monitoring of hazardous materials and products , information on the euro and access to justice .
I particularly commend to the House Amendment No 16 from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection which added the provision that access to justice for the citizens of Europe is a necessary provision , and one which was not taken sufficiently into account in the original proposals which came to us from the Commission .
I have some reason to believe that the Council would accept some amendment of this order .
We look forward to their proposals , perhaps next week .
I hope the Council can also accept the strongly-held view of Parliament that a starting budget of ECU 24 million in 1999 , rising in the proportions set out in Agenda 2000 , would produce a financial envelope for the legal base of between ECU 120 million and ECU 130 million .
We are not saying here that this is a matter of endless increase .
I have said in my report that there are elements within the current consumer budget , like the financing of EHLASS , that really should not be there .
They belong in another part of the Community budget .
If they were moved to it there would be a saving to the ' consumer ' appropriation of over ECU 7 million over the five-year period .
The British presidency acted swiftly to untangle the knots caused by the European Court of Justice ruling which it sought , together with other Member States .
I should like to commend the Austrian presidency which has shown considerable dispatch in moving towards a viable and sufficient legal base .
They deserve our salutations for that .
I should like to say not only to Commissioner Monti , but also to the Member States and the Council - to all of them , including my own : do not betray Europe 's consumers and citizens .
Allow this modest proposal to go through .
Above all , do not claim to be consumer champions , with glossy leaflets and public clamour , unless you have the civil courage to sustain in private what you commend in public .
The only single market worth having is the one where we can all make informed choices about what we buy , what we eat and how we live .
This report is intended to bring that one small step closer .
Madam President , may I begin by greeting Mr Whitehead , not only in his capacity as rapporteur , but also as chairman of the consumer protection inter-group .
His work has been outstanding and this report , which I fully support , bears this out .
This report was urgently needed .
A legal base is necessary and it is positive that the Commission should have proposed it .
However , there are points that must be improved , in particular access to justice , which Mr Whitehead mentioned .
Amendments Nos 16 and 33 are essential .
When I held that particular responsibility in Portugal , I found that rapid and efficient access to justice was one of the key elements in protecting the consumer .
Second , how can we overcome the crisis of confidence on the part of European consumers towards European institutions , particularly as regards the Council and the Commission , brought about by the BSE crisis ?
Amendments Nos 4 , 6 and 22 seek to move towards a solution to this problem .
Third , the Commission proposal is inadequate regarding the impact of the euro and the achievement of genuinely single markets , particularly in financial services .
We already have immense experience of countless cases of contracts where consumers have been taken in by misleading advertising or bad contracts .
I support Amendments Nos 24 and 26 .
Fourth , the effective implementation of European legislation and its correct application by the Member States .
It is certainly necessary to continue and to improve what has already been done , but the Commission proposal is defective here .
Fifth , the guaranteed review of the present action programme following ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam ( Amendment No 21 ) .
It is essential that the Commission should present the revised version after ratification .
Lastly , the recognition of the vital role of non-governmental organisations and the clarification of rules under which they are given assistance or contracts are concluded with them ( Amendments Nos 17 to 20 ) .
I wish to end by supporting the rapporteur 's statement regarding the budget .
I consider that the budgetary framework which the Commission presents for executing such an ambitious project is not adequate and , therefore , in this regard , in the context of Agenda 2000 and in the preparation of policies up to 2006 , the Commission must review the budget if it wishes to have a consumer policy that is supported by 320 million persons who will thereby also be supporting the construction of Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that it is vital to pursue a proper policy of consumer protection .
Consumers are justifiably puzzled by the suspension of funding , as ordered by the recent Court of Justice ruling , and the programmes intended to consolidate consumer organisations in Spain , Italy , Portugal , Greece and the Irish Republic would certainly become less efficient if this ruling continued to jeopardise certain categories of discretionary expenditure .
Article 129a of the Maastricht Treaty and then Article 153 of the Amsterdam Treaty set out certain actions , which however are not sufficient unless a programme of priority measures is established for the implementation of the existing general framework .
This framework at last makes it possible to have a legal base for promoting actions in the interests of consumers , allowing for a budget line amounting to ECU 114 million over the next five years .
The actions which are possible with this financial support range across four sectors : consumer health and safety , the protection of consumers ' economic interests in respect of goods and services , consumer education and information , and the promotion and representation of consumers ' interests .
It is , however , also important to support the scientific committees and experimentation , so that the information campaign will adequately promote access and participation by consumers .
We often forget that the five-year period 1999-2003 will be a particularly important and difficult one for consumers , who find themselves facing challenges such as the advent of the single currency , continued growth of the information society , accession of the applicant states to the EU , and information on food safety and quality .
In conclusion , consumers will need to be provided with adequate means of assessing risks and taking legal action where necessary , in other words monitoring and inspection will need to be speeded up .
Madam President , greater consumer protection for ordinary citizens is imperative .
I support the recommendation of this report to increase expenditure on consumer protection by 15 % for the period 1999 to 2003 .
The amount of work that needs to be done out of this budget is enormous , ranging from research to investigation to ensure that adequate legal redress be available when needed .
Give the billions of pounds spent by consumers every year on a vast array of products and services , the ECU 130m being sought in this report is a very small amount in relative terms .
Many people in the United Kingdom are very worried about what happens to consumers when the euro arrives .
Is it going to be like the change to decimal currency - a rip-off ?
International cooperation between the various consumer interest groups is also important given the global market that now operates across virtually all sectors .
Finally , this Parliament has a duty to ensure that consumers are properly informed , educated and protected .
The implementation of this report will help to do that and I congratulate Mr Whitehead on bringing it in .
Madam President , we in the Green Group were very concerned at the Court 's decision to freeze the budget line for consumer activities .
What we in fact wanted was for these activities to be expanded and more resources to be allocated .
For us that is the crucial point .
We support the Commission proposal .
However , we believe it is most important that resources are made available not just to the classic consumer organisations but also to the NGOs .
May I remind you that in the Federal Republic very considerable resources are spent on an advertising campaign to promote meat as a vital energy source .
But there we are talking about marketing companies , which must not be confused with consumer organisations .
So the aim must be genuinely to strengthen the consumer organisations , which also means that key consumer protection organisations must receive funding from that budget line .
But this must not lead to funds being diverted from , for instance , the action programme concerning environment-related diseases or from activities in favour of consumers .
So we consider it most important that key consumer organisations also benefit from these resources .
The money really must be used to inform the consumer and not to market certain products in the European Union to the benefit of industry .
The consumers need these resources , because they have a great need for information .
Madam President , I remember the report on priorities in consumer policy for 1996 to 1998 .
The rapporteur at the time warned the Commission not to move too fast , yet now that is exactly what he himself is doing .
He is not just calling for more funding , but also for more policy areas to include consumer activities .
I feel that the Commission document is more in tune with the limited opportunities open to consumer policy at European level .
The proposal to extend consumer activities to all areas of policy seems completely unrealistic . The Commission 's decision to go for transport and public health seems a sensible one , in that it is based on experience from the last few years and also fits in with the next action programme .
The increase from ECU 114 million to ECU 130 million which the rapporteur proposes in Amendment No 14 is far too little to be able to cover all areas of policy , and some scope must be left for dealing with unexpected consumer problems .

Part of this must be earmarked for defending consumers ' interests when the euro is launched , and here I agree with the rapporteur : these interests can best be defended by supporting measures taken by the consumer protection organisations .
This brings me to my final point .
I welcome the shift in consumer policy which the establishment of this general framework represents .
We will no longer just be drafting regulations , but will actually be working to strengthen the position of consumers .
Consumer protection begins with the consumers themselves .
Strong consumer representation improves the operation of the market , while statutory regulations simply disrupt it .
In conclusion , it is not the quantity of measures to benefit consumers that needs to be improved , but their quality .
Madam President , the Whitehead report discusses how European consumers are to be protected when the euro is introduced and how the Union is to deal with existing concerns over the safety and quality of foods .
I think it is a good report that touches on some important questions .
I think that the BSE crisis has taught us that we must adopt the precautionary principle when it comes to food , in other words also take measures even when it is only suspected that humans can be adversely affected by a food .
We should now devise rules to reduce the use of antibiotics in animal husbandry .
I believe that stable and firm rules create consumer confidence , as does labelling which provides sound information to the consumer .
I am , however , opposed in principle to increasing the budgetary provision in the proposal from ECU 114 million over five years to ECU 130 million , which the rapporteur is proposing .
I trust that the Commission has done its homework here and has got the right results .
In addition , I think that measures of a different kind are as effective in this area as central increases in budget appropriations .
I have a feeling that politicians sometimes tend to adopt measures which are not entirely necessary .
I do not think that we politicians should underestimate the civic forces in society .
Consumers themselves have a major responsibility .
Perhaps we politicians are inclined to say that it is we who must solve their problems .
In the long run , this can lull consumers into a false sense of security .
We must of course be exacting in our demands on safety , but we must also allow the consumers to use their power - which is now considerable - to take the necessary decisions .
A consequence of this will be that producers become more attentive to consumers ' demands .
Madam President , we must strike a blow for consumers , not because some elsewhere might think that the European Parliament lacks faith in itself , but because the consumers ' interests need to be brought into focus .
As a justification for the legislative proposal , the Commission states that the purpose of the general framework is to make it possible for consumers ' interests to be taken more into account in the context of the EU 's other policies and activities .
I am surprised that the Commission then only gives public health , research and transport as examples and does not mention the integration of consumer concerns into areas such as agricultural policy , competition , financial services and , last but certainly not least , the EU 's food policy .
Apart from that I think it extremely regrettable that the Commission proposal limits support to 50 % .
This rule makes it impossible for many smaller consumers ' organisations to take part in projects , because they simply cannot afford to pay the remainder themselves .
Also consumers ' organisations in the smaller countries , including the Consumers ' Advisory Council in Denmark , have problems with this form of financing .
The EU should pursue consumer policy in such a way that it is actually feasible , for smaller consumers ' organisations too , to take part in projects .
The financial resources of the organisations are tied up in wages and other administrative costs .
And it must also be remembered that it is often the EU , rather than the consumers ' organisations themselves , that wants to launch various campaigns , and that in this context the EU needs reliable consumers ' organisations , indeed organisations like the Danish Consumers ' Advisory Council , to take charge of these campaigns .
Hence it is not reasonable to ask the organisations to cover as much as 50 % of the cost themselves , certainly not when the campaigns are an EU priority but not necessarily a priority for the consumers ' organisations .
Also we find it unacceptable that the administrative part of the EU 's consumer campaigns is often so complex that it demands an incredible amount of patience for the staff of the organisations to take part in these EU projects .
There is also a tendency to forget that the EU 's campaigns derive great benefit from the credibility and reliability of the national and European consumers ' organisations , but that the EU currently only pays half price for that credibility .
Finally , having said that , I would like to thank Philip Whitehead because , once again and - as usual - in an excellent report , he has struck a blow for consumers ' interests .
I wholeheartedly support the report .
Madam President , I am particularly pleased that Mr Monti is here with us this evening : as we are all aware , he is the Commissioner responsible for the single market - or the internal market , to use a more agreeable term , given that we are dealing with consumers .
The needs of this single market , encompassing 370 million citizens in their capacity as consumers , must increasingly be taken into account by all the Community institutions ; we must keep up with the winds of change sweeping through the consumerist world .
We very much agree with the call for increased funding , voiced by the rapporteur and strongly endorsed by Mr Pimenta : these improvements are merely a recognition of the new circumstances whereby consumers are the protagonists in all public and private activities .
Consumers first !
We can call him client , user or whatever we will , but the consumer remains king : it is he who , in a changing market , in the public and private spheres , constantly demands new or improved products , calls for simpler and less dangerous packaging , seeks more information on what he is consuming , clearer labels , eco-friendly and less polluting materials and , finally , demands modern and efficient services ; in other words , more assurances all round .
These consumers move around more , wish to broaden their horizons and want to make better use of their time .
Their children might practise a different occupation from their parents , perhaps in a different country , but undoubtedly on a scale which is no longer just national but at least Community-wide , spanning all the EU countries .
The major innovation in this whole scenario is the advent of the euro .
Day one of the new single currency , which will revolutionise purchasing habits and consumer patterns , is 1 January 1999 .
It is our duty to brief consumers exhaustively on the advent of the single currency , on the one hand to train businesses , and on the other to inform the citizens .
Only yesterday , during the discussion on the euro , I requested that the issuing of the 500 euro banknote be postponed by one year , because it could cause substantial difficulties for consumers within the new monetary system .
Their interests are the focus of our day-to-day efforts .
Madam President , over the past decade the Union has considerably stepped up its consumer policy , especially since the entry into force of the Treaty on European Union .
Further developments in respect of consumer policy and health protection are provided for in the Amsterdam Treaty .
I very much agree with all those speakers this evening who have remarked , albeit in differing terms , that consumers are the protagonists of the European single market .
This proposal outlines the legal framework for activities eligible for Community funding under the policy relating to consumers and health protection .
For decades now , actions undertaken in the name of EU consumer policy have been financed through the Community budget .
During this period there has been no basic legal act geared to financing such action , nor a formal description of activities eligible for funding , with the sole exception of the references contained in Article 129a , introduced into the EC Treaty in 1992 .
In the light of continuing European integration , it clearly becomes necessary to assure the citizens of the Union , in their capacity as consumers , that their rights and interests will be adequately protected in the new enlarged single market - and that market is taken a stage further with the single currency .
Consumers ' interests must be taken into account in the same way as those of the other economic players .
This general framework should not be confused with a multiannual action programme .
Indeed , it would be impossible to predict with accuracy , on a five-year basis , all the problem areas in which the Community needs to intervene for the purposes of consumer protection .
By the end of the year , the Commission is to present a programme outlining its priorities for the years 1999 to 2001 .
This programme will explain the actions which the Commission intends to undertake over the next three years .
The decision now under discussion constitutes the legal base for financing the activities set out in the priority programme .
Following the Court of Justice ruling last May , rapid adoption of this proposal has become necessary , given that , in the absence of a legal base for the expenditure , most of our activities in the field of consumer policy and health protection would have to be suspended .
I wish in particular to thank the rapporteur , Mr Whitehead , for his excellent report , for his constructive work and for the way in which he has managed to accelerate Parliament 's internal procedures , making it likely that a decision will be reached by the end of the year .
Almost all of Parliament 's amendments are acceptable to the Commission , and incidentally I would thank the rapporteur for having extended the indicative list of activities , notably in respect of consumers ' rights .
However Amendments Nos 12 and 16 , on the adaptation of this decision to the Amsterdam Treaty after its entry into force - amendments with which , I must say , I broadly sympathise - are too general and sweeping in the Commission 's opinion ; therefore they cannot be accepted in their present form .
I can nevertheless undertake here and now to present to the Commission , as soon as the Treaty enters into force , a proposal taking account of the implications of the Amsterdam Treaty for consumer policy .
As regards Amendment No 13 , on the financial allocation , the Commission will provide Parliament and the Council with all necessary technical assistance to enable them to reach an early agreement on this matter .
I would merely point out - and I do so more to the Council than to the European Parliament - that , once the financial allocation has been set , its adaptation to the implications of the Amsterdam Treaty would seem rather unlikely ; therefore the financial allocation must take account , as of now , of the new activities which will result from the Treaty 's entry into force .
We are currently at the stage of the first reading , and the Council is to announce its position on this proposal on 3 November .
As I have already said , Parliament and the Council have undertaken to speed up the decision-making procedure for the adoption of the proposals which constitute the legal base providing for Community funding .
The Commission will do all it can to enable Parliament and the Council to reach their decision at second reading by the end of this year .
I would like to end by reiterating my thanks to all those who have spoken : their comments will be fully taken into account when the new three-year action plan to which I referred is drawn up .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Conditional access services
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0325 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0421 / 98-97 / 0198 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive on legal protection of services based on , or consisting of , conditional access ( Rapporteur : Mr Anastassopoulos ) .
Madam President , with this recommendation for second reading of the directive on the legal protection of encrypted services which we are considering today , we are taking the penultimate step so that , with the Council 's acceptance of our two amendments , it will at last become possible for this directive to be approved in the near future .
That will enable us in the European Union to do something more effective and more coordinated about a pirate activity which represents a real threat .
The illicit decoders produced by the pirate industry are estimated to account for perhaps as many as 20 % of all decoders .
The loss of income for encrypted services exceeds ECU 200 million per year and the effect on the European film industry is truly appalling , since 34 % of its income comes from that source .
In any event , it is enough to mention that , in just four months , there have been on the celebrated Internet over a million advertisements for illicit pirate devices , just to give us a picture of the extent of illicit activities in this sector .
These are activities which militate against the proper operation of our internal market , impeding the further development of industries specialising in new technologies and the development of new means of communication to facilitate trade .
They create consumer protection problems and weaken the protection provided by agencies dealing with intellectual property rights .
Designing more sophisticated decoders with more powerful features offering increased protection in order to combat piracy has been shown to be both costly and ultimately ineffectual , because the pirate industry has always managed to adapt at lightning speed and neutralise any protection system with even more advanced techniques .
The only thing left , therefore , was a Community approach to the problem involving harmonisation of the rules protecting services based on , or consisting of the provision of conditional access .
The Commission and the European Parliament in the first instance , but then the Council too , have shown that they understand the urgent need for this measure , because piracy has not ceased to flourish .
Between the Commission 's Green Paper and the second reading of the draft directive , which Parliament called for following my first report in May 1992 , only two years have gone by , a period which can certainly be regarded as brief in the context of Community procedures .
My second report on the draft directive , which was approved by a very large majority on 30 April 1998 by the House , included 24 amendments .
In its amended proposal , the Commission accepted 18 of these in whole or in part , and the Council has essentially followed suit .
The result is that we have before us a common position adopted by the Council whose text has several improvements compared with the original text .
The definitions have been reworked and have become much clearer .
A new Article 1 clarifies the directive 's scope .
The rental and distribution of illicit devices have been added to the illicit activities , and the factor of addition has been established in the new explanatory concept 21 by the Council .
These important elements , however much they satisfied your rapporteur , were nevertheless unable to offset the refusal by the Commission and the Council to extend the directive 's scope .
In its amendments , Parliament had asked for the protection of conditional access , with the aim of providing more general protection of the economic value of the services and not just ensuring remuneration for their provision .
However , the Commission and the Council insisted on limiting themselves to that last point alone .
The disagreement could have become more acute and prolonged if Commissioner Monti had not given an undertaking to authorise a study to ascertain whether it would be appropriate to extend legal protection to services which use conditional access for purposes beyond just securing remuneration .
Following that undertaking , which brings the prospect of more extensive protection in the future , your rapporteur felt that there was no need to resubmit the amendments tabled by Parliament at first reading .
With Amendment No 2 to Article 7 , I thought it preferable to keep the door open for a later stage and generally to make things easier for the Council , always provided that just the two amendments which go together with the recommendation for second reading are accepted , so that the final draft directive can be approved quickly .
Madam President , our hope is that even though the Council and the Commission have restricted its scope , the directive will help to deal more effectively with decoder piracy .
In that hope , I have the honour to submit this recommendation for second reading to the House .

Madam President , as the rapporteur , Mr Anastassopoulos , said , Parliament 's main concern was to fill a legal vacuum , and we must bear in mind that the three institutions have worked very effectively . Consequently , in only one year and two weeks , this directive , which is aimed , as the rapporteur said , at combating piracy in information society services , television and radio broadcasting , etcetera , has been approved .
The directive is a genuine one in that it does not contain provisions of a regulatory nature . It leaves Member States sufficient leeway to develop legislation either through criminal law or simply through civil responsibility , which to me seems quite reasonable .
The directive is also noteworthy because of the comprehensive way in which it deals with the issue .
As Mr Anastassopoulos said , we have chosen to close the matter for now , but have left open the option of carrying out a short-term review through Amendment No 2 , should any inadequacies be detected .
And , apart from Amendment No 2 , which is aimed at quickly rectifying any inadequacies , the Committee on Legal Affairs has also tabled Amendment No 1 that refers to the general need for each state to protect services that are remunerated .
I think that the three institutions are carrying out some good work and as always - as Commissioner Monti is well aware - the Committee on Legal Affairs has been very keen to collaborate .
I think that Parliament will be able to approve the text tomorrow with the amendments tabled by the rapporteur , and a step forward will therefore be taken .
We must , of course , remember that we are dealing with the protection of certain fundamental rights , such as the right to information , which is , moreover , compatible with the exercise of private activities that effectively enable this information to be transmitted .
I believe that Community law will soon be developed by Member States and that this matter will thus be dealt with without many difficulties .
Madam President , I should like to begin - and this is not just rhetoric - by congratulating the rapporteur on behalf of my group , the Group of the European People 's Party .
I think that by accepting the sensible and well-reasoned amendments that were tabled , this directive has satisfactorily concluded a very complicated issue in a very short space of time .
This success has undoubtedly been achieved thanks to the combination of the rapporteur 's rigour and skillful negotiating .
As far as the issue itself is concerned , the proposal for a directive covers a wide range of interactive broadcasting services , independently from the method of transmission used .
The market for conditional-access services is growing rapidly due to digital technology , but such growth may be threatened by the equally rapid development of piracy , a parallel industry - which is currently booming , as the rapporteur pointed out - that manufactures and markets the devices that facilitate unauthorized access to these services .
Apart from harming the industry , to paraphrase the rapporteur , this piracy has a number of adverse effects , not only in terms of the loss of income from subscriptions to service providers but also in terms of the economic damage it causes to conditional-access and content providers .
Furthermore , it will mean higher prices and less choice for the consumer , who is often the victim of fraud because he is not told where the pirated device he buys is from and is also led to believe that the device being bought is an authorized one .
The discrepancies between our legal systems have very serious and negative implications for the development of these services and also - as the rapporteur mentioned - for the internal market .
So , in simpler terms , this proposal for a directive is an instrument that is both necessary and useful to combat one of the many facets - but a very important one - of technological piracy . It is a facet that , through technical devices , facilitates access to encrypted services without paying the legal established fee .
This characterises the directive 's field of application , its very structure and its purpose .
It does not aim to protect access to any type of distant encrypted service . Rather , its purpose is limited to those services that depend on previous authorisation aimed at guaranteeing the remuneration of the service , as well as services provided on the basis of this conditional access .
This limited field of application - as highlighted by the rapporteur - gave rise to a fruitful debate , an interactive debate - if you will pardon the pun - , between the Commission and Parliament .
As a result of this interaction , Parliament accepts the arguments put forward by the Commission , which advise against including the broader concept of economic value as a protected legal interest alongside the concept of remuneration .
Tomorrow we shall vote in favour of the Commission and the Council 's approach and , in this case , we will support the argument that the legal instrument would lose some of its effectiveness since its precepts would have to be defined in very general terms in order to respond to very different situations .
By accepting this , the House understands that the Commission has committed itself to immediately initiating the necessary proceedings to ensure that those other services that are rendered without payment are also protected by European legislation as soon as possible .
As far as these services are concerned , there is no doubt that criminal activities also damage an interest that can be legally protected , and this , in the last analysis , affects them economically .
This therefore resolves one of the controversies that has plagued these proceedings and , to a large extent , justifies Amendment No 2 by the Committee on Legal Affairs .
This was voted for unanimously at the suggestion of the rapporteur , insofar as it expresses concern regarding follow-up work , so effectively led by the rapporteur himself . The text of the common position contains clear improvements , not only because it follows the guidelines of the first reading report drawn up by this Parliament in its capacity as co-legislator , but also because it offers substantial improvements from a technical and objective point of view .
The rapporteur referred to the clearer definition of Article 1 but , in terms of clarity , it is worth studying the strengthened definitions in Article 2 .
At the same time , a number of gaps have been filled , such as the inclusion of activities relating to the renting and distribution of illicit devices among those activities that are brought to prosecution and those liable for prosecution . In addition , punishments are being better adapted in their current form to the different national legal systems .
We must also be pleased with the fact that , for example , difficult , specific and overly technical expressions , such as the seizure of illicit devices , that in some systems - for example , the Spanish system - would be difficult to implement from the transposition of the directive , have been replaced by more generic forms , such as the removal of illicit devices from commercial circles . This now appears in the text and is being introduced under the premise that each Member State will adopt it in accordance with the structures of their own legal system .
Lastly , the new recital includes the element of intent , which enables national legislation to prosecute the perpetrators of illicit activities who can be shown to have had fraudulent intent .
This addition must not , in any case , modify the concept of civil responsibility that in all our legal systems is of an objective nature , in other words , independent of any form of subjectivity .
To sum up , this directive is important in that it does fill a gap , albeit partially .
For us , it is a stage in implementing wider legal protection .
The ball is now in the Commission 's court .
Let us hope it acts soon .
Madam President , Commissioner , it could be said that in this Chamber we are ' cryptic correspondents ' , who go in for coded messages .
I do not know what I am now expecting from the interpreters .
To begin with , I regret that we have not taken up the amendment that was discussed in the Legal Affairs Committee .
What we wanted to secure by that amendment was that anything deliberately devised in order to circumvent this protection should have been made subject to criminal sanction .
I regret that this has not brought into the plenary debate .
Secondly I wish to take up the serious matter - in the light of information we have recently received - that it is not just the French but also the Spanish Government that persists in fragmenting the market in encryption products .
I have already taken up this question with Commissioner Monti .
I am very sad that we are not achieving progress , indeed we seem to be moving backwards as regards encryption in other sectors .
It is really my hope that this will form part of the work to create an area of peace , security and freedom which we have been talking about since the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking the members of the Committee on Legal Affairs , and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Anastassopoulos , for their alacrity in examining this important and complex proposal .
I also wish personally to compliment the rapporteur , who obviously has a thorough knowledge of the subject as well as great political sensitivity .
As a result , I hope that the directive will be adopted and implemented very soon .
I would refer in particular to the withdrawal of the main amendment put forward at first reading , seeking to extend the scope of the proposal .
As stated in the report explaining the reasons for the recommendation , the Commission has undertaken to conduct a study to investigate the use of conditional access techniques for purposes other than that of ensuring remuneration , and to take into consideration the legal and economic implications for the single market and the need to introduce appropriate legal protection .
The call for tenders for this study was published in the Official Journal of 10 July 1998 , and I am happy to announce that the administrative preparations for the relevant contract are now in their final phase .
Therefore the Commission welcomes Parliament 's second amendment , designed to create a legal base to allow for periodical adaptations of the directive and in particular of the definitions under Article 2 , in the light of technical and economic developments .
The first amendment introduces a new recital which helps to clarify the aims of the directive ; it reflects the content of Amendment No 10 tabled at first reading , which was incorporated into the Commission 's modified proposal but rejected by the Council .
I note with satisfaction the rewording of this amendment , and can tell you that the Commission is happy to accept it .
The Commission will defend the new modified proposal in the Council , taking account of the European Parliament 's amendments , in an attempt to convince the Council to draw the appropriate conclusions and , in its turn , adopt the revised text .
Once again , Madam President , I thank Mr Anastassopoulos and all those who have cooperated in what we really can describe as a further example of rapid and successful interaction between our two institutions .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Recognition of qualifications
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0319 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0422 / 98-96 / 0031 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive establishing a mechanism for the recognition of qualifications in respect of the professional activities covered by the Directives on liberalization and transitional measures and supplementing the general systems for the recognition of qualifications ( Rapporteur : Mrs Gebhardt ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Monti , first let me thank all those colleagues who helped me to draft this report .
That made it easier to reach a result that the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights could approve unanimously , which creates the best basis for making the necessary amendments to the common position .
That document concerns the mechanism for the recognition of qualifications in commerce and industry .
In Article 3 ( 1 ) , the Council provides that , in case of doubt , evidence can be provided by an adaptation period or an aptitude test , at the choice of the host Member State .
I regard this as an unnecessary bureaucratic imposition .
The Legal Affairs Committee agrees with me that it should be left to the applicant to choose the mechanism for providing evidence of adequate knowledge and skills .
There are sound reasons for this .
An individual who wants to settle and work in another country can work out for himself how to provide evidence of adequate professional qualifications that fulfil the host country 's requirements .
So he should also be able to decide for himself whether to sit an aptitude test or to attend an adaptation period .
He must not be burdened with the demands of a bureaucracy that he may find quite alien .
After all , we are trying to dismantle rather than build up obstacles .
Applicants were given this choice in the first two horizontal directives on the recognition of diplomas .
It is important and necessary for the coherence and transparency of European legislation to adopt a corresponding rule for the third horizontal directive we are discussing here .
To that end we must amend the common position , and I do not think we will find that particularly hard to do .
I assume that not many more monitors will be turned on in Members ' offices at this time of night than there are Members present here in plenary .
But it would be wrong to take that to mean that we are merely killing time on a trivial matter .
The directive on recognition in the field of commerce and industry is in fact a highly important one .
I can give you one figure to demonstrate this . We are turning 35 liberalisation and transitional directives that have come into being over the years into one single one .
When it enters into force , 35 earlier laws will suddenly lapse .
That is what I see as the consolidation of European legislation .
It creates more transparency , even if the layman would probably find his head spinning at the sight of this document .
That should not necessarily be the case .
If we really want to come closer to the people , we must strive in future to make our texts more readable .
Otherwise even a minimum of legislation will frighten people off .
I cite my own amendment as a bad example .
It is four sentences long , but only amends one point of the common position .
The German version of the draft amendment consists of no less than 36 lines , and even the first sentence is an endless 82 words long .
The second achieves a proud count of 50 and the third a mere 30 .
By comparison , when journalists had to measure their dispatches in words , 500 words represented a full-scale report on an important event far away .
Or look at the Ten Commandments . They say much in few words .
That is not because Moses was lazy , did not have a computer and had to engrave it all laboriously in stone - it is a simply a well-drafted text !
So much for the ugly facade of the directive on recognition , which is designed to sweep away 35 old rulings in order to create greater clarity and legal certainty .
I think that is most important .
Others could say the directive is an industrious piece of work , a successful technical repair job on the legislation and no more than that .
But it is more than that .
In fact this directive is much more - if we take a serious look at it .
It helps to implement an important civil right in the European Union , the right to freedom of movement .
Remember , it is only since Maastricht that civil rights have become a part of the Treaties on which our European Union is based .
They are basic rights , although they are not drafted in particularly lavish terms .
Article 8a on freedom of movement provides that every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States , subject to the limitations and conditions laid down in this Treaty .
This could be termed conditional freedom of movement on paper .
The present directive creates an area of genuine freedom of movement that is recoverable by law .
For surely the truth is this : freedom of movement has to mean freedom to reside and work in the place of one 's choice .
We have made a beginning with two other directives , now we are giving the green light to activities in commerce and industry .
Bureaucratic obstacles have been removed and the proposed amendment will ensure the necessary fair treatment .
That is how the road looks that runs from civil rights on paper to living reality .
The recognition of diplomas is a big step along that road .
It not only loosens the bonds restricting young people in the exercise of their profession , but is also an important means of combating the scourge of unemployment in Europe .
Why ?
Because by guaranteeing professional freedom of movement we can counter what is often an unfair distribution of work .
After all , we all know about the complaints of numerous sectors that could offer enough jobs in certain regions , but cannot find suitable workers .
And then there will be the young person who does not dare to learn the trade of his dreams because it is not needed in his particular region .
The freedom of establishment guaranteed by the directive we will vote on tomorrow will ensure the necessary labour mobility .
This is not just an economic necessity , but for many who love their work it is also a matter of personal happiness .
I cannot imagine doing a better political service to our citizens than helping to fulfil their wishes and dreams .
Now that we are completing economic and monetary union with the introduction of the euro , we can turn our eyes to the people of Europe and their rights .
It is up to us to breathe life into citizens ' rights .
I believe that looked at from that perspective we can see the true importance of the recognition directive .
But it must not remain an isolated one .
There are many ways of making Europe useful to its people through citizens ' rights .
Just a few months ago we adopted a whole range of measures with the De Clercq report .
Let us implement them !
In conclusion , let me clear up an imprecision in the wording of the amendment .
In some languages , the term ' beneficiary ' crept in instead of ' applicant ' .
Only the word ' applicant ' makes sense and corresponds to the word ' demandeur ' which I chose in the original French text .
I would ask for this to be corrected in all the language versions .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , operators in the commercial , industrial and craft sectors will soon receive recognition , from the Member State in which they intend to establish themselves , of qualifications obtained in their Member State of origin .
What we are about to approve at second reading is an across-the-board system of recognition , according to the recognition mechanism referred to by the Court of Justice in the Glassopoulo ruling .
This complements Directives 89 / 48 / EEC and 92 / 51 / EEC , the first relating to university degrees and the second to vocational training , which are currently being updated to incorporate the Glassopoulo case law and to carry out some helpful simplification .
The Commission and the Council have accepted the amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading .
The Council has moreover put forward some highly commendable modifications , such as the easing of the criteria concerning the length of training , giving priority to practical experience .
Before authorising someone to operate in the industrial , commercial or craft sectors , the Member State concerned will have to conduct a comparison of the knowledge and skills certified by the professional diplomas and qualifications acquired in other Member States and the skills required under its own national regulations .
If there is equivalence , recognition must be granted .
The host Member State must complete this procedure within eight months of receiving the application .
Legal action may be taken if the application is rejected .
If there are differences between the training provided in the Member State of origin and in the host Member State , the migrant worker must prove that he has acquired the additional knowledge through an updating course or an aptitude test .
The only outstanding point at issue between Parliament and the Council of Ministers concerns the responsibility for choosing between a course and an aptitude test .
In its common position , the Council states that the host Member State should have this choice , albeit taking account of the migrant 's preference , but the Committee on Legal Affairs decided unanimously - and quite rightly , in my opinion - that the choice should be left up to the migrant worker .
There are two reasons for this : the administrative difficulties encountered by people wishing to obtain recognition of their qualifications in another Member State , which would be further compounded ; and the need to keep a parallel between this directive and the general system of recognition of qualifications , already established through Directives 89 / 48 and 92 / 51 , which give the migrant worker the right to choose between an adaptation period and an aptitude test .
Another important aspect is the procedure for updating Annex A of the directive . I believe that the decision to abide by the codecision procedure already laid down for the body of the directive is correct , because aspects of a legal nature which would merit a legislative procedure can often sneak into annexes .
Finally , in complimenting Mrs Gebhardt on her work , I hope that the Council of Ministers will take on board the points raised by the European Parliament , and that the directive will be adopted very shortly in its final form .
Madam President , Commissioner , supplementing the recognition system for examination certificates is essential to increase the free movement of citizens and to improve standards of equality among them and safeguard their legal protection .
People seeking the recognition of qualifications should , however , be allowed to choose a method themselves by which they can show their qualifications : either through application tests or adaptation periods .
I too hope , as has been said already , that the Council will adopt this amendment by the rapporteur .
The result would thus match the existing practice in the horizontal directives .
The whole area of reciprocal recognition of examinations and qualifications is a vital one in the practical development of European cooperation .
The issue concerns not only the movement of skilled and professional people , but also the participation of students and young people in educational and exchange programmes and the wish for them to acquire experience alongside their studies , as well as developing a facility for European cooperation .
For example , the Socrates and Leonardo programmes , which are at present being reorganised , are good tools for reciprocal understanding and for the development of European awareness .
But at the same time , there has to be an awareness that the education programme must also include the recognition of examinations passed and qualifications gained in another Member State
One problem is still a lack of knowledge of the workings of the common system for recognition and the possibility of an appeal .
We have to develop ways of spreading information on working conditions and vacant posts through the Eures network .
Furthermore , the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training does much good work for the reciprocal recognition of professional qualifications .
The Commission should now look very closely into the experience gained from the application of the recognition system and the possible practical problems that exist , and embark on the further action needed , on the basis of a comparative study and the progress made .
Madam President , I have a good deal of sympathy for one remark made by the rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt .
It may well be that the Chamber is not very full at this hour , yet for all its simplicity - and because of its simplicity - this directive really is extremely important .
And for three reasons : it is a tremendous simplification ; it directly affects the people 's Europe ; and it relates more particularly to mobility of labour , which is so important in terms of enhancing the freedom of individual citizens , especially in an economic and monetary union .
It is vital in an economic and monetary union that labour should enjoy a high degree of mobility .
As we are only too well aware , in Europe , unlike the United States , we shall always have the factor of language diversity - and would certainly not wish to lose it - but at least we can and must minimise man-made obstacles , including all the difficulties which this directive seeks to overcome .
I am pleased that this House is able to approve the Council 's common position almost in its entirety .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt , and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights for their constructive attitude .
The amendment granting the migrant the right to choose between an aptitude test and an adaptation course is acceptable to the Commission , as it is designed to facilitate freedom of movement for workers .
This directive is important because it not only simplifies Community law by merging 35 directives into a single text , but also extends recognition to qualifications for certain occupations which are not yet covered under the general system .
I would also recall that , very logically in my view , this proposal has received the support of Parliament 's Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , as a contribution to combating unemployment , an area where it is so difficult to come up with effective , straightforward measures .
Here we have one !
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Court of First Instance
The next item is the report ( A4-0290 / 98 ) by Mr David W. Martin , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the draft Council Decision amending Council Decision 88 / 591 / ECSC , EEC , Euratom establishing the Court of First Instance of the European Communities to enable it to give decisions in cases when constituted by a single Judge ( 6290 / 97 - C4-0218 / 97-97 / 0908 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , the Court of First Instance was created in 1988 and first heard cases in 1989 .
The reason for its creation was that the Court of Justice itself could no longer cope with its case load .
The reality is that the Court of First Instance only had to deal with 55 cases in 1989 and in 1997 it had 624 .
Although 624 cases is a considerable number , it should have been possible for the Court of First Instance to deal with these efficiently .
Unfortunately , the backlog at the end of 1997 was 1 106 cases .
So we have a crisis .
Clearly the Court of First Instance cannot cope with its workload and delayed justice often impacts on the quality of justice .
We are anticipating a further increase in the workload of the Court of First Instance when appeals against the trademark decisions start to feed their way into the system .
The Court is naturally and rightly looking at ways to speed up the rate at which it handles cases .
In essence the proposal before us today is that certain types of cases , primarily those that raise non-complex legal issues , should be heard by a single judge instead of by chambers of three or five judges .
This item was very controversial and the vote ended in a dead heat the first time we voted on it , eight Members voting in favour , eight against and four abstaining .
Eventually we voted again and the committee agreed to support the proposal .
Briefly , the arguments against the proposal were that by moving towards the system of having a single judge , we would undermine the multinational nature of the Court .
Many members of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights felt that it was important that different legal systems and different legal cultures were expressed in any judgment .
There was also a danger that a judgment would be identified with a nationality .
For example , an Italian judge who consistently gave judgments in a particular way against his colleagues might wrongly be impugned as having a national interest in his or her decision .
So it was felt that to be able to identify the nationality of a judge might start to weaken the confidence of the general public in the Court .
Other members felt this was a false argument , that we were part of a European-wide organisation and we should have confidence in any judge no matter what nationality .
In the end the committee voted in favour of this proposal because we had no other concrete proposals in front of us to improve the speed at which the Court of First Instance handles cases .
Although it would not save us much time as the Court claimed , we felt that having a single judge would save some time .
Perhaps 10 % more cases a year could be handled .
Neverthless , that leaves us with a significant problem and no one on the committee - whether for or against the proposal - believed this was the ultimate solution to the problems that the Court of Justice and Court of First Instance face in terms of handling their workload .
The committee has suggested that in the future we should be looking at the possibility of increasing the number of judges in the Court of First Instance , improving the staff structures in the Court , moving towards the use of specialised Chambers to speed up cases and even reconsidering at a future IGC the powers of the Court of First Instance .
For example , should staff cases be a Court matter ?
Would it not be better to find a tribunal to handle staff cases .
These cases take up a considerable proportion of the Court 's work .
So , although in the end we have decided to come out in favour of this proposal , it is with some reservations and it is with a view that this will not be the long-term solution to the Court of First Instance 's problems .
Probably at an Intergovernmental Conference - but certainly at some sort of forum in the future - we are going to have to come back to this issue .
Madam President , the absence of Ms Mosiek-Urbahn this evening leaves me with the honourable but difficult task of presenting the majority position of the Group of the European People 's Party in favour of the Council 's proposal for a decision to enable the Court of First Instance to operate under a single judge , even though I personally have a number of reservations that I shall come back to later .
I would now like to make particular reference to the excellent speech given by the rapporteur , which is simply a culmination of the way in which this complicated and controversial report has been conducted . I should firstly like to highlight the fact that the vote by the Group of the European People 's Party in favour of the proposal - and I do not doubt that the House will vote the same way tomorrow - is proof of its confidence in the Court and those who work there , given that our competence is limited to presenting a report on the amendment of Article 2 ( 4 ) of the Council Decision .
In other words , neither Parliament nor indeed the Commission have any institutional competence to give an opinion on the amendment of its Rules of Procedure .
However , it is very difficult to assess the legislative proposal without considering the amendments to the Rules of Procedure , including future amendments , since they will determine the circumstances under which this body may be called to give a verdict in a specific case .
I would stress the fact that Parliament will tomorrow be signing a blank check whose content and possible expiry date will be the sole responsibility of the Court and the Council .
Ladies and gentlemen , there can be no more trust than that .
Let us now turn to one of the arguments outlined by the rapporteur .
The Group of the European People 's Party welcomes , shares and encourages the concern over budgetary efficiency that this measure has generated since , according to the best estimates , the total number of cases handled will increase by 10 % , without any increase in costs .
A constant concern of this Parliament is to get the maximum return from every Community ecu that is spent , and in this respect we are pleased with the proposal .
The argument put forward by the distinguished judges is also relevant as it states that the biggest threat to the Court 's legitimacy is the slowness inherent in the running of the body .
And as the rapporteur has already said : late justice is not justice at all .
The Court 's legitimacy will be strengthened as the time taken to handle each case is reduced .
This is certainly true .
But justice still has to be administered if the Court is to be strengthened .
Lastly , a vote in favour of the proposal tomorrow will prove that the House has confidence in the ability and equanimity of the Court with a single judge .
And throughout its history there has certainly been no shortage of proof of the opportunities for the Presidents of the Chamber after they have fulfilled their role of assigning cases .
The vast majority of the Group of the European People 's Party will therefore vote in favour of the proposal .
Allow me now , Madam President , to speak on behalf of those of us who have reservations about this solution , that we shall express tomorrow through a constructive disagreement with the majority .
An attempt to offset a critical situation - a situation that looks set to worsen with the imminent arrival of trademark litigation - by increasing the number of cases handled by between 5 % and 10 % is nothing more than a makeshift solution .
Because of the way the institutions operate , it will also prevent this issue from being dealt with decisively in the near future .
And , given the institutions ' heavy workload , let us not forget that it will be difficult to ' come back ' to the issue .
According to the judges already mentioned , 150 appeals at the end of the year from Alicante would lead to a serious crisis .
Well , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want to be a prophet of doom , but a crisis appears to be the inevitable outcome of this solution .
However , the reservations held by those such as myself are not only of a practical and temporary nature , but also stem from concerns relating to substance .
The rapporteur spoke of pluralism .
It is true that cultural pluralism and the pluralism of legal heritage form one of the foundations of European legal integration .
And this is particularly true in terms of the Court of Justice .
It is not a matter of mistrusting anyone , less still the institution itself , but who would deny that a joint , plural ruling , at least at the present stage of the construction of Europe , would receive wider public acceptance ?
And , Madam President , if justice comes from the people , then the people should perceive it as such .
Who would also deny the fact that since the times of Ancient Greece one of the functions of the collegiate has been to integrate into one body those that , in the end , must always speak with one voice , with the same voice , and with the coherent voice of all those who come from very different backgrounds and who have very different , diverse and disparate experiences ?
And lastly , would it not be understandable , predictable even , that , in the face of collapse and the lack of solutions , the Court and the Council - since , as we have already said , neither Parliament nor the Commission would be anything more than powerless witnesses - might increase the number of cases in which a single judge could be used ?
This would undoubtedly constitute a saving but only in the very short term and it would not take into account the social cost - in addition to the economic cost - that it would inevitably also entail .
Madam President , this issue therefore needs careful consideration .
Further to the solutions put forward by the rapporteur , I would like to add that of the review of certain privileges for officials in relation to costs .
And finally Madam President , to paraphrase Churchill , justice is expensive , but if the European Union is to fight for one thing , it should in fact fight to build a Europe of law .
Because Europe will either have its own body of law or it will not .
Madam President , we really have an odd situation here : all three of us who have spoken so far , including myself , are actually against the proposal .
We also have a situation in which the legal services of all three institutions find , for somewhat different reasons , that the proposal is not desirable . My impression is that the core of their argument relates , firstly , to confidence in Community law and , secondly , to the fact that the problems of effectiveness are not solved .
It is precisely this point , the effectiveness problems remaining unsolved , that previous speakers have been addressing .
The key issue for me is to uphold the principle of collegiality in decision-making .
Collegiality needs to be maintained when difficult decisions are to be taken .
I think we must now take a serious look at the situation as regards the defence of the Community justice system .
A congress was recently held here in France , a political congress , at which the Community legal system was ferociously attacked with claims that , for example , Community justice no longer works directly for citizens .
We see many attacks of this type on Community justice , which is nevertheless what holds our legal system and our EU together .
We must , however , look very seriously at the need to have courts that function in such a way that citizens can have confidence in them .
The essence of this is the collegiate system .
I therefore hope , Commissioner , like David Martin , that you will give serious attention to this question of the functioning of the courts in the forthcoming IGC , preferably as soon as possible in Vienna , but at least when the mini-IGC begins .
For my part , I will endeavour to ensure that it becomes an objective for the Finnish Presidency , since this is important in holding together a Community based on the rule of law , which the EU is .
I will merely say in conclusion that a large section of the Liberal Group will vote against the proposal .
Madam President , Commissioner , even as one who is well aware of the reservations about introducing single judge decisions by the Court of First Instance put forward during the discussion in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , and has now heard them repeated , let me on behalf of my group plead for adoption of the Martin report , now that the Committee on Institutional Affairs has decided to do so too .
My reasons are these . The initiative for the new ruling comes from the Court itself , which set out its views in some detail in the Legal Affairs Committee .
The new rules can only be applied after a Chamber decision , i.e. only on the basis of a Chamber decision .
Their scope is so carefully circumscribed that there is no risk of legal uncertainty .
These new rules on single judge decisions cannot be replaced by any other potential proposals with regard to the composition of the Court of Justice .
My other reason is , I believe , the most important one , and perhaps I can remind you of it even at this near-midnight hour : the European Union has to prepare itself for tasks on a quite different scale , not least with regard to its jurisdiction , in view of the forthcoming accession of the Central and Eastern European countries .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Court of First Instance is faced with an enormous workload .
The deepening of European integration and the simultaneous realisation by citizens of their rights under Community law are adding to this workload .
The effect on the average length of lawsuits has been inevitable : it has now reached 29.3 months .
This is a cause for concern , particularly in view of the litigation likely to result from the application of Regulation No 40 / 94 of 20 December 1993 on the Community trade mark .
The procedures and structures therefore need to be altered , so as to clear the backlog and enable the CFI to cope with the increase in litigation .
The proposal is to entrust a single judge with certain less important , repetitive cases , such as staff appeals .
There would , however , be no change to the principle whereby the CFI sits in chambers composed of three or five judges .
Referral of a case to a judge-rapporteur , as a single judge , would moreover be optional and confined to situations determined in the Rules of Procedure , with the decision taken in every case by the chamber comprising three judges .
The changes to the Rules of Procedure which have been submitted to the Council of Ministers provide for an important set of limitations and restrictions .
The resulting legal framework would have a beneficial effect on the length of proceedings , without making Community jurisdiction any less authoritative .
In any event , as proposed by Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , the impact of this measure should be assessed three years after its entry into force .
Finally , in thanking Mr Martin for his valuable work , I would say that I am in favour of the proposal but look forward to seeing other more comprehensive and fundamental initiatives , which will of course require more detailed examination and more time .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , the Commission expressed its view on the issue of the single judge in the opinion forwarded to you last June .
Reading the introduction to your draft resolution , on which I compliment Mr Martin , I note that our reactions to the proposal from the Court of First Instance and the Court of Justice are broadly similar .
Indeed , how could we fail to sympathise with the concerns expressed by the ECJ and CFI ?
In a Community based on the rule of law , it is vital that judges should be able to perform their duties within a reasonable time-span ; otherwise the citizens ' backing for the building of Europe will be compromised .
Judges must therefore be given the means to work efficiently .
Nevertheless , the dilemma is this : is the single judge the most suitable means ?
If I am to be guided by the main argument put forward by the ECJ and CFI , in other words the huge increase in the volume of litigation concerning trade marks , I have grave doubts .
Indeed , according to the proposed criteria , delegation to a single judge will only be possible after a number of years , once an established body of case law already exists .
In that case , why lay down as of now the composition of the judiciary body for litigation the actual scale of which no one yet knows , especially as - I would stress - the huge increase anticipated in 1997 has so far failed to materialise , meaning that its complexity cannot yet be assessed ?
Perhaps it might be wiser to think in terms of a chamber specialising in all fields of intellectual property , rather than a single judge system .
Referring to the statistics submitted by the Court , including its sentencing rate , I am convinced that what is urgently needed is something else .
As the Court itself acknowledges , the single judge will have only a marginal impact on efficiency , since such judges will only be able to handle cases considered to be minor ones , following an investigation of the case by the chamber .
Undoubtedly , and the Commission has taken this into account , when reading these statistics one is bound to conclude that no request for help , however modest , should be neglected . At the same time , however , is it reasonable to ease the CFI 's workload to such a marginal extent by introducing , without further reflection , a reform as far-reaching as the introduction of a single judge into the Community 's legal system ?
The Commission has voiced many doubts in this regard .
Indeed , it strikes the Commission as extremely hazardous to seek to transfer to the Community 's legal system solutions adopted in the Member States , in other words in homogeneous settings , as a means of coping with an increase in lawsuits .
Obviously , there are some minor cases , such as disputes concerning annual staff reports , or certain cases , such as those mentioned by the ECJ concerning milk quotas or customs agents , which basically only require the application of the principles of so-called ' pilot ' rulings .
Such cases could undoubtedly be left to the discretion of a single judge , but the texts proposed by the ECJ and CFI go much further .
They relate to litigation over trade marks and plant varieties which , for the reasons already given , cannot as of now be regarded as suitable for consideration by a single judge .
The same applies to public service litigation in general : such litigation , which draws its solutions from various general rules and principles of the Community 's legal order , cannot in the Commission 's view be regarded as minor .
Finally , appeals in cases concerning the non-contractual liability of the Community are involved here , as are all manner of other cases which , on the strength of somewhat vague and subjective criteria , would be judged by the chamber and the judge-rapporteur to be not particularly complex .
In the Commission 's view , the proposed system should under no circumstances be approved in its present form .
In any event , and irrespective of any changes which might be made to the proposal from the ECJ and CFI , the Commission believes that it is premature to adopt , without further reflection , the principle of the single judge as a normal operating method of the Court of First Instance in the future .
And this is precisely the point here .
Indeed , once the principle of the single judge has been adopted , and in the absence of any other reform of the CFI , the CFI will inevitably be tempted to extend the competence of the single judge , simply by modifying its Rules of Procedure , in order to cope with its burden of work .
Under these circumstances , the Commission considers that the most urgent issue is not so much that of the single judge , but of conducting a thorough reform of the Community legal system as a whole .
The Court of Justice should not forget that it too is experiencing certain difficulties , and that it will soon be faced with competences deriving from the Amsterdam Treaty , particularly in the field of asylum and immigration , fields which by their very nature lend themselves to a fair number of disputes .
The Commission therefore believes that it was imperative to appoint a group of wise persons to launch a joint process of reflection with the ECJ as soon as possible , in order to determine what reforms are needed prior to the forthcoming enlargement .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.30 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I wish to lodge a complaint regarding the fact that , for some time now , the night sittings - such as that on Tuesday - have not been covered in the press reports .
In my opinion , we cannot discriminate against individual policy areas . Please be so good as to find out why this is happening .
Thank you , Mr Stockmann .
We will look into that for you .
Mr President , I should like to raise a point which I have already raised at previous Strasbourg sittings .
On 7 April , I tabled a written question to the President of Parliament , in other words to the Chair , concerning the supply of furniture for the bars and restaurants of the Leopold building .
I tabled this question on 7 April .
That is nearly six months ago , Mr President , and I have still not received an answer .
The question has been put to you , and and I wonder why I have not received an answer .
I would repeat that I have raised this on several previous occasions .
Thank you , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel .
We are preparing the reply and I hope you will receive it very shortly .
But I will do my best to ensure that the presidency sends it to you as soon as possible .
( The Minutes were approved )
5th framework programme
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0324 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0419 / 98-97 / 0309 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Decision concerning the rules for the participation of undertakings , research centres and universities and for the dissemination of research results for the implementation of the Fifth Framework Programme of the European Community ( 1998-2000 ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Marset Campos ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at this second reading I would like to thank the efforts of the Commission and the Council in accepting a considerable number of the suggestions put forward by our Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
In this respect , I should like to point out that the two debates that took place in committee were marked by unanimity and a common desire to accept the proposals put forward by the Commission through increased effort .
I would like to briefly outline the main issues that our committee thought should be retained at second reading so that they can be taken into consideration by the Commission and the Council .
The first issue relates to the nature of innovation in scientific research .
Our colleague Mr van Velzen is quite right to stress that in some innovative projects an exception may be made to the rule that an enterprise filing a request must have been operational for less than a year , and that those involved must guarantee the necessary scientific abilities as a group filing a request .
Another of our suggestions in relation to the advance financing period follows similar lines in that , for the same reason I mentioned earlier , highly innovative projects should not receive such funding for more than six months .
And finally , I shall mention the last point in relation to this issue of the importance of scientific innovation .
We are putting forward a proposal that states that in a rapidly changing market in terms of innovation , highly innovative projects may be altered while in progress .
We believe that this is important for certain research sectors so that they can increase their competitiveness .
We are also putting forward another proposal aimed at guaranteeing the European Union 's right to the knowledge resulting from work carried out where the cost borne by the Community is higher than 50 % , and not when it is below this figure .
In addition , we are anxious to improve access to the dissemination and assessment of the results obtained , and to facilitate electronic communication through methods that currently exist , from the Internet to other forms that are continuous , efficient , flexible and fast . And here we must reiterate our constant request that all European Union languages be used .
Finally , another basic question remains at this second reading , which arises as a result of the growing awareness in our Community of potential fraudulent activity .
Such awareness is understandable within the European Union and it is therefore important to have this opportunity to put forward suggestions aimed at preventing it from occurring .
We have seen this happen recently in some of the decisions made by this very House in relation to some highly sensitive issues , such as humanitarian programmes .
In addition , for some time now the committee has been receiving complaints from both university departments and companies concerning possible discrimination and flaws in respect of equal conditions .
And I would like to refer to the fact that , with the implementation of the fifth framework programme , we can introduce amendments that will detect possible irregularities and thus take the appropriate measures that are necessary to eradicate them .
The Commission 's response to this suggestion surprises us because it says that we lack the legal framework to enable such decisions to be taken .
Our support for this proposal is based on a ruling by the European Court of Justice that does , in fact , make this possible .
I believe that when it comes to guaranteeing public funds and the interests of the Union , Regulation No 2988 / 95 provides for this .
So we do not understand its negative response when it is evident that these issues need greater attention .
Mr President , we are therefore proposing these measures in the hope that the Commission and the Council will accept them and that they will be voted for in this House .
Mr President , I believe that the rapporteur clearly explained the amendments approved in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy and I shall therefore not go over them again .
I would , however , like to stress the fact that , as this is a second reading , it would perhaps be worth refreshing our memories as to what the dissemination of results implies .
We have often spoken about ways in which we can link scientific research and social and economic cohesion .
This is an essential step towards ensuring that research results do not remain in captive markets or limited to those areas that carry out the research , but that they can benefit initially the entire industrial sector , and then the research sector in general .
We have often tended to repeat research activities and to invent the wheel far too many times in various research projects .
I believe that the dissemination of results is of vital importance to enable a substantial section of the research and business sectors to benefit from European Union investments , and not only in the areas where the research has been carried out but throughout the European economy .
And in relation to the fifth framework programme , I have to say that it is precisely those areas that have an impact on the dissemination of results that are scarcely accepted and considered from a budgetary point of view .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to thank the rapporteur for the exceptionally constructive and enjoyable manner in which we were able to cooperate .
We are now at second reading , and when you look at the document you find we have the same amendments as were submitted at first reading .
I am rather disappointed at this , as I have the feeling that the discussion between Parliament and the Commissioner fell on deaf ears somewhat .
In my view , Parliament proposed some excellent amendments , but the Commissioner ultimately decided to ignore them completely as her letter was already ready when we discussed them in Brussels and she simply failed to take them into account .
I therefore sincerely hope that now at second reading we will receive more support from the Commissioner .
In this instance , I should like to ask Commissioner Papoutsis if he can perhaps convey a different message than Mrs Cresson did at first reading .
It is of course Articles 4 , 8 , 10 and 12 which are at issue here .
I should simply like to say that the research contracts under the fifth framework programme and the dissemination of research results are at least as important as the content of the fifth framework programme itself .
If these contracts are not correctly drawn up , then we could find ourselves involved in a lot of discussion about money , as this is what is ultimately at stake .
It is essential to realise that if you want rapid innovation - and that is what we want to promote , since it is that which creates employment - then you cannot have bureaucracy and you must make provision in advance for the nature of rapid innovations .
This also means flexibility in the regulations , with which a number of our amendments are concerned .
The second point is the following .
We have concluded , notably following the research undertaken by this House in connection with ESPRIT and the telecommunications and applications programmes , that there is room for a great deal of improvement in the area of evaluation .
One of the key points is that the contract does not state what evaluation output criteria a project must satisfy .
If this is not laid down in advance , it is difficult to subsequently determine the results of such a project .
The contract also fails to include requirements concerning the dissemination of a project 's results .
In this respect , much greater use must also be made of electronic communication .
I believe that if we include a number of proposals of this kind in the contracts for the fifth framework programme it will prove all the more effective and efficient .
This is why I hope that this House will once again approve these proposals and that the Commissioner will finally adopt them .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Liberal Group supports the initiative of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy to submit for second reading all Parliament 's amendments which were not accepted by the Council .
This is because the amendments in Mr Marset Campos 's report are excellent , as is the report itself .
I therefore regret the arrogance shown by Mrs Cresson on this matter .
My group would like to underline two particular points .
First of all , Amendment No 5 which states that the research contracts must lay down how the research results obtained must be disseminated and implemented .
In addition , the contract must stipulate the output criteria .
My group fully supports this amendment , and I will shortly be returning to this point myself in my report on innovation in SMEs .
I will also be returning to the matters which Mr van Velzen has just mentioned .
Ladies and gentlemen , research under the fifth framework programme must not be an end in itself .
Research without making use of the results and thus without follow-up of implementation is of no purpose .
The provisions of Amendment No 5 can solve this problem .
Research must lead to innovation , by which I mean product innovation , because in that case European research strengthens our industry 's ability to compete and this in turn creates employment .
My second point , ladies and gentlemen , concerns adequate financial management .
Research projects must be subject to control and measures to combat fraud .
We owe this to European taxpayers .
This applies to contracts and it also applies to the Commission .
The Commission is repeatedly a poor payer when it comes to research projects .
Small businesses are particularly hurt by this .
My group therefore hopes that the directive approved last month with the aim of tackling this problem of late payments in the Union will also stimulate the Commission to pay more promptly .
Mr President , first of all I wish to congratulate Mr Marset Campos and the whole committee on an excellent decision .
I think the rapporteur made exactly the right decision in repeating his views as expressed at first reading .
The views of the committee were well reasoned from the start .
None of the aims have vanished into thin air , but are well-founded , concrete and serious .
I think it is most odd that Council has not been able to approve them .
For example , the agreement procedures that are involved in highly innovative projects must be very flexible , as the rapporteur states .
The research market changes very quickly and the results of research must also be put to use very quickly .
This requires flexibility in the agreement procedure .
I also think that the view on combating fraud is particularly important .
It should be an aspect of all financial aid that the EU makes available , including that given to research , obviously .
Fraud prevention should also be common to , and standard in , all Union activity and should also be clearly and tightly regulated to a sufficient extent across the board .
Although I imagine that fraud is rarer in the field of research than elsewhere , there must be vigilance in this area too .
It is also a matter of the trust of our citizens , however - trust in how the EU works and how funds are used there .
Mr President , Europe is clearly lagging behind in research and technological development . The research effort is extremely patchy , the link between research and innovation is inadequate , coordination between the various individuals involved presents problems , the rules about disseminating research results are weak , and investment is too limited .
Quite obviously , in the current era of globalization , our backwardness gives cause for concern to say the least .
So there is a vital need to promote innovation and coordinate it with various specific programmes involving businesses , research centres and universities more closely , thus ensuring consistency and continuity of methods and synergies favouring innovation .
There is a clear need for greater transparency and clear rules , and a simple horizontal framework needs to be created to promote scientific progress .
Taking account of the responsibilities involved in carrying out the specific programmes , this should include measures to promote innovation and ensure the transfer of technologies , it should incorporate and guarantee effective coordination with the activities envisaged by the specific programmes , and it should facilitate the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises .
They must be assured of positive exchanges of experience , dissemination of results and transfer of technology by improving existing laws , and especially by using liaison and innovation centres intensively , and rationalising data bank systems .
The development of human potential needs to be highlighted in the context of innovation , with incentives provided for training , mobility and researcher and scientist exchanges , in particular for SMEs , and contacts between the academic , scientific and industrial communities need to be strengthened .
Finally , the downward trend in funding and the impact this has on basic research are a danger signal for the future of the framework programme for research , and particularly threaten to accentuate the brain-drain in European researchers .
That really must be avoided .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur for his cooperation and also for completing the report early enough to allow it to be used in the areas of the consultations on the fifth framework programme specifically relating to small and medium-sized companies .
It is small and medium-sized enterprises which are very often highly innovative and create the jobs that we need in order to cope with the difficulties experienced in Europe today .
Because they are highly innovative but also relatively small , they have greater difficulty in gaining access to European programmes than large companies .
For this reason I would once again urge the Commission to continue the measures it has already introduced in order to facilitate access : simplifying administrative procedures , shortening the duration of the processes involved and , in particular , providing reasons for rejection , which is simply a question of courtesy .
In addition , I would like to raise a point which is covered in one of the amendments : there have to be controls where taxpayers ' money is being spent , but this does not mean that each applicant should automatically be treated as a potential criminal , which sometimes happens , or at least this impression is sometimes given .
Finally , I would urge that we should use a flexible definition of the term SME , as in the framework programme .
Of course , we must agree on limits , but above and below these limits there must be room for a degree of flexibility which can be applied without having to debate it at length .
Mr President , the application process for research projects is a difficult and awkward one , so it has to be made easier and less cumbersome in order that SMEs are also better able to participate .
A whole new profession has now emerged , solely engaged in the drafting of applications .
In addition , negative decisions and the reasons for them have to be submitted in writing .
The importance of information technology in communications between the different parties involved in projects cannot be emphasised enough .
I hope that Council will consider Parliament 's request , as information technology can also help to reduce red tape and the rigidity that exists in administration .
In this way , there will be sufficiently more resources for researchers to carry out their research work .
We have to make rules in the fight against fraud so as to be able to intervene quickly and effectively when there are problems .
Investigators in such cases must have all possible resources to intervene , and we must not have a situation , such as that publicised here recently , where not all the documents are to hand .
There has to be more openness , therefore , but not at the cost of the protection of information .
Finally , I would like to express my thanks to the rapporteur , as this is a very important part of the whole fifth framework programme , which we will hopefully be implementing on schedule .
Mr President , in the application of Community science and research policy , the aspects of participation and dissemination are of central importance for countries such as Portugal .
I had the opportunity to speak at greater length about the Marset Campos report at first reading .
Therefore , I will now confine myself to the single matter of SMEs .
In the Council , Portugal , together indeed with the majority of Parliament , defended the importance of maintaining the definition of SMEs at the level of 500 workers .
This is the only way in which to guarantee the participation of the most innovative and dynamic companies in research projects in smaller countries .
The Council did not agree , and in its common position of last June it adhered strictly to the definition of SMEs contained in the 1996 recommendation at a level of 250 workers .
Having lost that battle , we must now win the war .
It is the war of the SMEs .
And the question is an eminently political one , concerning the role that must be given to SMEs in the execution of the framework programme and its individual programmes .
The possibility of strengthening the Europe 's science sector and its capacity for innovation and flexibility depend on our emerging victorious from this war .
In this matter , small continues to be beautiful .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me first thank the European Parliament and especially the rapporteur , Mr Marset Campos , for the work accomplished during consideration of the Council 's common position at second reading .
In part , this common position reflects the position Parliament expressed at first reading , and which helps to make the rules of participation and dissemination clearer and easier to understand .
Thus today we have a text which takes into account both the experience gained from past framework programmes and the objectives of the fifth framework programme .
The Commission understands Parliament 's concerns , which are embodied in the amendments tabled at second reading .
Despite that , for the reasons given at first reading , the Commission cannot accept them .
In fact , some amendments either tend to introduce rules of day-to-day practice into texts of principle which are required to form the framework within which the whole of research policy is to operate - and I refer here to Amendments Nos 7 and 10 - or are already covered by existing provisions , such as Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 11 .
The Commission also considers that for other amendments , such as Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 5 , 8 and 9 , the rules of participation and dissemination do not constitute the appropriate legal instrument to make them acceptable .
However , more especially as regards combating fraud , the Commission intends to make an early start on the work which should eventually lead to the publication of a sectoral regulatory measure relating to research in particular , in accordance with the provisions of the Council regulation on the protection of the Community 's financial interests .
To sum up , the Commission takes the view that the Community should have proprietary rights over results stemming from measures whose cost it has borne in full , as mentioned for example in Amendment No 6 .
The rules of participation and dissemination are an essential phase in the context of the next framework programme 's implementation .
For the moment , the Commission 's aim is to set the fifth framework programme in motion at a rapid rate .
It also aims to ensure the continuation of research activity in the Community .
Of course , I agree with you completely that access by SMEs to research and technology programmes should be facilitated .
However , the fifth framework programme is clearly orientated towards such enterprises .
As regards the definition of SMEs , there is indeed a common position from the Council .
However , the Commission has undertaken to look further into the matter so that we can find the best possible solution and definition , in order to ensure the maximum possible participation by SMEs in research and technology programmes .
We rely on you to help us realise that aim and achieve the overall approval of the framework programme , which will make available the means we need to face the challenges to which it will have to respond .
Ladies and gentlemen , I thank you for your attention and for the cooperation we have enjoyed so far , both on behalf of the Commission and in particular on behalf of my colleague , Mrs Edith Cresson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Energy sector - ETAP - SURE - Solid fuels - SYNERGY
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0340 / 98 by Mr W.G. van Velzen , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Decision adopting a multiannual framework programme for actions in the energy sector ( 1998-2002 ) and connected measures ( COM ( 97 ) 0550 - C4-0070 / 98-97 / 0302 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0335 / 98 by Mr W.G. van Velzen , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Decision adopting a multiannual programme of studies , analyses , forecasts and other related work in the energy sector ( 1998-2002 ) ( ETAP programme ) ( COM ( 98 ) 0423 - C4-0487 / 98-98 / 0233 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0323 / 98 by Mr W.G. van Velzen , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Decision adopting a multiannual programme ( 1998-2002 ) of actions in the nuclear sector , relating to the safe transport of radioactive materials and to safeguards and industrial cooperation to promote certain aspects of the safety of nuclear installations in countries currently participating in the TACIS programme ( SURE programme ) ( COM ( 98 ) 0423 - C4-0488 / 98-98 / 0234 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0339 / 98 by Mr Adam , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Decision adopting a multiannual programme of technological actions promoting the clean and efficient use of solid fuels ( 1998-2002 ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0550 - C4-0074 / 98-97 / 0372 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0322 / 98 by Mr Soulier , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation adopting a multiannual programme to promote international cooperation in the energy sector ( SYNERGY programme ) ( 1998-2002 ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0550 - C4-0073 / 98-97 / 0369 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to congratulate the Commissioner on the publication of this framework programme .
It is an exceptionally important initiative , since it is in this way that we can incorporate all the energy programmes within a single framework .
I also believe that it is necessary in order to prevent overlapping and simply to make the energy framework programme more transparent .
When you have small programmes for every possible field , it is of course very difficult to gain an overall view of what exists in the various programmes and what the difference is between SAVE , Altener and ENERGY for example .
I believe that this energy framework programme satisfies a major desire on the part of the Council and the European Parliament .
An energy framework programme naturally has a great many consequences .
It therefore requires considerable thought .
First of all , it means that horizontal coordination within DG XVII must be increased in order to ensure that programmes are coherent , but secondly - and in fact we believe this to be even more important - it means that there will be horizontal coordination between the DGs .
I will give you two examples to illustrate why this is so important .
We all know that after Kyoto savings are going to have to be made in the energy sector .
Energy policy will play a crucial role in this .
Energy policy must not become a part of environment policy , since in that case the two other objectives of energy policy , namely security of supply and price competition , will be made subordinate to the environment objective and of course we do not want that .
But it is of course clear that a great deal must be done in this field .
I therefore believe that we must ensure that energy policy plays a more prominent role and that subsequently a contribution can also be made to achieving the Kyoto objectives .
The second example is of course what is taking place at the moment in Central and Eastern Europe .
Enlargement is on the way .
Yet there is no acquis communautaire , neither in the energy field nor in the nuclear field .
This also means that the energy sector must play an important role in this respect .
It is therefore important for Commissioner Papoutsis to have an instrument available , in relation to his colleague Mr van den Broek of DG I A , in order to also impose horizontal coordination .
I believe this is to be welcomed , and I therefore also hope that the Commissioner makes use of the new instrument and am also pleased that there is already talk of coordination and discussion between the DGs under Director-General Benavides .
I believe this is the right approach .
The legal bases were of course necessary for the two other smaller programmes : ETAP and SURE .
ETAP is clearly very important as it provides the information needed in order to implement a long-term energy policy .
In connection with the general energy framework programme , we have become rather more ambitious by calling for more attention to be paid to a couple of points : first of all , to combined heat and power and , secondly , to implementing the gas and electricity directive , where it is important to monitor the situation .
Amendment No 9 , point 1g is very important .
We therefore hope that the Commission will report regularly to us on this aspect of the implementation of the gas and electricity directive , because we believe this to be of key importance .
The fourth paragraph of Amendment No 9 is also very important , as this can permit further horizontal coordination , not only to include the European Union but also other bodies , such as the European Investment Bank , which could implement a great many projects .
A certain form of control from the European Union is exceptionally important in this area .
Mr President , nuclear energy commands our constant attention .
Under the SURE programme we have made the greatest possible efforts to ensure the highest possible safety standards .
But I hope that the coalition we now have between the SPD and the Greens in Germany will not result in an abandoning of the position previously taken on nuclear energy by the Socialist Group .
That would be to engage in national coalition politics , and we must not use the European Parliament for that purpose .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am going to speak as part of the consultation procedure on a multiannual programme called SYNERGY , which is aimed at promoting international cooperation in the energy sector .
We have three main objectives here : to help third countries to define , formulate and implement energy policies , to promote industrial cooperation on energy between our Union and third countries , and to coordinate the European Union 's external activities in the field of energy .
The programme is already under way .
Moreover , the way in which the Commission is carrying out this task is quite remarkable , Commissioner .
Current measures include providing advice and training on energy , analysing forecasts , establishing dialogue , encouraging the exchange of information , improving frameworks for cooperation and training people .
However , let us be clear about one thing : SYNERGY is not the type of programme that would involve building a power station , for example , or that would enable us to reform an entire gas sector .
No , this is a small programme : it only has ECU 36.4 million available over five years , which means that it would be very limited if it was aimed at specific schemes .
The objective is , in fact , to take part in general discussions and prospective analysis , and to enable some projects to get off the ground , before they are taken over by large programmes such as PHARE , TACIS or MEDA , and we have expressed the wish to have this complementarity clarified .
What defines the specific character of the programme , to which we are very committed , is that it constitutes a forum for exchange and a source of experience and knowledge that helps third countries to control their production and consumption of energy .
I would just like to highlight two or three points .
We know today that energy consumption in the world is constantly increasing .
I have heard what has been said on the television about the hole in the ozone layer , which is constantly growing .
We must not let go of our concerns about energy ; we must keep them in mind .
This increase in energy consumption is going to continue , certainly at a moderate pace in the OECD countries , but more rapidly in Asia and in Latin America , and , to a slightly lesser extent , in the Mediterranean basin .
Secondly , it is essential that we work with others , because our resources are not inexhaustible and Europeans are in a position of energy dependency , which affects their security .
It is obvious that helping South America or Asia to draw up more reasonable energy policies that are more environmentally friendly can only be beneficial to the planet as a whole , and this directly concerns our security .
My last point is that SYNERGY is not an entirely new programme .
We have had a legal basis since 1995 , and the funds for the programme are tending to decrease , despite the fact that , as I said , SYNERGY is essential in terms of international cooperation , in talking to others , and note that I did not say ' in talking to foreigners ' .
This is why I have asked in an amendment that the contribution to SYNERGY be fixed at 18 % of the total amount earmarked for the Framework Programme for Energy , as otherwise funds could be cut further .
In conclusion , I would say that this programme is obviously a small one , but it has proved itself .
With limited means it has managed to achieve some interesting goals that have real implications .
It may appear less important when compared to other big programmes such as Save and Altener , the two other major components of the Framework Programme for Energy , but that would be forgetting that SYNERGY alone is responsible for the external aspects of energy policy .
We would therefore be ill-advised and lacking in foresight to deprive ourselves of such an instrument for international cooperation .
Mr President , when we talk about energy , we are talking about a way of life and a policy of security .
Energy consumption is growing , as has been pointed out already , but non-renewable energy resources are not being renewed .
As a result , people living in industrialised countries may be in for a shock when it comes to their way of life .
Furthermore , it has to be seen than dependence on imports is increasing .
More and more energy is being imported from countries outside the EU area .
This is because traditional energy resources are cheap .
Fossil fuels are cheap - I would say too cheap , because there is no incentive to alter the basis of energy production .
By the year 2020 , the EU area 's dependence on oil importation will have increased to a figure of 90 % , and the figures for coal and gas will be 80 % and 70 % respectively .
We now have to ask ourselves if this is a desirable state of affairs to be in .
Is this our aim ?
If we do not want this kind of dependency on imports , we shall have to implement urgent measures for energy production in the EU area .
Those regions from which we import energy are often unstable .
Oil comes mainly from the Middle East , and gas from Russia .
If nothing is done , there will be no alternative but to rely on production in these regions .
Now the Commission has produced a common framework programme for the various energy programmes .
It is a good legal basis for budgetary spending in the EU .
But we really have to start from the notion that the EU ought to be using more resources for these sub-programmes , because if nothing is done , we shall be strategically dependent on imports from unstable countries .
We also have other restrictions on the use of energy , which have to be taken into consideration and to which EU countries are committed .
We have the Kyoto agreement , which is aimed at preventing climatic change .
If nothing is done , the EU will not embrace the aims spelt out in that agreement .
Member States have not yet embarked on measures to prevent carbon dioxide emissions .
The framework programme presents measures connected with pollution in an unsatisfactory way , and in particular pays too little attention to the fact that energy-saving schemes can help us try and have an impact on people 's lives .
The matter was explained in a more satisfactory way in a Commission statement on the effect of Kyoto on traffic , and there are radical demands for a change in people 's lifestyles that should be taken into account in other Union energy programmes .
Moreover , in the framework programme the question of taxation is hardly touched on .
Taxation is an indirect way of influencing energy-saving schemes and it is perhaps the most effective means of all , since other technological saving schemes may be noticed in the market , but the price in the consumer 's mind is the decisive factor , and the price can be influenced by saving energy .
As for individual programmes , the CARNOT programme for the improvement of energy efficiency is really very modest and is founded mainly on an exchange of information .
It should be considered whether it is generally worth going ahead with such small-scale programmes , which receive so few resources .
I suggest that when the Commission reports back for the first time on the implementation of this programme , the whole thing should be reconsidered .
As for the alternatives , they are also mentioned in the framework programme .
The most important of them is Altener , which we will return to in the future , though personally I think it is going to be very hard to achieve a 12 % share for renewables in total energy production , if nothing is done .
Energy consumption is growing , then ; dependence on imports is increasing , and the aims of the Kyoto agreement and the proposed objective in Altener for a 12 % share for renewable energy sources will not be achieved in this way .
With regard to this , I hope that Mr Papoutsis will change his rhetoric at our meeting on Tuesday , endeavouring to foster , as he does so , a spirit of hope and belief in these objectives .
It would be better if the Commission were to realise that these objectives will not be met .
Let us acknowledge the facts , including the fact that Member States are not really committed to these objectives at all .
Mr President , I agree almost one hundred per cent with what Mr Seppänen said .
I particularly liked his reference to the dangers of increased dependence on imports , which the Commission has also referred to on several occasions .
In this context , I would say that , when the euro is in place , any sudden rise in energy prices would represent a risk not only for energy policy but also for monetary policy .
We do not have time to debate this now , but I believe that it is clear .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs , Messrs van Velzen , Adam and Soulier , for these three excellent reports .
I would also like to thank the Commission for presenting this logical multiannual programme for the energy sector ; as we have already said , it creates greater transparency and ties together various other programmes .
I am also very pleased that the question of safeguards , in other words the monitoring of nuclear materials in the former Soviet Union , has now been mentioned expressly within a programme .
Even if it does not involve much money , it is nevertheless a programme which is capable of improving our safety significantly .
One thing I would criticise - and this is not the fault of the Commission but that of the legal bases - is that we have a plethora of different articles which are enough to confuse the ordinary observer .
One programme is based on Article 35 , another on Article 130s and a third on an article of the Euratom Treaty .
That is just how things are .
I repeat that I am not blaming the Commission but the European Union , which today has still not managed to bring energy issues together into one chapter , as is the case for the European networks , for example , and still has not allowed the European Parliament full co-decision rights .
If we are honest , all we do is to sit here and deliver opinions .
We are consulted , but no one really has to listen to what we say here .
Consultation means that you can give your opinion , which is then translated into eleven languages and finally thrown in the bin .
I know that the Commission takes what we say very seriously , but it is not obliged to do so .
This is unsatisfactory , and I would like at this point to emphasise once again that it is highly important for energy policy to be given its own legal basis and for Parliament to have full co-decision rights ..
It has already been said that the cost of this programme is relatively low .
I have calculated it roughly .
Let us suppose that approximately ECU 150 billion is spent on energy investment per year in the European Union .
If the figure I have estimated is correct , this programme constitutes 0.03 % of total investment in energy .
It is not a huge amount , but we must be clear about what we can achieve with it .
At this point I would therefore like to propose that we concern ourselves not only with financial programmes but also with financial engineering .
I cannot think of any better term for this than the English one .
This involves gaining banks as partners in energy policy so that they can fund projects which border on being economically viable , while the particularly risky projects are financed from public funds .
I would urge the Commission and also Parliament 's Committee on Budgets to attach greater importance to this issue .
Perhaps we can develop techniques - some are already available - to promote energy investment within the European Union .
I would like to thank the Commission once again for bringing the various programmes together , and I would also like to thank the rapporteurs once again ; I hope we will continue to work on these issues in future .
Mr President , Commissioner , I , too , would like to thank the three rapporteurs for their work on a programme that , although modest in financial terms , is of the utmost importance .
We all know why energy is not featured in the Treaty . However , Commissioner , the most important economic issue is in your hands , in your Directorate-General XVII .
Without energy , there is no quality of life whatsoever ; without energy , there is no production .
In fact , if we take into account the world 's commercial activities , the leading trade is the oil trade .
Out of the 10 largest companies in the world , more than half are energy companies . It was time for DG XVII to initiate work , work that constitutes a beginning , an embryo , but that needs to go much further .
And I would like to say , Commissioner , that more needs to be done than is currently feasible and you therefore have many tasks pending .
All environmental problems , or at least 80 % of the major problems , are in some way linked to energy .
And I think that DG XVII is somewhat shortsighted in its approach .
You need to examine the possible solutions and this is why I think the ETAP programme is so important .
We have liberalised some of the markets - electricity and gas - but you need to look at the direction in which we are heading .
To some extent , the security of our supplies is at stake , although there are now very cheap resources , as is our energy efficiency , as has already been pointed out ; the intensity of Europe 's energy use is extremely high .
We must use less energy in our production processes , and you have the task of working for everyone - and this House will also endeavour , through its Committee on Budgets - to ensure that more economic resources are allocated .
Now I should like to turn to the issue of coal , which also needs careful consideration .
Europe is lacking resources .
Apart from the United Kingdom , and the Netherlands to some extent , because it has gas , and , of course , Norway , the other countries have scant resources .
Spain 's external dependency is around 70 % , and whatever little there is - be it good or bad - , we have to use .
This is why , in my opinion , the CARNOT programme is so important .
With enlargement , countries that will consume large amounts of coal are going to join .
Therefore , Commissioner , the issue of coal needs to be examined in depth , especially since we are continuing to use it : 50 % of the electricity produced in the world is generated by coal .
In the United States , this figure is higher and China 's consumption is going to grow considerably , as is India 's .
We need clean fuel but , above all , we need fuel that is efficient .
And , in fact , environmental issues , which are so closely linked to energy , should be the subject of unofficial declarations and tackled through technology .
I am convinced that not only the fifth framework programme - I am rapporteur for the specific programme entitled ' Energy and the Environment ' - , but all of the energy-related programmes , together with the means you will have at your disposal in the future , will help solve these problems .
In any case , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs and the Commission - DG XVII - on their work .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to express my pleasure at Commissioner Papoutsis 's proposal to incorporate all the energy programmes within a single framework programme .
My group has stressed the need for this on many occasions and we welcome this initiative , even if it has come rather late .
I would also of course like to congratulate all this morning 's rapporteurs on their excellent reports .
A single framework programme covering all energy measures has the advantage of allowing energy measures to respect a clear strategy .
This prevents overlapping between programmes .
It also permits a better use of limited budgets .
My group regrets that the Council regularly allocates insufficient financial resources to programmes aimed at energy efficiency and the promotion of sustainable energy .
This conflicts with the Union 's undertakings at Kyoto .
It will not be possible to achieve the Kyoto objectives without new resources for research into new energy technologies .
Furthermore , Agenda 2000 identifies SAVE and Altener as priority programmes .
But what does the Commission mean by this , because the Council has drastically reduced the budget for these programmes ?
What are the priorities ?
It is thus to be hoped that the approaching Union enlargement will cause the Union to reflect , because it is precisely investments in Central and Eastern Europe which prove doubly profitable .
Ladies and gentlemen , the future energy situation of Europe and the world is being principally determined by the environment issue .
The Liberal Group has been arguing for an integrated approach to energy and the environment for many years .
My group believes that a single framework programme for energy and environment policy under the joint name of ' sustainable development ' must be the Commission 's next step .
Mr President , the current framework programme on energy makes it strikingly clear once again what an obstacle it is that we do not have a separate chapter on energy .
The current framework programme on energy is by no means coherent , with a variety of legal bases , as Mr Linkohr already mentioned .
Funding is at laughably low levels and is not even worth discussing .
Under these circumstances it is impossible for us to fulfil our Kyoto commitments ; the current situation will not provide a stimulus for the necessary innovations , nor will it allow us to become one jot less dependent on imported energy .
What is even more astonishing is the very awkward attempt in the form of the SURE programme to edge nuclear energy into the normal energy sector .
It is a Euratom matter , so there is nothing more to be said .
It covers only safeguards and the transport of radioactive materials , and while safeguards are certainly very important , they have nothing to do with this issue .
As far as the transport of radioactive materials is concerned , what is lacking in the Commission proposal is , firstly , a uniform and compulsory notification system .
We do not have this at all , as we saw with the scandals in my country in the spring , although they did result in all transport of radioactive materials being banned since then .
Then we need to agree on the requirements to be met by containers used to transport radioactive materials .
It is not acceptable that only computer simulations should be used , as has recently been the trend .
Incidentally , this is banned in America .
Here I have to tell Mr van Velzen , who thought that we were suddenly in favour of animal experimentation , that this is nonsense !
But we do have vertical-shock tests and fire tests , and so on .
Currently , in the EU , very different containers are used for rail transport , and most of these should be banned as they no longer meet requirements .
Yet this would mean , firstly , that we would have to have an energy framework programme with substantial funds and uniform legal bases behind it , instead of organising a little bit here and a little bit there , and , secondly , that we would , of course , have to deal with every aspect of nuclear energy .
We finally need to get to grips with the issue of nuclear waste disposal , which will involve spending a great deal of money .
What will we do with existing nuclear waste ?
It is only ever moved from one country to another , and no one knows where it goes .
Ideas in this area include transmutation techniques and vitrification .
We should invest our efforts and our funds in this ; it is not sufficient to examine this issue only very briefly in the context of the transport and energy sector .
These are the tasks for the future , but they do not feature in the proposals under discussion .
I regret this very much .
I recognise the Commission 's good intentions , but they fail to put us on the right track .
Mr President , in creating or attempting to create an energy policy I totally agree with Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz that we must have this one coordinated legal base and - I would suggest - one Commissioner to deal with it .
That would make a lot of sense .
We are told that the result of liberalization would be cheaper fuel .
However , I am sceptical about this being achieved in my own Member State under the current government .
Dependence on imports is phenomenal and will be even more so by the year 2020 .
One speaker mentioned a figure of 70 % dependence for energy as a whole : oil 90 % ; coal 80 % ; gas 40 % .
Another speaker mentioned the fact that we would have to rely on imports from very unstable countries : this must worry us .
In relation to renewables , there are many possibilities but very little money is available and very little is being done .
In the UK the power of the nuclear lobby effectively stopped an excellent programme of hydro-electricity .
The Hydro-Electricity Board owned lots of land for more programmes but this was ended .
The nuclear lobby was too strong .
Then there was a marvellous programme from Professor Salter of Edinburgh University .
He invented something called Salter 's Duck , a cheap way of producing wave energy .
My part of the world is entirely suitable for this , as it is for wind energy which has been very little developed - indeed , we could take a leaf out of Denmark 's book with regard to its development of wind energy .
Salter 's Duck was killed by the nuclear industry which said it would not be effective .
In the last year the UK Nuclear Inspectorate spent 136 days in Dounreay in my constituency .
If you work it out you find that each inspector was getting £ 5 000 a day .
They came out with 23 grave criticisms of Dounreay .
So , do not send your waste to Dounreay under any belief that it is going to be safely disposed of .
Recently the House of Commons was told after the event that Dounreay had taken in waste from Georgia in the interests of the safety of Europe .
It turned out that when it got there the license to reprocess had been withdrawn by the Nuclear Inspectorate , which had spent 136 days complaining about the discharges into the sea , into a waste shaft and into the land .
The House of Commons Trade and Industry Select Committee was critical of the culture of secrecy .
Going back to Salter 's Duck , Tony Benn was the Secretary of State for Energy and admitted that he had misled the House of Commons that nuclear energy was safe , cheap and non-military .
It turns out that in June of this year it was admitted that the government had sent 73 kilogrammes of weapons-grade material to Aldermaston for military purposes .
This secrecy must stop .
Please do not let your countries send waste to Dounreay .
We are not allowed to reprocess it .
Mr President , there is a need for a radical change of course in the EU 's energy policy . Its sights should be set on the fastest possible transition to sustainability , with renewable energy sources explicitly stipulated as the main aim of the energy policy and energy prices clearly reflecting the real environmental costs .
Without such objectives set , the framework programme will lack the necessary vision .
Apart from a zero contribution to CO2 emissions , renewable energy sources offer long-term security of supply and remove the element of threat from the geopolitical context .
The Danish experience is unequivocal .
Good results were obtained by providing stable growth opportunities for private popular initiatives with satisfactory economic terms for the consumers , and without interference from the State .
Directives , central control and liberalisation actually constitute a potential threat to stable growth in the use of renewable energy .
There is instead a need for a broadly based effort , in which energy solutions for the future grow out of local initiatives promoted by both high-profile consumer groups and smaller institutions and firms . In contrast , the current heavy demands on administration and the high component of own financing in energy programmes have led to a concentration on established institutions and large firms with substantial capital resources , which do not need support .
I would welcome a framework programme based on the principles I have outlined , so I strongly urge you to support the Green amendments opposing nuclear energy , in particular Amendment No 17 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our colleague Alain Pompidou who is the UPE coordinator for the issues we are discussing , has been detained away from this House and I offer his apologies .
It is my job to express our group 's position in this joint debate on energy .
By way of introduction , I want to highlight the three aims of the Framework Programme for Energy , which would be set up for a five-year period from 1998 to 2002 . It would aim to provide transparency , coherence and coordination of the actions carried out by the European Union , thus contributing to the security of supply , to competitiveness and to the protection of the environment .
The Framework Programme is based on three main objectives : providing a stable legal basis for the actions carried out by the Union ; strengthening the coordination of all actions under the authority of the Commission 's Directorate-General responsible for energy ; and setting up a new framework for the coordination of activities in the energy field under other Community policies concerning , among others , the Structural Funds , external aid programmes and research programmes .
Our group will support the rapporteur 's proposals aimed firstly at guaranteeing closer monitoring of the implementation of the 1996 directive on electricity and the 1998 directive on gas , with a view to ensuring the complete success of the internal energy market , in the interests of both European companies and households .
Secondly , we will support the proposals that aim to highlight the role that the Framework Programme should play in helping the enlargement process .
Thirdly and finally , we will support the proposals aimed at increasing transparency in monitoring , while stressing the fact that the budgetary funds allocated to the Framework Programme for Energy should enable it to face the challenges of the next decade .
What is more , our colleague Mr van Velzen has brought improvements to the ETAP programme through amendments that aim to strengthen the prospective analysis and monitoring of the market in two ways : the first involves the progressive liberalisation of the electricity and gas markets ; and the second aims to guarantee a greater security of energy supply .
The SURE programme aims to ensure safety in the transport of radioactive materials , especially in view of the enlargement to include countries that already participate in the TACIS programme .
It has our support .
With regard to André Soulier 's report , to its great credit it ensures international cooperation in the field of energy policy from 1998 to 2002 by continuing the SYNERGY programme , which we support unreservedly .
Mr President , it is obviously a good thing to achieve a high level of security , in the nuclear field as in all other fields .
I think that the French nuclear industry , which has a high level of reliability , should be used as a reference for this matter .
Nevertheless , I would like us to discuss the energy issue in more detail .
I am among those who think that nuclear energy , whatever the level of security , is truly like a sword of Damocles hanging over our heads .
There are many types of risk .
Some are frequently discussed , while others , strangely , are passed over in silence .
These include the human risk , of course , where an error in operation could cause a catastrophe like Chernobyl , and the technological risk linked to the ageing of materials .
Who can tell us that our successors , the political leaders in 20 or 40 years time , will be wise enough to renew nuclear equipment , especially if there is a serious and chronic economic crisis ?
There is also the terrorist risk , which does exist , and finally , there is the risk of war , which is never discussed .
Tell me , ladies and gentlemen , what the prime targets would be for possible missiles in a conflict ?
They would be the power stations , of course , and therefore nuclear power stations .
All nuclear power stations are thus vulnerable to being destroyed , no matter how reliable they are .
In any case , it has long been accepted that zero risk does not exist .
The conclusion seems obvious to me : we need to stop , progressively of course , but we do need to stop , using nuclear power .
Mr President , congratulations to the rapporteurs and Commissioner Papoutsis , who has not had an easy task here .
He never does have an easy task , given that the implications of energy spread across several committees .
It has been very interesting to hear so much consensus this morning .
I feel extremely European after hearing more or less the same speech in 11 different languages , albeit with some differences of emphasis and with different views , clearly , on nuclear matters .
We welcome the framework .
It provides a sort of legal base .
Having struggled with the budget of the energy programmes over the last two years I was aware of that lack .
It gives us that legal base for a set period although I have the same reservations as Mr Linkohr about the lack of a uniform legal base .
The budget is inadequate .
I too regret , as previous speakers have , the failure of Member States to insert an energy chapter during the discussions in Amsterdam .
There are far more aspects to energy than just environmental aspects .
Mr Adam clearly indicated the export possibilities for coal technology .
I like his phrase ' lean and clean ' .
Perhaps it does not translate well into all languages , but in English it is an excellent sound bite .
Not all aspects of energy are included in this framework .
Some of the Euratom aspects are missing , as well as research , structural funds , MEDA and large aspects of PHARE and TACIS .
Development aid , agriculture , transport and tax all have energy implications .
If there is to be a restructuring of the committees in Parliament let us not fall into the trap of thinking that an Environment Committee could possibly undertake to look at all the aspects of energy .
We need quite complex discussions on energy in the event of any sort of restructuring , which may well be an interesting idea .
I have said before that the Euratom Treaty was a very efficient way of promoting nuclear energy , on which we have varied views .
We need an intergovernmental agreement which gives us something similar in the field of renewable energy and energy efficiency .
I have put my suggestions before you .
Maybe ' charter ' is a better word than ' treaty ' , and certainly more achievable .
I hope the Commissioner will do some work on this .
We will shortly give him a tool to encourage him to carry out work on that basis .
I am pleased that some of the Euratom work is now being incorporated into a comprehensive energy framework , so that one management committee will encompass the work of the SURE .
That should be continued and encouraged .
It is quite absurd to have two separate Treaties dealing with something as fundamental and complicated as energy .
Mr President , we are facing an immense challenge .
While we plan enlargement towards the east , our dependence on imported energy is growing .
We have to try and make sure the energy is delivered .
But just as much a priority , I think , is the development of high standards of safety in all nuclear power stations and in the transportation of radioactive materials .
These demands must also feature in negotiations on membership .
The aims in the energy document for cooperation between Eastern Europe and the EU in matters of safety , the environment and energy must be implemented .
The added benefit of combined heat and power production is an effective means of getting nearer to the Kyoto objectives and will have a positive impact on EU environmental policy .
That is how a cost-effective use of energy will make progress in Member States in the short and medium term .
Combined production ties in closely with the national objectives of Member States , but in spite of this we also need investment at Community level .
The Union should try and adopt an overall view of the promotion of combined production and allow the market to decide on the competitiveness of fuels .
If the aim is a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions , the only feasible solution to the basic energy question is nuclear power and renewable energy sources .
Mr President , in my view we have before us two major tasks facing society in the energy field .
The first is to stimulate environmentally friendly energy sources which are sustainable in the long term , especially biological energy resources , for example wood fuels , pellets , briquettes and biogas , in order in that way to achieve sustainability in energy use .
The second task is to phase out nuclear power , oil and coal , which are not sustainable in the long term .
It is important that all this be done in stages : we who are elected representatives promote measures to phase out nuclear power and the burning of the fossil fuels , oil and coal , so that the market in turn gets the stimulus it needs to concentrate efforts on the development of renewable energy sources .
If this is done in the right way and with vigour , we shall in the long term be able to stimulate a sustainable energy market in environmentally friendly fuels for future generations .
Mr President , when we listen to speakers here , we hear the words ' environment ' , ' long-term ' , ' secure and sustainable energy systems ' and affirmations that these are what we should be building on .
That means of course that the majority here will also be voting today for the amendments tabled by the Greens .
These seek to promote precisely those ingredients : environment , sustainability , security and long-term action .
In Sweden we are about to start on the phasing out of nuclear power .
Following the change of government in Germany , nuclear power will also be phased out in Germany .
The EU must adapt to reality too and have some faith in the future .
The EU cannot continue to hold the nuclear power industry in its embrace indefinitely , but must break loose and set its sights on development and the future and on renewable energy sources .
These do not include nuclear power , oil or coal !
I therefore hope that the majority here will support Mr Bloch von Blottnitz who , on behalf of the V Group , has tabled these amendments calling for nuclear power to be phased out .
Mr President , the energy sector is changing fast .
The gas and electricity market has been further liberalised .
In the future , we will be increasingly dependent on energy sources outside the Union .
This is why we strongly advocate energy savings and the further stimulation of alternative energy sources .
Every effort must be made to greatly increase the relative share of sustainable energy sources .
In order to arrive at a share of 12 % or even 15 % in 2020 , we need more in the way of tax and agricultural policy .
Research to improve and further develop solar energy must also be encouraged .
Coordination and integration by means of a framework programme is desirable in order to coordinate the individual energy programmes .
It is a good thing that the proposed framework programme will actively monitor developments , including analyses and forecasts .
But when it comes to activities in the nuclear sector we could not be more reluctant .
As long as there are good prospects of alternative energy sources , which are safer and for which waste production is less of a problem , then our preference goes to them .
We agree with the rapporteur to also include candidate Member States in improving nuclear safety .
Mr President , the decision concerning the future use of energy in Europe is one of the most crucial questions facing the European Union .
I have a feeling that the Commission has not yet fully recognised the significance of the energy issue .
Certainly some praiseworthy efforts can be seen , such as the announcement that the White Paper on renewable energies is to be implemented .
But the ALTENER II programme , which has almost no funds , is insufficient to achieve a change in energy policy .
There are five reasons why we need to change our energy policy .
The environmental reasons are clear .
Then there is also job creation , the protection of resources and the export market which we cannot afford to leave to Japan and the United States .
The most important point is that wars are currently being waged for energy resources , and as these energy resources are depleted the number of wars will increase .
Nuclear power is certainly not the solution .
Even in recent weeks we have heard of reactor problems in France , the quintessential nuclear state , where even security of supply was not guaranteed .
Yesterday the dreadful news came from Chernobyl that a worst-case scenario on a larger scale than 1986 is possible .
The changes to the programme proposed in Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz 's amendments are therefore vital .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteurs for their work . I will concentrate on two points .
The first concerns the legal basis .
As some of the previous speakers have already mentioned , it is very good that with this multiannual programme for energy we have created a legal basis at least for a period of five years .
However , I think it is only a stop-gap measure .
What we really need is an energy chapter in the Treaty covering all forms of energy , so that they all receive equal attention and so that we do not have a situation like the present in which nuclear energy receives more funding than all other types and is given preferential treatment .
In my opinion , an energy chapter of this kind would also help us achieve what Mr van Velzen mentioned , an acquis communautaire in the sector with uniform standards and rules on how certain power stations - and here I do not mean only nuclear power stations - must be set up and what sort of security measures must be taken .
In this way we could also help improve transparency of cost in the internal market in electricity .
A power station which converts renewable energies into electricity requires the local fire brigade in case of emergency .
A nuclear power station requires a range of security measures , and it is possible that a whole area may no longer be habitable if an accident occurs .
The second point which I would like to discuss is the need for a sustainable energy policy to achieve the Kyoto targets .
In this area it is not sufficient to pay lip service .
Otherwise we will not achieve the Kyoto targets , and we will miss the chance to gear the European economy to a modern awareness of the needs of the environment , climate and the protection of resources .
Since the Americans think too much in the short term and have not yet recognised that switching the economy over to energy-saving measures and the use of alternative energies gains much more than its initial cost , we as Europeans have the opportunity not only to take the lead in wanting to protect the environment , but also to push our own industry towards innovation .
When resources were scarce the pressure to innovate was always considerably greater than when we could rely on having a plentiful supply and did not have to concern ourselves with how energy and other resources were used .
I would like to conclude by repeating a sentence which I first said in the House when the Auto Oil Programme was passed .
Modern industrial policy is the same thing as environmental policy , and in order to allow the Union to develop better we must allow energy policy to overlap with environmental policy too .
Mr President , if we are to integrate into a framework programme the wide range of activities in the spheres of international cooperation studies and analyses , renewable energies , energy efficiency , efficient use of solid fuels and nuclear safety , we clearly need an appropriate strategy for developing the sector .
Since the van Velzen , Soulier and Adam reports deal individually with the programmes in question , and very competently , I will say only that I hope to see the programmes that are currently in force , including the ALTENER and SAVE programmes , incorporated in the first framework programme for energy , although I know that some members of the Council are opposed to this .
Whether such programmes are incorporated in the framework programme or not , they should in any case be given an increased budget , since convergence in this sphere is far from complete and cohesion in Europe should include energy as well as economic and social matters .
Moreover , the Union 's energy policy must be sufficiently clear and strong to prevail over the nuclear lobbies .
I will end by saying , on the subject of including the environment in the co-decision procedure , that I think it would be preferable if the programme had both Article 235 and Article 130 as its legal bases .
The quality of the framework programme can only benefit from an emphasis on the environmental dimension and from the fuller involvement of Parliament in decisions .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for trying to bring together various elements of European energy policy .
I know how difficult that is because energy policy is really a difficult terrain .
I would like to comment further on two points .
The first concerns the way in which we deal with nuclear energy .
The majority of countries in the European Union eschew nuclear energy , and some countries which formerly used it are currently preparing to abandon it .
Even one of the larger Member States is now taking significant steps to begin this process .
However , in a programme to which all countries make a financial contribution , the money cannot only be used to carry out research and work on the safety of nuclear energy .
I think we must also provide significant support for the efforts made by countries no longer using nuclear energy to move away from this type of energy completely .
It is not acceptable that all countries should pay so that a few can use nuclear energy ; instead , we must lay further emphasis on moving away from this .
The second point is that the budget only pays lip service to energy policy in Europe .
It does not allow us to bring about a change of direction in energy policy .
We need legislative proposals to supplement this programme , firstly on energy taxes , and secondly on the promotion of renewable energies through a pan-European electricity supply directive .
For this reason , Commissioner , I urgently request once again , particularly in view of the change in government in Germany , that you devote your efforts to advancing the proposal for a European energy tax , so that a proposal for a pan-European electricity supply can be on the table as soon as possible .
Mr President , in the short amount of time available I shall only refer to the CARNOT programme .
Although Mr Adam is not here , I would like to congratulate him on his report .
But the European Commission should firstly be congratulated for presenting this multiannual framework programme for actions in the energy sector , which is an attempt to coordinate and focus the work of the various sectors in a coherent way .
I believe that a programme such as the CARNOT programme was needed in order to encourage exports of clean coal combustion technology .
It was also needed to encourage the dissemination of results and cooperation both within the European Union and at international level . This is especially important in relation to other European countries that are heavily dependent on coal , countries whose entire coal industry needs substantial modernisation and to be adapted to the environmental requirements we have laid down .
However , Commissioner , I would like to use the time I have left to make a few general remarks on coal research because I think it gives us cause for concern .
In this technological sector , as in many other industrial sectors , both the medium and long-term prospects need to be borne in mind , and in this respect the situation is uncertain at the moment .
The Council decided that what was left of the ECSC Treaty budgets for steel and coal - which is what we are referring to now - should be taken over and integrated into the Union .
And yet , the information that the Commission itself provides in relation to coal research shows that we are in a hopeless situation .
And here we are discussing the fifth framework programme .
The Commission has once again proposed to include this research in that programme , which will be a programme for the future . However , with the exception of Germany , Mr Estevan Bolea , with the exception of Germany , the other countries , including Spain , are against the inclusion of coal research in the fifth framework programme .
It would therefore be a great shame to lose this scientific aquis , particularly concerning issues relating to the clean and efficient use of coal , because Europe 's technological level , which I believe to be so important , is on a par with , and in certain areas even above , the situation of the international market .
It is true that a country can continue to carry out research on its own , but the point is that the wealth of all this research has been the European cooperation up until now , and myself and others would like to see this continue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the three rapporteurs , Mr van Velzen , Mr Soulier and Mr Adam , for their excellent work .
The Commission 's proposal for the framework programme on energy is vitally important for the future development of a Community energy policy .
That programme promotes three strategic objectives .
First of all , the creation of a stable , multiannual legal base for action in the energy sector .
Secondly , the creation of a coherent , complete and flexible framework for all activities in the context of energy policy .
And thirdly , the fullest possible coordination of energy-related action undertaken within the scope of other Community policies .
Today , as you know , we face great challenges in the energy sector .
Our first priority most certainly concerns reliability of supply , and that is why we must make better use of endogenous energy sources , while at the same time developing international cooperation .
More especially , as Mr van Velzen stressed , in the light of the enlargement process , such cooperation is critical so that the candidate countries will be able to adapt to what represents the Community norm in the energy sector .
Urgent measures are also needed to improve the competitiveness of European industry .
The creation of a productive internal energy market would certainly make a major contribution towards that .
We also attach great importance to ensuring compatibility between our energy policy and the Community 's environmental objectives .
This requires effective measures in the areas of both energy production and use .
To meet these major energy challenges effectively , Community energy policy should focus more upon specific aims , it should be more integrated and it must certainly be better coordinated than are the other Community policies .
Beyond that , the Union 's energy policy must have a clear international dimension , since energy is a powerful element of international cooperation , the political importance of which has been highlighted by Mr Soulier in his exceptional work and in his speech to the House today .
On the one hand , that too requires an integrated approach , but on the other hand it requires better means for coordination and cooperation between the parties involved .
That brings me to the main objective of the framework programme on energy , which is to ensure the cohesion , transparency and productivity of coordinated action in the context of our energy policy .
I am particularly glad that Parliament agrees with this approach by the Commission , and I believe - and at least , the early indications suggest this - that the Council too echoes the same view .
Now , as for the subject of finance which many speakers have raised - I noted Mr Linkohr , Mrs McNally and Mr van Velzen - I would like to point out that our proposal is accompanied by a financial statement whereby , as an indicative amount , a sum of ECU 213 million will have to be provided for the framework programme .
Let me add , however , that I personally regard that sum as a bare minimum .
At any rate , as you know , the budget will be determined on an annual basis by the budgetary authority .
For that reason it is largely up to you , up to the European Parliament , to ensure that there are enough appropriations to cover the activities in question .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission will agree with many of the amendments you have tabled .
For the sake of clarity , I shall deal with each report separately .
First of all , as regards Mr van Velzen 's report on the framework decision , most of the proposed amendments clarify the Commission 's proposal .
As far as enlargement is concerned , I completely agree that energy has an important part to play in the enlargement process .
For that reason the Commission accepts Amendment No 5 .
As for liberalisation of the energy market , I quite agree that particular attention must be paid to the application and monitoring of the directives , and I can therefore accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 4 .
I cannot agree with the proposal to establish a separate programme on the monitoring of the internal market .
The Commission has already done everything proposed within the scope of a new sub-programme of that kind , since it is obliged to by virtue of the Treaty and the directives relating to the internal market .
We are already working towards beginning to set that mechanism in motion .
Moreover , monitoring of the internal market will be part of the ETAP programme .
Consequently , I cannot agree with part 17 of Amendment No 9 .
I would also like to point out that part 5 restricts the flexibility of the CARNOT programme , and that is why we cannot accept it .
However , the whole of the rest of Amendment No 9 is acceptable .
Amendments Nos 3 , 6 and 11 , which seek to improve coordination and transparency , are also acceptable .
However , having regard to the resources available , the Commission cannot agree with the last sentence of Amendment No 8 , given that the amendment prejudices future financial perspectives .
But the Commission can accept the first part of Amendment No 8 , and Amendment No 7 too with one small change of wording .
The Commission also cannot accept Amendment No 14 , because that would disturb the overall balance of the proposal .
I also wish to say that while I do not disagree in principle with the contents of Amendments Nos 12 , 13 , 15 and 16 , we consider that they are already covered by the programme , so we prefer the existing wording .
In addition , we cannot accept Amendments Nos 17 , 19 and 21 since they conflict with the Commission 's views on nuclear energy , while Amendments Nos 18 , 20 and 22 are not compatible with the statutory provisions of the Treaty .
We also cannot accept Amendment No 23 , because it is already covered by the initial proposal .
At this point , however , let me make a comment about nuclear energy .
So long as this form of energy exists , it is our duty , the European Union 's duty as it emerges from the Euratom Treaty , to ensure that the maximum degree of safety is achieved .
As you know , it is up to each country to decide whether to have nuclear energy or not .
In any event , as you will be aware , we in the Commission are also striving to promote new forms of energy , to establish a new energy balance for the future .
Moving on to the ETAP programme , the Commission can accept most of the proposed amendments .
In other words , we accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 and 5 .
More particularly , Amendment No 2 is acceptable in principle , but I think we should add consumer organisations to the list of those able to participate in the programme .
Now , as for Amendment No 4 , the objective of analysis relating to renewable energy sources is very important , but it is already covered by the special action of the Altener programme .
However , there must be coordination between the ETAP and Altener programmes in that sector , and in that sense , of course , the Commission undertakes to supervise the best possible coordination between those two programmes .
Thirdly , regarding the SURE programme .
The Commission accepts Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 and 7 , since they clarify the programme 's objectives and stress the need for greater transparency .
More particularly , so far as Amendment No 3 on common safety standards is concerned - and this is in fact what I want to say in answer to Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz - the Commission can today accept the content of this amendment on common safety standards , even though that clearly falls mainly within the competences of the Member States .
At any rate , the Commission believes that the SURE programme could give even greater impetus to cooperation between the Member States .
The Commission also accepts Amendment No 6 with a few minor changes of wording , concerning industrial cooperation with the CIS countries and Russia , in other words the countries which can benefit from the operation and use of the TACIS programme .
In our view , there is a need to stress the fact that this cooperation should lead to the application of equivalent and high-level safety standards .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 8 and 11 , because they conflict with its views on nuclear energy .
We also cannot accept Amendments Nos 9 and 10 and the conclusions they lead to concerning the transport of nuclear material .
We can accept Amendment No 12 in principle , but we think it is already covered by Amendment No 7 .
Now , as for the Synergy programme , we can accept the amendments tabled by the Committee on Energy , except for Amendment No 1 .
More particularly , the Commission accepts Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 4 , but cannot accept Amendment No 1 because we believe it simply restricts finance flexibility , a flexibility which is needed in light of the speed with which developments are taking place all over the world today .
Finally , on the CARNOT programme , I am glad that Parliament agrees with the great need for a programme in the sector of using clean coal .
The Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 4 , but not Amendment No 3 on the programme 's duration and its budget , because the result would be to reduce flexibility in the implementation of the programme . I also consider it exceptionally important to ensure that the programme 's duration is the same as for all the programmes included in the framework programme , but apart from that I agree with Mr Adam that we must ensure that the results of research in this sector are published .
We also cannot accept Amendment No 5 for formal reasons , given that it equates the former Soviet Union republics with the Eastern European countries , with which we have concluded overall cooperation agreements .
Cooperation with countries covered by the TACIS programme in the solid fuels sector is certainly important , but we must comply with the official framework established for that cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I once again wish to thank the rapporteurs - Mr van Velzen , Mr Soulier and Mr Adam - for their excellent work .
As you have heard , the Commission can accept most of the amendments tabled .
Before winding up , however , I should like to draw the House 's attention to the two remaining programmes of the framework programme on energy , namely SAVE and Altener .
I am sure that our cooperation with the rapporteurs on those two programmes , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz and Mr Robles Piquer , will be just as constructive as the cooperation we have had on the programmes we have been talking about today .
Thanks to Parliament 's efforts , the Energy Council on 13 November will be able to carry the framework programme on energy forward substantially , taking due account of the political aspects of the subject .
I look to the adoption of final decisions by the Council in relation to the framework decision and the ETAP , SURE , Synergy and CARNOT programmes , as indeed I look to that Energy Council for confirmation of the political will to support the SAVE and Altener programmes .
Mr President , I would like to ask a brief question .
The glaring contradiction between the announcement that you intend to step up the promotion of renewable energies , which I fully endorse , and the laughable budget figures before us - according to your proposal it should be ECU 11 million , after a figure of ECU 22 million was discussed in the preliminary draft - is , in my opinion , painful and regrettable , and we hope that we can bump this amount up a little .


The reason given is that more than ECU 11 million cannot be administered .
This is completely incomprehensible to me given how far behind we have fallen in the new biomass and photovoltaics markets , and also the considerable opportunities to promote exports , especially for small and medium-sized companies in this sector .
Could you please explain your position once again as I do not consider this to be a valid argument .
Mr President , I am glad of the opportunity to answer the honourable Member 's question .
Indeed , I too agree that major impetus should be given to the use of renewable energy sources and to the spread of new technologies which can contribute towards advances in that sector .
In its proposal on the budget and the financial statement , the Commission limited itself to a sum which , according to present forecasts and demands , we estimate could be utilised sufficiently and in a rational way .
That is what we proposed , but it does not mean that in the future we would wish to continue just with that amount of finance and no more .
Obviously , a policy to which we are giving political backing will need more finance in later years .
As you know , however , the budgetary authority - Parliament and the Council - took a different view in drawing up this programme within the overall framework of the financial perspectives .
In that respect , then , it is up to you , up to the European Parliament and the Council too , to decide on the level of finance and of course the degree of political priority that should be given to the issue of renewable energy sources .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended until 12 noon )
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , we have with us here today a delegation from Moldova whom I should like to welcome .
This delegation is led by Mr Valeriu Matei , deputy speaker of the Moldovan Parliament , and Mr Nikolae Tabacaru , the Foreign Affairs Minister of Moldova .
VOTES
We do not care for the idea of an action programme at EU level on pollution-related diseases as a basis for work in this field .
We think it is superfluous and inappropriate to give the Commission powers in this area .
It would be far better to coordinate efforts in intergovernmental cooperation under WHO auspices , since pollution-related diseases are not restricted to the EU 's territory .
As regards matters that require special European cooperation , this should be pursued through the European section of the World Health Organisation , which is based in Copenhagen .
In the second reading of the Cabrol report , however , we only have the opportunity to consider the individual amendments .
We therefore opt for a pragmatic approach and vote for the increase in the financial framework plus the amendments regarding additional evaluation reports from the Commission , but we cannot support the demand for further actions to be put in hand by the Commission .
For several months , we have been giving our opinion on proposals linked to public health .
I want to reiterate what I have already said about Mr Cabrol 's skills in this field .
I would also like to reaffirm my support for our colleague 's relevant proposals .
I have already explained how I voted and the importance of implementing a specific policy in the fight against pollution-related diseases , and therefore the fight against pollution .
This summer was once again marked by peak levels of pollution in many cities in the European Union .
This deterioration of the situation does not look like it is going to improve .
It is even more important to realise the urgency of the situation given that water quality is causing great concern .
The cases of pollution that France has seen in the last few weeks are not , in my opinion , particular to France and cannot be considered as purely a French problem , but as a European or even a global problem .
Moreover , while I cannot understand the Council 's attitude with regard to the budget margins available , I do not think it is reasonable to cross out with the stroke of a pen the provisions that we had advocated , not long ago , in the context of the action programme on pollution-related diseases .
While waiting for a global policy on the environment to yield its first results , it is Europe 's duty to deal with the risks associated with pollution and its consequences for health .
Viceconte recommendation ( A4-0336 / 98 )
It is important that patients with rare diseases are not forgotten , but are helped .
This should in principle be achieved at intergovernmental level under the auspices of the World Health Organisation .
Patients with rare diseases do not only live in the EU ; besides we do not want the Commission to have powers in this area too .
We are voting against the amendments concerned with the setting-up of a Community database , comitology and continuing training programmes .
However , we are voting in favour of the amendments that seek to clarify the text .
Despite our position in principle , we wish to promote a pragmatic approach and are voting for the budget increase .
I recognize that the Commission accepts five-year funding for rare diseases .
Nevertheless , the main work is yet to be done , as resources now need to be given to this policy guideline .
However , we must approve the Community approach that our colleague Guido Viceconte wants to launch in the field of rare diseases .
The common sense , which in this case is not at all a derogatory term , involved here responds to a logic linked to the small number of people affected by this type of disease , some of which are particularly serious .
Therefore , the battery of provisions proposed by the rapporteur seems to me to be capable of responding to the research needs in this field , which is so specific and often absent from the immediate concerns of national governments .
In saying this , I do not wish to accuse the governments in any way , but it must be recognised that the amounts needed to further specialist knowledge require investments that the Member States alone cannot provide from their funds .
Europe must therefore intervene .
Finally , I think that the proposal to involve all those affected by rare diseases in this programme is a step in the right direction , and could help families and volunteers , who are often left to fend for themselves in their daily lives .
Let us hope then that the European Parliament 's position will help to achieve the necessary goal of raising the public 's awareness in this respect .
The Danish Social Democrats today voted for the abovementioned report .
However , we would stress that the question of comitology has not been settled .
We refer to the Commission 's statement on comitology , according to which the Commission wishes to propose to the legislative authority that the comitology provisions in all previous legislative measures be amended in order to bring them into line with the new comitology agreement .
I would like to congratulate Mr Viceconte on his excellent report on rare diseases , which I fully support .
I completely agree with his analysis of the importance of this issue and the urgent need to establish a true Community programme in this field .
In fact , the issue of rare diseases , like that of orphan drugs - which will soon be discussed in committee in Parliament and , I hope , in the House before the end of the legislature - , is indeed a matter of public policy .
Research into these diseases and the necessary treatments are not sources of profit for pharmaceutical laboratories .
For this reason , they are reluctant to use financial resources for research .
Nevertheless , these so-called ' rare ' diseases are only rare to those who are not affected by them , and no supposed rarity can justify leaving sufferers untreated under the pretext of non-profitability .
The sufferers themselves are 100 % affected !
It is therefore the responsibility of public authorities to put some sort of constraints on pharmaceutical laboratories by virtue of a ' public health service ' obligation .
This constraint , this responsibility , must of course be accompanied by support that stimulates research in these areas .
In this respect , it is therefore essential to have an appropriate budget available .
This programme , like that on orphan drugs that is soon to be discussed , must thus be provided with budgetary resources that are sufficient - unlike the usual scattering of resources - to give rise to real initiatives .
We should also think at some stage about directing Community health programmes towards providing direct support for research and not just towards attractive awareness campaigns .
Finally , in order to avoid the inevitable scattering in terms of Community programmes , we have to tackle the issue of comitology .
The mysteries of this clandestine science do not interest us here .
What is important is that we adopt the management methods that will enable us to finance projects according to their quality and not according to the nationality of the participants .
I therefore think it is essential that we have parliamentary monitoring and greater transparency .
Anastassopoulos recommendation ( A4-0325 / 98 )
My group is voting in favour of the Anastassopoulos report . Thanks to the rapporteur 's persistent but prudent negotiations we have a compromise which ensures that Parliament 's wishes , which are not reflected in the current text of the directive because they were rejected by the Council and the Commission , will at least be pursued further by the Commission in this form , and also that by prompting research it allows investigation of ways in which the legal arrangement sought by Parliament could in future be realised .
It is necessary to extend the protection of conditional access electronic media services in such a way as to ensure appropriate remuneration but also to protect the economic value of the service from technical abuse .
We agree with the rapporteur 's decision not to endanger the existence of the directive by insisting on Parliament 's amendments , following the statement by the Commissioner responsible in favour of taking the protective measures recommended by Parliament .
Gebhardt recommendation ( A4-0319 / 98 )
I regularly point out here the progress that has been made in European harmonisation : the single currency , the freedom of movement , the standardisation of social protection systems , the struggle for high-quality public health , etcetera .
There is , however , an area in which , at the moment , we cannot guarantee equality to all our citizens .
Diplomas , certificates and other professional qualifications are recognised in different ways depending on whether a person chooses to work in their country of origin or in another country of the European Union .
Considerable progress has been made since the directive of 8 February 1996 , especially in the legal and medical sectors .
But there is still more to be done to the system that has been set up , especially in the sectors associated with industrial businesses .
Up until now , the length of training received has always taken priority over the skills acquired .
It is therefore time to put an end to this inequality that each year prevents many young people from exercising their right to free movement .
The fight against unemployment and to create stable jobs is the permanent concern in the majority of the decisions that the European Parliament takes with the Commission .
In this field , as in many others , liberalisation can provide answers and solutions .
A greater liberalisation of diploma recognition , far from leading to services or products of lesser quality , may , on the contrary , allow skills that are currently too often neglected in their country of origin to be better distributed among the 15 Member States .
We must not close the door to employment on young people who are prepared to leave their countries , as long as we recognise , without too many administrative or bureaucratic complications , the training that they have acquired in their country of origin .
It is for this reason and from this perspective that I therefore support the Gebhart report .
This new reading of Mrs Gebhardt 's report gives me some satisfaction , as the Council has accepted the amendments tabled by our House , which is proof that we can change the course of some decisions and provisions .
We now need to make sure that this directive is applied at national level for , in this field like in many others , it is one thing to legislate at Community level , and quite another to translate this initial will into action .
Whatever happens , the recognition of qualifications is a tool that is working relatively well , and this is something to be pleased about .
I also think , like our colleague , that the choice between an aptitude test and an adaptation period should be left up to the candidate .
However , although considerable progress has been made in this field , I wonder about the conditions in which those who have had their qualifications recognised are going to be able to practice their profession .
Problems with taxation and the freedom to reside in another Member State are very real and do not seem to be improving , at least in some countries of the European Union .
I am backing this report aimed at improving the recognition of people 's hard-earned qualifications across the EU .
Too many people in the past , including constituents of mine , have faced in effect discrimination because they happened to earn their qualifications in another EU country from the one where they would like to work .
The single market we are still waiting to see operate in all its aspects for capital , goods and services is also supposed to apply to people seeking work in another EU country than their own .
In practice though we see bureaucratic hoops put in front of such people which they are then asked to jump through - perhaps being required to undertake a new course in their adopted country in order to practise a profession they are already trained in .
If the powers that be in the European Union think we can negotiate recognition of standards for goods traded between Europe and other parts of the world , then surely it is not beyond the wit of the governments and the Commission to agree on mutual recognition of qualifications between our own EU countries !
I would first like to congratulate our rapporteur .
I think , too , that we should be pleased with the fact that in its common position the Council has taken over almost all the amendments adopted by our Parliament at first reading .
We must realise that these amendments all deal with fundamental issues , including , notably , the definition of ' manager of an undertaking ' and the Commission 's obligation to present a report after five years on the implementation of the directive .
By annulling the ' liberalisation ' and ' transitional measures ' directives , this text responds to the need to simplify and clarify the Community legislation currently in force concerning the practise of these professions .
It will therefore allow , in accordance with the 1990 judgement by the Court of Justice of the European Communities in the Vlassopoulou case , the recognition of qualifications not covered by the general system .
This is an essential objective , as it plays a very specific role in achieving the principle of free movement of people within Community territory .
Marset Campos recommendation ( A4-0324 / 98 )
Madam President , we have just voted on the Marset Campos report on the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in the research programme and I would like my vote against Amendment No 6 to be shown in the Minutes .
This is not a mere detail .
I did not have the opportunity to speak earlier , and I want to do so now .
This amendment seeks to change the rules governing the publication of the results of research partially financed by the European Union , placing the results of the research more easily in the public domain .
If that were to happen , small and medium-sized firms would feel both motivated to participate in the framework programme for research and put off from doing so at the same time .
It is vital to have tough protection for intellectual property so that small and medium-sized firms with short product-development horizons can genuinely participate , and I am glad the Commission was equally negative about Amendment No 6 , because I cannot see it as positive .
It is bizarre that the Council has not reached agreement with Parliament on openness in the fight against fraud .
We need clear , transparent rules to help all concerned to work effectively .
Parliament 's proposals have been long-fingered by the Council and Commission and we cannot tolerate this .
The report by our colleague Mr Campos responds to two of our Parliament 's requirements , which is why I will support the author 's opinion .
Beyond simply disseminating research results , efforts should of course be focused on the contents of this research .
It is , for example , regrettable that projects , particularly innovative ones , should be so behind in comparison to what is at stake in the next few years .
Once again I must denounce the time-lag between words and actions .
In such a specific and uncertain field , we must be able to bet on the future .
If this constant timidity on the part of the authorities , but also on the part of the investors , continues , Europe cannot hope to play a significant role in the new technologies sector .
I also support the rapporteur 's desire concerning the absolute need to be transparent in the fight against fraud .
We do not want to create conflict , but we have every right to question each other .
This does not only refer to the research sector , but to all European Community intervention programmes .
On several occasions , our Parliament has unanimously expressed the wish to step up the fight against the various types of crime , and particularly financial crime .
It would be absurd if this will , which has been demonstrated by the various authorities involved , were not extended to monitoring the use of Community funds , including those for research .
Finally , I agree with Pedro Marset Campos that simpler mechanisms should be set up in order to strengthen and coordinate more efficiently the teams taking part in the projects .
The adjustments that we are requesting are not foolish .
I believe that they correspond to the expectations of the majority of those who may be affected by the fifth joint programme on research and development .
I hope that the Council and the Commission will take account of these remarks , since their only aim is to improve the existing mechanism .
Our contacts with the research community show clearly that the EU 's research programmes involve too much bureaucracy for researchers .
If we really want to foster research , the best way of using these resources would be to pass them back to the national research councils .
The EU 's research programmes are well meant but ineffective and bureaucratic .
Research is not well served by them , and they should be scrapped .
Whitehead report ( A4-0334 / 98 )
I would like to reiterate the position I previously expressed in this Hemicycle : without consumer confidence in products and services , the internal market cannot operate properly .
This was also acknowledged in the Luxembourg Council 's declaration on food safety , following the BSE crisis .
However , this harmonised approach to the protection of consumers , to their right to redress and access to justice , and to the introduction of effective international methods of monitoring and inspection requires an increase in the Community budget .
What is more , the imminent entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam and Article 153 also call for this increase because without it both the scientific committees and validation checks would not operate with the necessary rigour , which would be disastrous for the consumer .
The Europe of citizens is , in many regards , the Europe of consumers , and for this reason I shall also vote in favour of developing a sustainable food policy in the interest of consumers .
The report on the establishment of a general framework for Community activities in favour of consumers contains a number of initiatives which may prove to be of benefit to consumer protection .
I therefore take a positive view of the content of the report .
I am abstaining from voting , however , because consumer protection and consumer health should in principle be a national matter and not a field in which the EU should dictate measures .
The recitals to the report draw attention to the need for consumers ' organisations to be given more opportunity to contribute actively to the definition of consumer policy .
It is also stated that the general framework must make provision for the necessary financial support to ensure the provision of high quality and effective control and inspection methods in connection with the protection of consumers and consumer health .
The emphasis on the role of consumers ' organisations and consumer protection in general I think is important in principle and I can agree with the need to promote food safety and quality , but that does not alter my view that consumer policy , along with health policy , social policy , etc. is a purely national matter .
The fact that the establishment of the internal market has to a large extent rendered a national consumer policy impossible is an argument for ensuring that the national political levels retain a right to maintain and adopt national rules which go beyond the EU 's rules in the field , as opposed to the current and future position in which the EU dictates total harmonisation rules .
Indeed , in a large number of cases it has been shown that concern for the functioning of the internal market takes precedence over consumers ' interests .
The three food additive directives , covering colouring agents and other additives in food , show that EU standards in the consumer protection field are often significantly lower than in national legislation .
Thus , in the context of the drafting of the EU 's permitted list , Denmark had to raise its limits for a large number of additives in food , despite the fact that there are grounds for suspecting that some of these substances can cause allergic reactions in children .
This example shows with abundant clarity that consumer protection and consumer health should be a national prerogative and not a matter for the EU .
Consumer policy and questions of product safety and health must be given greater weight in political work at all levels , including the European level .
The EU 's rules for consumer protection must be minimum rules , i.e. an individual Member State must have the right to apply more stringent rules .
Martin report ( A4-0290 / 98 )
We thank the rapporteur for a thorough job on an important report .
We think that the difficult situation caused by a heavy workload in the Court of First Instance must be resolved in order to ensure that the Court of First Instance is able to perform its duties in an effective and credible way .
The proposal under consideration for a single judge procedure to be adopted in certain cases can therefore be viewed as acceptable under the circumstances .
The single judge procedure must , however , be applied to a limited extent and under very stringent control , so that legal security and proper judicial legitimacy in the conduct of cases are safeguarded .
The introduction of single judges is a measure that can only be justified by the specific case load prevailing in the Court of First Instance .
The single judge expedient should thus not be pursued as a measure applicable in principle and more generally in other contexts .
The Court of First Instance now faces a huge backlog of cases and a further increase is expected when appeals against trademark decisions start to flood in .
The situation is clearly untenable .
However , the proposed decision to allow a single judge to decide a limited number of cases is not the solution .
Although in favour of clearly defined areas where single judges can sit , the proposal is uncertain and its scope unclear .
The scope of the proposed decision can be extended without further recourse to the European Parliament or the Council .
It is essential that the multinational and collegiate nature of the Court is maintained .
A ten per cent increase in efficiency will not solve the vast problems facing the Court and the Community justice system .
It is not even a temporary solution .
It would clearly be premature to approve the decision in its present form .
A more radical and urgent overhaul , including an increase in the number of judges and the introduction of specialised chambers , is necessary .
I therefore voted against the proposal .
We have chosen to vote against the report , partly for reasons of legal security and partly out of consideration for the anti-federalist principle .
The Martin report proposes approval of the proposal from the Council - which had originally been drafted by the Court of Justice - that the Court of First Instance should be able to hear cases with only one judge .
It is clear that the risks of error and hence miscarriages of justice increase if the number of judges is reduced to only one in cases handled by the Court of First Instance .
The Court of First Instance currently deals mainly with competition matters , agricultural rules , state aid , trade policy protection rules , structural fund disputes , anti-dumping measures , intellectual property law and disputes between the institutions and their employees .
The criteria in the rules of procedure proposed determining what cases a single judge may be able to hear , in our opinion , lack sufficient precision for legal security to be considered assured .
Yet the solution is not to be found in increasing the number of judges or in reducing legal security , but rather in applying a more restrictive policy as regards the transfer of decision-making powers from the Member States to bodies concerned with Community legislation .
This is an especially important point for the majority in the European Parliament to consider , which invariably proposes supranational solutions for practically every problem .
A solution can also be found , however , in a transfer of decision-making powers from the EU to the national parliaments .
That would get rid of much of the workload of the EC Court of Justice .
The proposal of the Court of Justice to change the working procedure in the Court of First Instance is welcome .
The Court of First Instance has become overloaded , a consequence of which is that the time for proceedings to be completed has become unacceptably long .
We take a positive view of concrete proposals on how to arrange the Court 's work so as to achieve reasonable completion times .
Making the work more effective must not result in loss of legal security .
If the Court is to decide on cases with only one judge , these cases must only be ones which are entirely uncontroversial from the legal point of view .
I cannot vote for this report because I think that a reduction in the number of judges in the Court of First Instance could easily jeopardise legal security .
However , I do recognise the good intention of the report , i.e. the proposed change would in many cases mean an increase in effectiveness .
van Velzen report ( A4-0340 / 98 )
We voted against the van Velzen report on a framework programme for actions in the energy sector .
We did so because we think that there is a need for a radical change of course in the Community 's energy policy .
It is quite obvious that it should be geared directly to the fastest possible transition to sustainability .
That means the most strenuous possible effort to promote renewable energy and environmentally correct solutions .
We also think it scandalous that the proposal is not also based on Article 130s of the Treaty . If this entire politically important and sensitive sector cannot be governed by provisions which take environmental considerations into account , no EU legislation should be formulated at all in this area .
Legislating in the field of energy without taking Article 130s as a legal basis in our opinion sends the wrong signals about the Community 's energy priorities .
The intention of the proposal is to standardise and streamline the EU 's energy policy .
The report of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy boosts these intentions as far as the centralisation of energy policy and the strengthening of the EU 's powers in the field are concerned .
This position should be challenged .
The Danish energy supply system is unique because it is consumer-led , and there is a risk of that being destroyed if energy supply is to be streamlined according to an EU model which is producer-led .
We have therefore supported the amendments tabled by the Greens .
As regards the use of taxes , this is something we can support where the environment is concerned , provided the proceeds are channelled back to the Member States .
I have decided to vote against the van Velzen report .
A key reason for this is that I think the report wholeheartedly accepts the EU 's electricity and gas liberalisation directives .
In the electricity sector we have already seen the first negative consequences of the Electricity Directive , not just for the environment but also for democracy .
The owners of the Barsebäck nuclear power plant in Sweden are invoking the Electricity Directive in order to get round the legislation enacted by the Riksdag under which nuclear power is to be phased out in Sweden .
Thus the option of pursuing a national energy policy has demonstrably been abolished by the EU in favour of free market forces in a field which , for environmental and supply-related reasons , must be subject to extensive democratic control - and as far as I can see it is only the national parliaments and authorities that can exercise that democratic control effectively .
The one-sided focus of the electricity and gas directives on energy as a commodity that can be freely exchanged frustrates the ability of Member States to maintain and extend a national energy policy in which , for example , the phasing out of nuclear power and power generated from coal in favour of renewable energy is a high priority .
van Velzen report ( A4-0335 / 98 )
We voted against Mr van Velzen 's report today .
According to the explanatory statement , the overall objective of the ETAP programme is to ensure that decisions at national and Community level on energy matters can be taken on common analytical bases , i.e. in terms of common economic studies and analyses and common energy forecasts and in terms of the dynamics of energy systems .
This sounds very trustworthy .
But an elaborate common system easily leads to intellectual strait-jackets and analytical orthodoxy .
Such a programme of analyses could easily end up serving industrial policy interests .
I would point out that it was not the nuclear power industry or the interests behind the coal and oil-fired power stations that analysed their way to the conclusion that there is a need to develop renewable energy .
Since the explanatory statement to the amendments of the Energy Committee clearly shows that these interests are poised to boost centralised energy policy in the EU still further , it is important to vote against them .
We also think that it is questionable whether the EU has any business implementing a programme such as ETAP at all .
Energy policy should be decentralised as far as possible . The ETAP programme only makes sense if energy policy is centralised at EU level , which strengthens the existing major players .
If the EU wants to spend money on analysis programmes , it should strengthen diversity and support independent research institutes and the grass roots .
van Velzen report ( A4-0323 / 98 )
The reason why we voted against Mr van Velzen 's report today is that the SURE programme serves to develop , not to phase out nuclear power production .
In our opinion the production of nuclear energy should be phased out , and programmes that promote it should be rejected .
With regard to the transport of nuclear material , it is obvious that all shipments should be undertaken in a responsible manner .
But we do not think there should be any transport of nuclear material from nuclear power stations at all .
We would far rather see the processing and , where necessary , dumping of nuclear waste carried out at the place where it is produced .
The transport of nuclear materials should be avoided .
Adam report ( A4-0339 / 98 )
The intention of the CARNOT programme is to support the exploitation of solid fuels - especially coal - in such a way that emissions of carbon dioxide and other pollutants are minimised .
The aim is to promote technological actions for the clean and efficient use of solid fuels .
It is an excellent objective , but is it enough in the long term ?
We would like instead to get away from an energy supply system based on the burning of fossil fuels in the longer term .
In the short term , however , it is necessary to burn coal , gas and oil in order to avoid what is worse , namely an energy supply system based on nuclear energy .
We are abstaining from the vote on this proposal because we do not know what the ultimate aims and implications of the proposal will be .
Are we to continue burning coal unchecked ?
Is it about the environment or industrial policy ?
We note that the rapporteur is proposing an increase in the budget for this energy policy programme from ECU 4.1 million to ECU 7.4 million .
Unfortunately it has become a bad habit in this Parliament for every rapporteur to seek an increase in the field with which he or she is concerned in the report in question .
These increases are sought at a time when public authorities around Europe are cutting back on their activities and dismissing staff because of tighter budgets .
We feel that Parliament must restrict its activities in this respect and that such routine demands for increases in the budget for this or that item must cease .
Soulier report ( A4-0322 / 98 )
The aims of the SYNERGY programme are a ) to assist in the definition , formulation and implementation of energy policy for third countries ; b ) to promote industrial cooperation between the Community and third countries in the energy sector ; and c ) closer coordination of the Community 's external activities in the energy field .
To support third countries in the definition of an energy policy stands out as a very sensible thing to do .
However , it is more difficult to see anything sensible in the EU sacrificing resources for the other areas .
The energy industry in the EU does not need public support for ' closer coordination ' , whatever that may mean .
Besides there is a good deal of uncertainty as to the demarcation of the scope of the programme in relation to other EU programmes .
Altogether the programme seems rather superfluous ; the resources could no doubt be used to better effect in the development of renewable energy and programmes to promote energy saving .
We are therefore voting against the report .
We support the principle behind the multiannual programmes in the energy sector which are being discussed today , and all efforts towards research and development in this area .
On the basis of the acquis communautaire , Austria , like other EU Member States , has declared itself against operating nuclear power stations .
At European level , Euratom 's central tasks of health protection and safety monitoring must be guaranteed and consolidated .
For this reason we give priority to promoting scientific advances to improve the overall safety of nuclear energy , including the development of pan-European safety standards .
Greater emphasis must also be given to innovative forms of energy production and renewable energy sources such as solar energy , wind energy , hydropower and biomass , as real alternatives to nuclear power .
Dangerous nuclear power stations must be shut down immediately .
Given the above , the reasons for our votes on the various reports are clear .
Joint motion for a resolution on Kosovo
Madam President , unlike the last part-session the result of today 's vote on Kosovo was very welcome , and I congratulate the groups on this .
In particular , I would like to thank the Greens for tabling an amendment which we rejected by a very large majority and which sought to make a UN Security Council vote a prerequisite for military and humanitarian intervention already long overdue .
This was rejected by such a large majority that we can say that this House has now voted strongly in favour of military intervention in Kosovo on the grounds of the current legal situation .
Without military intervention of this kind , we will , within the foreseeable future , witness the death of huge numbers of people .
For this reason we hope that by the time of the next part-session we will already be able to discuss what measures to take following successful military intervention .
In my opinion , these measures must involve putting Kosovo 's entire executive and judiciary powers into the hands of the elected representatives of the people .
I am voting in favour of the joint resolution on Kosovo tabled by the various political groups in Parliament , but I think it ought to be associated with a firm call to the UN and NATO to take action , after the irresponsible ' no ' to the American negotiator .
Yet again we have proof that the Serbian leader only understands the logic of force .
Immediate action must be taken unless we want to pay an even higher price tomorrow .
We will ask the Italian government to liaise closely with the other European countries and the United States , and to make its territory fully available for the inevitable military intervention designed to persuade the parties to negotiate and come to a sensible peace agreement .
The situation in Kosovo and Europe 's paralysis are once again demonstrating - as if this were needed - the urgent need for a political Europe .
It is important to be a great economic power , especially one that is armed with a single currency , but that does not guarantee peace , security , or even democracy .
In order to achieve this , we need a common European diplomacy , a common military force and therefore a European political authority to decide what Europe wants .
We are very far away from this !
Each state tries to play its part , or else its card , without really worrying about the others , while the Serbian President gloats .
We might have hoped that the sad Bosnian affair would have borne some fruit , but nothing came of it .
This is both tragic and ridiculous .
Europe is disgracing itself by allowing civilians to be massacred and by serving the interests of tyrants .
The Danish Social Democrats voted for the resolution on the situation in Kosovo today .
It is not the first resolution the European Parliament has adopted .
Innumerable resolutions from democratic assemblies in the UN , NATO , the WEU , the OSCE and the EU have condemned Serbian action in strong terms .
The West must now react .
It would be comforting if the United Nations Security Council could honour its responsibility and adopt a resolution putting some force behind its constant threats .
But , if this is made impossible by some mistaken loyalty towards Russia , other responsible - preferably European - politicians must step in .
It is not only our credibility that is on the line .
It is human lives .
The FPÖ is of the opinion that the existing UN resolutions are sufficient for intervention by NATO .
It is essential to find a speedy solution to the conflict in order to prevent further bloodshed .
Therefore , the FPÖ supports the motion for a resolution as a whole , but points out that it is not in agreement with paragraph 8 , as it is particularly those countries bordering on this trouble spot that should receive the humanitarian aid and financial support they need to allow them to take in as many refugees as possible .
This should prevent Austria from having to cope with most of the refugees coming into the EU .
Joint motion for a resolution on migrants
Madam President , in my speech yesterday on the issue of illegal immigration from the South , I explained to our House why , in the opinion of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , the reform provided for in the Treaty of Amsterdam could aggravate the problems instead of resolving them .
I would now like to tell you what proposals we would have liked to have seen in the resolution voted for by the European Parliament , and which , unfortunately , do not feature in it .
It must be understood that , in a united European area in which there are no controls on people at internal borders , as proposed by the Treaty of Amsterdam , the overall level of security will always be that of the weakest link in the chain .
However , maintaining national controls means that the risks are limited , while giving the responsibility to each state , which knows that if it accepts illegal immigrants due to a weakness in its system , it will not then be able to get rid of them by passing them on to its neighbours .
But this is not enough .
Many illegal immigrants have already managed to enter our territories , creating serious problems , and if more of them enter , they could destabilise our societies .
On this level , Europe can be useful .
We need to draw up extensive programmes to return these people to their countries , and the European states would participate in these on a voluntary basis .
I do however believe that the majority of them would agree to participate in the programmes , as it would be in their interest to do so .
Obviously those to be returned to their countries also need to be willing , and in order to achieve this , the conditions for returning and their reintegration into the local society need to be attractive .
This means , unfortunately , that it is going to be expensive or relatively expensive .
But we need to get used to this idea . It will still be cheaper than keeping these non-integrated people in our societies .
In the same way , on the voluntary basis of various types of cooperation , I think that neighbouring states should help each other to guard their borders when it is in their common interest to do so , and without questioning each state 's responsibility for its internal or external borders .
Should not France , Austria , but also - and why not - Switzerland , launch a joint programme to help Italy financially in guarding its external borders ?
I think that such an initiative would be common sense .
We abstained from the vote on the joint resolution because we cannot support the formulation of a common EU immigration and asylum policy on the basis of Title VI of the Treaty on European Union .
We are similarly opposed to Schengen and Europol , which are also mentioned in the resolution .
Clearly we think that immigrants should be treated correctly and we support a humane national policy on refugees .
The Danish Social Democrats voted in favour of a resolution on immigration questions today .
Indeed we must cooperate in combating illegal immigration and organised crime associated with illegal immigration .
That said , we must ensure that immigrants and refugees who are resident in the Union get the necessary protection .
We can do that by joining together in laying down certain minimum rights for immigrants and refugees .
We must point out , however , that Denmark has a reservation regarding supranational cooperation on immigration and asylum questions .
This reservation can only be changed , if required , by a referendum in Denmark .
I voted in favour of this resolution because of the many positive proposals contained in it to tackle the problem of illegal immigration , both by increasing the security of the external borders of the European Union and by curtailing the activities of criminal organisations assisting and promoting illegal entry .
I also commend the proposals to improve humanitarian assistance to illegal immigrants , who are often the unfortunate victims of the criminals who exploit their need .
However , I and other British Labour MEPs are unable to support recital F , which unjustly deplores the five-year limit for full integration of asylum and immigration policies , despite this having been agreed in the Amsterdam Treaty by the governments of all Member States .
We are also unable to support paragraph 2 , which on similar lines calls for the creation of a common EU immigration and asylum policy .
In conformity with what we have previously stated , we do not think that the EU should develop a common refugee and immigration policy .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
The sitting is now suspended and will resume at 3 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )
TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0897 / 98 by Mr Goerens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the tragic death of Semira Adamu and asylum policy ; -B4-0909 / 98 by Mrs Van Lancker , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the death of Semira Adamu following an expulsion order ; -B4-0915 / 98 by Mr Collins and others , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on the tragic death of Semira Adamu ; -B4-0921 / 98 by Mr Pradier and Mr Vandemeulebroucke , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the murder of Semira Adamu and the increasingly repressive immigration and asylum policy in Europe ; -B4-0927 / 98 by Mr Chanterie and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on expulsion procedures , following the tragic death of Semira Adamu ; -B4-0935 / 98 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the death of Semira Adamu and the need for a more humane policy on refugees ; -B4-0937 / 98 by Mr Vinci and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the forcible expulsion and death of Semira Adamu .
Madam President , we would like to express our distress at the tragic death of Semira Adamu .
Her tragic disappearance also , and above all , reflects a profound unease in our societies with regard to the countless nationals of third countries who , wanting to escape poverty , persecution , violence or violations of their rights , often do not find the legal means to do so .
The few measures adopted today to help find an acceptable solution to the problem raised in this resolution , and the slowness that characterises the search for humane solutions , only serve to demonstrate the embarrassment that our societies feel when faced with the victims of the unequal distribution of wealth and a lack of rights and freedoms .
This resolution does not aim so much to point the finger at the Member State in which the fatal tragedy involving Semira Adamu took place - although that Member State must of course initiate the necessary judicial enquiry and bring it to a conclusion - , as it aims to stress the need to introduce future measures in full respect of the provisions of the Geneva Convention on refugees .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , two weeks ago Semira Adamu , a young Nigerian woman , met a violent death as a result of her forced expulsion from Belgium .
I believe it is right for us in the European Parliament to also express our shock at this event and to condemn what happened .
As Mr Goerens said , it is extremely important for Belgian justice to provide absolute clarity regarding the circumstances of and the responsibilities for Semira 's death .
I believe it is also important that the Belgian Government has finally abolished the harshest aspects of its asylum policy .
But the death of Semira also confronts the European Union with its responsibilities .
Semira is not the first victim of a restrictive refugee policy practised by Member States of the Union and also by the Union itself .
Heavy-handed expulsions have already caused deaths or serious injuries in other countries .
It is also not the first time that the European Parliament , together with many human rights organisations , has sounded the alarm about the tendency for Europe to adopt an increasingly severe asylum and refugee policy .
In this context , I do not believe it makes much sense to once again debate all the European Parliament 's positions in defence of a more humane asylum and refugee policy .
But I do believe that Semira 's death obliges us to place two very important problems on the Council 's European agenda .
Firstly , Semira was fleeing a forced marriage in Nigeria .
I know that some people doubt her story , but I do not believe it is for us to judge that .
But it is our job to once again stress that all the European Member States should generously apply the Geneva Convention and thus give protection to women who are the victims of forced marriages , rape or sexual mutilation .
Europe does not need to wait for the world to review the Geneva Convention .
The Council can itself take the initiative , and I am very pleased that Commissioner Gradin has supported us in this during this week .
Secondly , difficult decisions to send people home can also be handled in a humane way .
The return of refugees whose asylum applications have been refused must not be an enforced deportation in which individuals are violently expelled from the country .
A humane return policy is possible by means of intensive support at this end , in which people are given the time , resources and help to prepare for their return .
It is also possible by means of resettlement aid in the country of origin and guarantees for their safety .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is more to international cooperation than simply standard return clauses or transit contracts .
All the Union countries should therefore make radical changes to their deportation policy .
This must also be an urgent task for the Council .
The Member States and the Union itself certainly have the right and the obligation to decide on the residence rights of refugees .
We believe the decisions must be made at European level .
But I believe there is a much more humane alternative to fortress Europe which is at present on the European drawing board .
Madam President , I ask you to allow me to make a point of order because the Portuguese , and therefore European , writer José Saramango has just been awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature .
Given that he is a European citizen , I would like this House to ask the Presidency to send him a message to congratulate and thank him for his work .
Madam President , she was 20 years old .
She refused to be expelled .
Some policemen killed her in a Sabena aeroplane .
It is as simple as that .
Of course , there were protests , demonstrations and a resignation , which is to the credit of the Minister concerned , and there are asylum-seekers who pay with their lives for so-called departure formalities .
There are others , in France and elsewhere : there have been those who have been discussed and those who will never have been discussed .
A foreigner who is to be expelled leaves via a detention centre .
I fear that few of our colleagues will have been curious enough to go and see what a detention centre is really like .
The buildings are not necessarily deep , dirty dungeons covered with wet straw .
Oh no !
Behind Charles de Gaulle airport there is a detention centre with acceptable rooms , a reading room , a meeting room and a television .
The only thing is that you are taken there by force between two policemen and handed over to the administration , with no contacts , no means of appeal , no lawyer , no possibility of altering the course of events and no power to do anything apart from wait for expulsion , which , of course , does not take long - from a few hours to a few days .
The State - with a capital ' S ' - takes measures for which it is accountable to no-one .
Here , there are no rights to be respected , not even human rights .
There is no trial , no judgement , no appeal , no defence .
The machine keeps going and the steam roller moves on , crushing everything in its path .
However little you demonstrate your relative disagreement with the decision that has been made , you are handcuffed and your ankles are shackled . You are then taken away by civil servants - who all look very good in the eyes of their superiors - , with as much consideration as you can imagine , in a police van to the foot of the detachable steps that lead to the aircraft .
That is how it happens in Europe .
A foreigner to be expelled is first and foremost a security and public order issue .
Well , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , that has got to change .
The Ministers for the Interior of the countries of the Union have to be accountable to us and to those who have sent us here .
It is in our name that these barbaric acts are carried out , and in our name that these terrible deeds are done .
Our request for the Council to come here very shortly to explain to us precisely what the policy is , what measures have been taken and , finally , how Semira Adamu 's murderers are being punished , is not a simple request ; it is a demand .
Madam President , on behalf of the PPE Group , I should also like to say that we are deeply shocked by the tragic death of Semira Adamu .
We trust that the judicial inquiry will shed full light on the circumstances of this tragedy and determine the respective responsibilities .
The tragic death of Semira Adamu demonstrates the need to implement a responsible asylum policy .
This must take into account the right of political asylum as laid down in the 1948 Geneva Convention , but also the commitments made within the European Union and the Schengen zone .
We should like to stress that this policy must be efficient and that it must be implemented with respect for human dignity and the fundamental rights of every individual .
I believe there are two elements , two lines of approach , which must be stressed : asylum and immigration policy must be founded on the best possible organisation of authorised immigration and the granting of protection to those in danger or in need of protection .
At the same time , asylum and immigration policy must also be designed to prevent and combat illegal immigration .
In this respect , our measures must be principally directed against the organisers of trafficking in human beings and those who abuse the situation of these poor migrants .
But an individual who remains illegally in a Member State must also be expelled from that country .
There is no way round that .
However , the need to respect human rights when doing so is of essential importance to the organisation of asylum and immigration policy in all its aspects .
This respect must be present during the asylum procedure and when removing persons illegally present in a country .
It is also important for asylum-seekers to quickly obtain legal security .
But we must also acknowledge the fact that the Belgian Government assumed its responsibilities following the death of Semira Adamu and congratulate the Belgian Government on seeking to adapt its policy and render it more humane .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , sometimes Members of this House are heard to say that Europe needs to develop a soul .
Well , Europe has a soul , and it is expressed in its universal thinking .
The prerequisite for this has always been love of the unfamiliar , openness , respect for and even curiosity about the unfamiliar .
In Semira Adamu 's terrible death we have witnessed the death of Europe 's soul .
Xenophobia has become an epidemic in our continent .
Cases such as the death of this woman could happen at any time .
This should come as no surprise in a Union where for years the right of asylum has been systematically undermined .
It should not surprise any of us that attempts can be made to violate the Geneva Convention , that it is possible to introduce deportation , which makes a mockery of human rights .
If we allow this , we will not only be responsible for further deaths , but we will also be killing Europe 's soul , and there will be no point in looking for it any more .
Madam President , once again we must denounce and condemn the use of violence in forced expulsions of immigrants by security forces in certain Member States of the European Union .
It is not the first time that the technique of using a pillow to smother the cries of those being expelled has been condemned .
Everyone will remember that Amnesty International has repeatedly denounced this method but , unfortunately , the issue was ignored .
This method , employed quite frequently in Belgium by police authorities to silence the cries of expelled refugees , led to the death of Samira Adamu .
Her murder constituted an unequivocal attack on human dignity and respect for human rights . And this must be said emphatically and clearly , rather than using the euphemisms so often employed .
We most strongly regret and condemn the use of such practices and ask that those responsible be punished appropriately .
Nonetheless , we know that this tragic event is nothing more than proof of the repressive aspects of the immigration and asylum policy implemented within the European Union .
At the same time , I would like to highlight , in this context , the pressing need for sexual abuse to be taken into consideration as a factor for granting political asylum . This is something that has not occurred , not even in the case of the expulsion of this young woman who was forced to marry a polygamist who was 65 .
From a more general point of view , I find it worrying that the European Union is implementing a policy that massively restricts the influx of immigrants , and that gives the impression of a fortress - as we already said yesterday in a similar debate - behind the measures that are adopted .
In addition , the document recently published by the Austrian Presidency also gives particular cause for concern because it highlights the serious threat to the already reduced right of asylum .
In this connection , we would like to state that we believe that any asylum policy that is developed within the European Union must be inextricably linked to the Geneva Convention .
Finally , I would like to stress and reiterate once again to this House that the immigration and asylum policy must be based on political measures of solidarity and not economic measures .
The first step to solving the problem of immigration is to consolidate in the European Union a genuine policy of generous and united cooperation that helps ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
I am sorry , Mr Mohamed Alí , but you are already a minute over your time .
Madam President , on 22 September , a young Nigerian woman died in Belgium , smothered by indifference , smothered by violence , smothered by selfishness .
She was 20 years old and had fled Nigeria because she was being forced into an arranged marriage .
She had hoped that in a European Union country she would find refuge , comfort and hope .
She thought that here the universal values of peace , freedom and equality were respected .
Poor Semira !
What she did not know was that our countries are too often insensitive to suffering and to personal or collective tragedies .
All our countries have ratified the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and signed the Geneva Convention on the status of refugees .
They all have , of course , their own laws on asylum , expulsions and immigration .
The Belgian law , the so-called Van De Lanotte law , has therefore been the focus of all the criticism and uproar .
It allows men , women and children who do not fit the criteria defined by the Aliens Office to be detained in closed centres , often for very long periods of time .
The tragedy involving Semira has shaken our society and , while maintaining the political force of the law , Belgium has taken measures to make it more respectful of people and , of course , to prevent the use of cushions .
It is up to the European Union to start the process , as quickly as possible , to define a real common European policy on asylum and immigration .
Mr President , in the case of the indeed very regrettable death of Mrs Adamu , so many lies and untruths have been told today that I should first like to remind the House of two facts .
Fact one : Mrs Adamu was , with all due respect , an asylum-cheater who even joked herself about the fact that people in Belgium swallowed her story about an enforced marriage .
This is clear , for example , from the shocking testimony of the Reverend Herman Boon , the chaplain at Zaventem Airport .
It should also be remembered that Mrs Adamu first stayed for some time undisturbed with a friend in Lagos , and then also left unhindered for the Togolese capital Lomé where , without encountering problems of any kind , she boarded a plane for Europe .
She was thus anything but a bona fide refugee .
Fact two : the fact that Mrs Adamu , incited by a far-left ' Collective against Deportations ' , succeeded on no fewer than five successive occasions in preventing a completely justified departure by screaming and fighting and more , simply means that the asylum policy is much too lenient , and certainly not the opposite .
The figures prove this .
In my country the greater part of rejected asylum-seekers , which means asylum-cheaters , if you will pardon the expression , are not repatriated but disappear into illegality .
Since 1990 , this has been the case for 100 000 people , but that does not seem to be a problem .
Finally , I must also say that I am deeply shocked to see the police officers who have to escort refused asylum-seekers become the victims of slander . They are being labelled as murderers , even in this House .
These people have to work in the most difficult circumstances and deserve every support .
The fact that they are also being maligned by the former Foreign Minister , the socialist Mr Tobback , I see as nothing short of scandalous , because it was not the police force and not even the Vlaams Blok , but the socialist Mr Tobback , the big boss of the socialists who are here today , who described the refugees , and I quote from his book ' Black on White ' , as ' gulls who come to rest on a rubbish tip here because that is easier than fishing at home or farming the land ' .
I would never dare to say this .
They are Mr Tobback 's words .
I recall that not a single Belgian minister resigned in the summer of 1996 when the four children in the Dutroux case were found , that nobody resigned when ten paratroopers were gruesomely murdered in Rwanda , and that nobody resigns in my country when its nationals are the regular victims of rape , robbery or murder carried out by illegal immigrants or asylum-seekers , for example .
I would end with this question : are there perhaps first class victims and second class victims of a defective policy ?
Madam President , this resolution must not obscure our own failings in moving towards harmonising asylum and immigration policies .
What have we done over recent years ?
We have made declarations , but we have done almost nothing tangible .
We cleared our consciences through the Treaty of Amsterdam by deciding that , in the five years following its ratification , minimum rules would have to be adopted in this sector .
So my question is the following : is Europe going to wait five years before acting ?
Is it not now time to present the 15 Member States with a set of measures leading towards a common vision , across all of Europe , of the conditions concerning both asylum and the status of refugees ?
In so doing , Europe would show that it is not only an economic machine , but that it is also capable , when united , of facing the difficult challenge posed by the attraction our society has for those who flee their country of origin due to its political regime , poverty or the violation of fundamental rights .
If Europe does not do its duty , if the Council of Ministers does not progress on this issue , there will , unfortunately , be other Semira Adamus .
Madam President , the dominant fact is that a 20-year-old girl has been brutally murdered by organisations of the State .
All the rest that was said a little while ago by one of our young colleagues is unacceptable , being not devil 's advocacy but a defence of crimes and criminals .
And the criminals are not simply the police , but the executive bodies , the government , the Belgian legal system and the more general legislation prevailing in the European Union on asylum , immigrants , foreigners - the very framework outlined by the Council of the European Union within which that legislation operates .
We must overthrow these things , and while our pain and anger over this matter may well up , we must remain calm and vigilant , and look out every day from now on for what can be changed and how to humanise the murderous legislation currently in force .
Madam President , a few days ago the new Greek Archbishop spoke of ' the barbarous East and the civilised West ' , but it seems that his prophetic powers leave something to be desired , since we have all seen where barbarism lies .
It is at the heart of the civilised West .
And we must change that heart , not tear it out but change it , make it truly civilised so that it does not just pay lip-service to humanity , human rights and other such mirages .
Madam President , I will not allow the words of Mr Ephremidis to pass when he says that , in Belgium , murders are only committed by illegal immigrants and that Belgian law does not comply with the Convention on Human Rights or with the European legislation .
Making such statements simply cannot be allowed , not even in the European Parliament .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in view of the fact that my colleague Mrs Gradin gave the House a clear and lengthy account of the Commission 's position last Tuesday , I will refrain , if I may , Madam President , from repeating my colleague 's words and merely express my personal sadness at what occurred .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0898 / 98 by Mr Frischenschlager and Mrs Thors , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the political situation in Slovakia ; -B4-0913 / 98 by Mr Wiersma and Mr Bösch , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Slovakia ; -B4-0928 / 98 by Mrs Stenzel and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on elections in Slovakia ; -B4-0936 / 98 by Mr Voggenhuber and Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the political situation in Slovakia ; -B4-0938 / 98 by Mr Carnero González and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the situation in Slovakia .
Mr President , I am pleased that we can now have a debate on Slovakia with a very positive undertone .
I hope that for the time being this will be the last urgent debate on Slovakia , and that from now on we can discuss this country normally .
This is indeed the result of the elections which were successfully held on 25 and 26 September .
A small delegation of observers from the European Parliament was present , and we could confirm for ourselves that the elections were conducted in a manner which was orderly , well organised and fair .
This also allows us to make a new evaluation of Slovakia and to have a new discussion on the question of whether it should be included in the first group of accession countries .
We assume that the incoming government and the new Slovak Parliament will be announcing a programme of political reforms , designed to strengthen the country 's democratic structure , protect the rights of minorities and better regulate the country 's free and independent media .
If they succeed in this , they will have removed the principal obstacles to Slovakia being included in accession negotiations .
We hope that not only the incoming government but also the political parties which are now negotiating will clearly understand that this programme of political reforms is also very important to the European Union , because over the past year the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council have all stressed the need for a number of these reforms .
If they are implemented , we must give serious attention to the formal and informal undertakings we have given to Slovakia .
But there is a certain time problem to which I would draw attention .
This is also referred to in the motion for a resolution .
Formally , the Commission 's screening reports are to be published on 6 November .
The Commission will clearly not have enough time to pay sufficient attention in these to the new political situation in Slovakia .
It is also unlikely that the new government will have come up with a concrete programme for political reforms by that date , and even less likely that certain actions will actually have been implemented .
The transition in Slovakia no doubt comes too close to the Vienna summit , and the Vienna summit will not be able to take a decision on whether or not Slovakia can be included in the first group of acceding countries .
We call on Parliament and above all on the Commission and the Council to show some flexibility , and to consider whether it is possible - if Vienna does not seem to be feasible , if in Vienna it is not yet possible to form an opinion on the political reforms - to draw up some kind of additional interim report on Slovakia in the spring for those points laid down as criteria for membership , namely rights for minorities and democratic stability .
The Council would then be able to decide under the German Presidency whether or not to include Slovakia in the first group .
It would be a very bad signal from Parliament , from the European Union , if we were to keep Slovakia waiting until December next year after everything we have asked of it .
Madam President , the elections which took place in Slovakia on 25 and 26 September have caused a major upset .
The Slovak population has demonstrated political maturity by voting out Prime Minister Meciar and giving the Democratic Coalition a majority vote .
This is a departure from post-communist despotism and represents a particular success for our sister party , the Christian Democrats , who are the main political force in the new government .
The European Parliament , therefore , rightly congratulates the Slovak population on the results of this election .
There are grounds for hoping that a strong and stable government will now be formed quickly .
The victorious opposition , the Slovak Democratic Coalition ( SDK ) , has found its feet in the determination to oust Meciar .
It unites such different forces as Christian Democrats , Liberals , the reformed Communist Left and the Party of the Hungarian Coalition .
It is a heterogeneous group which is going to have to work to maintain its cohesion .
However , there is a strong chance that it can create a government which fulfils the Copenhagen accession criteria , particularly in terms of achieving institutional stability as a guarantee of democracy based on the rule of law , of respect for human rights and of respect for and the protection of minorities .
There are now calls for the European Union to support Slovakia so that it can fulfil the political criteria for accession .
The political change in this country favours the integration of Slovakia into the European Union and represents a welcome element of stability in Central Europe .
Madam President , the European Parliament has repeatedly expressed its dissatisfaction with the progress of democracy in Slovakia , which was also the reason it was not included in the first group of accession countries .
However , I believe that anyone expressing dissatisfaction and criticism should also be prepared to recognise change and progress and to assess them fairly .
The elections in Slovakia were fair and correct , as I observed for myself .
The question for us now is whether the Union is capable of responding to this situation quickly and firmly and of assessing it appropriately .
I believe that the current resolution is too vague , too ' wait and see ' , too cautious .
My group believes it is possible to bring Slovakia into the first group sooner , particularly given that the new forces of democracy could use all the support they can get not only on the path to democracy but also on the path to Europe .
Madam President , as other Members have mentioned in their speeches , I would like to welcome the fact that the general elections held in September in Slovakia took place under acceptable conditions . They will surely constitute a decisive step towards establishing in that country a democratic system and the rule of law worthy of such names .
If this is indeed what has been achieved , there is no doubt that Slovakia will be in a similar position to the first group of countries that are already negotiating their accession to the European Union .
What is more , the Members of this Parliament should welcome this positive development . However , they should also take into consideration that perhaps , in one way or another , the opinions given by this House - as well as those of the European Commission and , of course , the Council - when determining the groups of countries and the processes through which they were to negotiate their accession have aroused a great deal of interest in Slovak society and public opinion , which has finally opted for the path of democracy and respect for the rule of law .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am not usually one for debates involving associated countries on Thursday afternoons such as this , but today really is a welcome exception after the excellent decision made by the Slovak electorate .
I think that it is not so important for Mrs Stenzel whether it is the Christian Democrats or other parties who received a larger share of the vote .
In my opinion , it is crucial that this has given a very clear signal in favour of Europe .
In this context , I , as co-chairman of the Joint Parliamentary Committee , would like to offer my warmest thanks to my colleagues from the OSCE , the Council of Europe and this House for acting as election observers and contributing significantly to the generally smooth running of the elections .
I feel that this is also an appropriate time to remind you that the decision taken by the European Parliament to hold the door open for Slovakia , despite recommendations to the contrary by the Commission , was correct and was in the end rewarded by the voters .
However , we will have to judge the incoming government and the incoming majorities in Slovakia by what happens in future .
We expect appropriate parliamentary monitoring of the secret services .
We want a law on minority languages , as agreed , and I believe that Slovakia will need a different form of political culture than has hitherto been the case .
We believe that there have been some highly encouraging signs so far , and we in the Joint Parliamentary Committee and in the European Parliament must help to ensure that the changing situation is given appropriate acknowledgement in the form of increased cooperation .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , 84 % voter turn-out speaks for itself .
I myself was in Slovakia for three days as election observer , and the enthusiasm of the Slovak people when they went to the polls was tangible .
I was also very pleased to note that the political representatives at the polling stations had had excellent training .
Training sessions often lasted up to five hours , and the use of videos ensured maximum preparation for the elections .
Young people were palpably pleased to vote in this election and it was clear that the official representatives , who regarded each other with great scepticism , really did monitor procedures right to the end .
It is for these reasons that I believe this election was a huge step forward for Slovakia .
Today , we can confirm with a clear conscience that the elections took place in a correct and objective manner , that new majorities were made possible and that Slovakia now has a real opportunity to forge ahead on the path to Europe .
We noticed that the Slovak population were very pro-Europe .
Another vote took place at the same time as these elections and had a very low turn-out , yet 84 % voted in the election involving the 17 parties that stood , so we know that the Slovak people had both practical and emotional reasons for voting the way they did .
I also call upon the Commission to ensure that Slovakia 's democratic election leads to appropriate action being taken .
Madam President , although this has already been said , there is reason to note that the Slovak people have realised that in a democracy it is possible to change the future of one 's country .
The people there have shown their desire to belong to the European democratic fellowship and have understood that having a functioning democracy makes a difference .
We note this with satisfaction .
However , I join with Mr Bösch in maintaining that it is important also to achieve results in the governmental work , both as regards developing a functioning administration , a stable democracy and , not least , when it comes to resolving minority questions .
I am not entirely happy on that point , having heard certain first reports from Slovakia .
We must await results on this point , but our signal and our debate today are a clear gesture to the Slovak people : thank you for the result you have achieved .
Finally I will merely point out that we are quite surprised that Finland was not invited to participate in the organisation to observe the elections .
Madam President , in March of this year Parliament expressed its concern at the political situation in Slovakia .
The departure of President Kovac followed by the appointment of Prime Minister Meciar created an even more worrying situation .
The undemocratic behaviour of Meciar and his party towards the opposition and the Hungarian minority caused much criticism from abroad .
Not so long ago , Slovakia was a candidate for membership of NATO and the European Union .
Unfortunately , under Meciar the country turned its back politically , legally and economically on European standards , its political situation excluding it from the first group of potential EU Member States .
Fortunately , times appear to have changed .
Prime Minister Meciar 's party suffered heavy losses at the elections to the National Council at the end of September , giving the Slovak opposition the unique opportunity to put right much of what had gone wrong under Meciar .
The high turn-out at the elections shows that the people are convinced of the need for change .
Meciar has lost the trust of his people , but his party nevertheless remains the largest .
The job is not over with this victory for the anti-Meciar parties .
A difficult task awaits the opposition .
The door of the European Union remains open to Slovakia , provided it has a democratic government .
The situation is worrying , as both before and during the elections the opposition had one thing in common above all else , namely their opposition to Meciar .
There was no agreement on a political programme .
Political and economic power are closely linked in Slovakia .
Although the election victory gives the opposition political power , economic power is still largely in the hands of Meciar and friends .
This is why the opposition must cancel many of the political appointments , look at the legality of the privatisation , and regain the trust of the international community .
They must show that they can provide stability .
Slovakia 's recovery is dependent on these opposition parties drawing up a political programme which gives substance to the aforementioned points .
It is in this way that a genuine coalition will be created .
They must also hold together for four years .
In this , they need the political and financial help and support of the European Parliament .
Together it is possible to work constructively on ensuring that Slovakia can join the European Union , like its former partner the Czech Republic , for example .
Madam President , we have not had a great deal of good news in Europe in recent times .
At last , a real ray of hope has come from Slovakia ; shortly before the elections , during which I was also present , the people really did not believe that they could win .
It is incredibly encouraging for us that these people were able to assert themselves against such a brutal power .
Mr Meciar really was a brutal potential dictator .
I spoke to him several times , and I have to say that I came away with the impression that the man is a medical problem rather than a political one !
However , this is dangerous for all of us .
We should now do everything in our power to enable the Slovak people , good people who have survived a tough history , to join the European Union as soon as possible .
We must ask the governments to do their best to ensure that the relevant decision is adopted at the summit in Vienna , which incidentally is only a few minutes away from Slovakia .
Madam President , the Slovak people have demonstrated , through their high turnout and their civil and peaceful behaviour on the occasion of the recent parliamentary elections , a firm commitment to democracy and a willingness to use this democratic opportunity to bring change to political life in the Slovak Republic .
The Commission encourages Slovakia to make full use of the opportunity thus created to address the problems highlighted in the Commission 's opinion of July 1997 which have hampered its accession process .
We hope that the outgoing government will facilitate the process of formation of a new government and that , in the interests of Slovakia , the process will be conducted quickly , avoiding unnecessary delays .
It is hoped that there will be a rapid improvement of the political climate which will lead Slovakia closer to the European Union in terms of democracy .
The European Commission is firmly committed to facilitating the process of integration of Slovakia into the Union ; it encourages the future government to accelerate preparations for accession by showing clear commitment to removing the obstacles indicated in the opinion , and to address the accession partnership priorities .
The new government is encouraged to consolidate and enhance the momentum of political reform , including in the area of protection of minorities , and to promote confidence and stability in key state institutions , including the presidency .
Macro-economic equilibrium needs to be promptly re-established and maintained ; economic reform , particularly in the financial sector , transparency in economic-decision making and better corporate governance all need to be pursued urgently .
As you know , the Commission is currently preparing the first regular progress report .
We will take the changes in Slovakia into account as late as possible in that process .
But the government has not yet been formed so , for the moment , it is too early to make definitive judgments .
Thank you , Commissioner Pinheiro .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Taslima Nasreen -B4-0906 / 98 by Mr Collins and Mrs van Bladel , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on Taslima Nasreen ; -B4-0920 / 98 by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on Taslima Nasreen ; -B4-0934 / 98 by Mrs Lenz and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on Taslima Nasreen ; -B4-0939 / 98 by Mrs González Álvarez and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the death threats levelled at Taslima Nasreen ;
Malaysia -B4-0899 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the human rights situation in Malaysia ; -B4-0908 / 98 by Mr Collins and Mrs van Bladel , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on Anwar Ibrahim ; -B4-0914 / 98 by Mr Titley , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the human rights situation in Malaysia ; -B4-0933 / 98 by Mr Habsburg-Lothringen and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on human rights in Malaysia ; -B4-0944 / 98 by Mr Telkämper and Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the recent political detentions under the Internal Security Act in Malaysia ;
Capital punishment in Iran -B4-0900 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the human rights situation in Iran ; -B4-0919 / 98 by Mrs Roth and Mrs Aglietta , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on capital punishment in Iran ; -B4-0926 / 98 by Mrs Sandbæk , on behalf of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , on the situation of human rights in Iran ; -B4-0930 / 98 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on capital punishment in Iran ; -B4-0941 / 98 by Mr Manisco and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on human rights in Iran ;
Capital punishment in the United States -B4-0911 / 98 by Mr Barzanti and Mr Bontempi , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the sentencing to death of an Italian national ; -B4-0917 / 98 by Mrs Aglietta , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the sentencing to death in the US of Rocco Derek Barnabei ; -B4-0925 / 98 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on capital punishment in the US ; -B4-0940 / 98 by Mr Manisco and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on capital punishment in the US ;
Leyla Zana -B4-0945 / 98 by Mr Wurtz and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the release of Leyla Zana ;
Georgia -B4-0931 / 98 by Mr von Habsburg , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on human rights in Georgia .
Taslima Nasreen
Madam President , we are concerned about one of the great women of this House .
Taslima Nasreen was awarded the Sakharov Prize here for her work , for her political commitment and for her commitment to human rights .
She received the Sakharov Prize , lived in exile for four years and has now returned to Bangladesh where she is being persecuted .
We are alarmed that fundamentalist parties such as Jamal-e-Islami in Bangladesh have been holding demonstrations against Mrs Nasreen since 14 September and demanding that she be executed .
We are worried that the police in Bangladesh are hunting for her after a court in Dhaka issued a new warrant for her arrest and for the seizure of her possessions , renewing the charge of blasphemy made in 1994 , and we are alarmed that a new reward of FRF 33 000 has been offered .
Why is she being persecuted ?
She incurred the anger of the fundamentalists in Bangladesh mainly because she defended the rights of women in the context of certain Islamic traditions .
Increasingly , we hear reports from Bangladesh about brutal and arbitrary behaviour by the police and about the inability of the organs of state to defend the rights of the victims of this violence .
We are dismayed by all of this and concerned that Mrs Nasreen has had to go into hiding , that she is being persecuted and that she may be facing death .
Therefore , I call upon the Commission and the Council to support the great lady of this House , the Sakharov Prize laureate , as I said , but also in particular , Madam President , to support this Parliament .
In two weeks a parliamentary delegation will be travelling to Bangladesh because of the devastating flood disaster .
That is a different problem , but I believe it is the duty of this delegation to address the human rights situation during talks with the government and to do everything possible to ensure that Mrs Nasreen can move freely .
Madam President , in 1994 the European Parliament awarded the Sakharov Prize to Taslima Nasreen .
In her book ' Lajja ' , which roughly means ' feelings of shame ' , she described the life of a Hindu family and outlined Muslim extremism , intolerance towards the Hindu minority and everyday discrimination against women in a male-dominated world .
The book was banned in her own country .
Anyone accused of injuring religious feelings can expect a prison sentence of up to two years .
After four years , Mrs Nasreen came out of exile and is back in Bangladesh .
Was it recklessness that drove her to do this ?
On her Internet website she gives her reasons for returning home .
One is homesickness and attachment to a country that is much too important to be allowed to fall into the hands of extremists .
The other is her mother who is seriously ill with cancer .
She wants to be with her in what will probably be the last weeks of her life .
Almost as soon as Mrs Nasreen arrived in Bangladesh under a false name and went into hiding , the streets were full of soldiers .
We have reliable reports of serious outbreaks of violence .
A reward has been offered , as Mr Telkämper mentioned , and demands for her death are circulating once again , initiated by fanatical Muslim extremists .
So Taslima Nasreen 's life is once again in danger .
It is still unclear how long the government , regarded as liberal , can hold its ground against the fundamentalists .
We call upon the Prime Minister , Mrs Hasina , to apply the human rights enshrined in the constitution and to protect Mrs Nasreen .
The demands for her to present herself voluntarily before the courts is a double-edged one , given the possibility of a prison sentence , uncontrollable pressure and the danger of attacks by extremists who are almost impossible to keep in check .
I hope , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , that the Sakharov Prize has the necessary international standing to finally help to free this brave fighter from danger .
Madam President , as other Members have already mentioned , after four years of being away from her country , Taslima Nasrin has returned there for personal reasons , perhaps to visit her mother whose health has deteriorated or because she missed her country .
She has returned and once again her life has been threatened .
We should ask ourselves exactly how being awarded the Sakharov Prize has helped her and her other colleague Leyla Zana - who will be mentioned later- , who continues to be held prisoner in Turkish prisons , after having received a further sentence of two years for writing an article .
I therefore believe that it should be very important for the European institutions to exert considerable pressure , in this case , on the Bangladeshi Government to prevent fanatics from killing a woman who has defended human rights in general , and the rights of women in particular .
The defense of human rights in general and the rights of women are of great importance to this Parliament , especially in those countries .
The Commission , or the Council , on its behalf , should apply severe pressure on that country in order to prevent something from happening .
Malaysia
Mr President , the recent events in Malaysia , and more particularly the tribulations of former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim , provide further evidence of the fact that authoritarian and undemocratic regimes ultimately devour their own children .
This has nothing to do with any supposed differences in culture or national character .
It has everything to do with accepting arbitrariness as a governing principle .
The Malaysian Prime Minister and his government cannot expect their country to be accepted as a full political partner if they violate fundamental human rights .
The Internal Security Act , which permits detention for long periods without any form of trial , violates the most fundamental principles of human rights , as does the criminal discrimination against homosexuals and the threats , persecutions , arrest of critics , mistreatment of detainees , refusal to grant legal assistance and much more .
My group supports the appeal to the Malaysian Government to stop this behaviour and calls on the Council and the Commission to apply human rights as the essential criterion in its relations with Malaysia .
Madam President , the arrest of Anwar Ibrahim , former Deputy Prime Minister and heir apparent to Mahathir Mohamad , along with 11 associates , demonstrates the short shrift that is given to democratic freedoms and human rights in Malaysia today .
Despite his previous status Mr Anwar had a black eye and other evidence of the physical abuse to which he had been subjected when he appeared in court .
It is likely that the charges of unnatural sex acts and corruption are fabrications to justify his removal and imprisonment while the real motive is to remove a rival when the Prime Minister 's standing has been shaken by the Far East economic crisis .
Regardless of this , however , the punishment of homosexual acts between consenting adults by flogging and up to 20 years imprisonment is an outrage .
Mr Anwar and his friends are by no means the first politicians to suffer at the hands of the Malaysian authorities .
A draconian set of laws threaten dissidents and journalists who speak out and people like Lim Guan Eng , an opposition MP , are already in jail for sedition ; Irene Fernandez , head of a women 's organization , is on trial for publishing allegations of abuses in immigration centres ; Param Kumaraswami , a UN special rapporteur , faces a $ 25m defamation suit brought by two Malaysian companies , and the government refuses to recognize his immunity .
There have been large demonstrations in Malaysia , and in the European Parliament we must speak out clearly in favour of the release of Mr Anwar Ibrahim and his colleagues and all political prisoners , and the abolition of laws which deny the right of free speech or other basic rights .
We are deeply concerned about the economic crisis and its impact on the peoples of Malaysia and all south-east Asia , but we must continue to raise our voice against the flagrant abuse of fundamental political and human rights .
Madam President , Commissioner , we have recently heard repeated reports from the media about the terrible ill-treatment of the deputy prime minister , Anwar Ibrahim , and the utterly grotesque accusations against him .
A representative of the Adenauer Foundation had the opportunity to visit him a few days ago and was able to confirm our worst fears .
I think we should take a brief look at the history of Malaysia and point out what Tunku Abdul Rahman , the founder of an independent Malaysia and one of the greatest figures in the whole of Asia , said about Mahathir Mohamad 15 years ago .
He warned people against him and said that he was a great demagogue who could bring disaster to Malaysia .
In my opinion , our worst fears about Mahathir Mohamad have proved to be true .
He is one of the greatest demagogues and perhaps one of the greatest experts when it comes to pushing aside troublesome rivals or unseating others who come to power .
The last obstacle to his seizing full power in Malaysia was undoubtedly deputy prime minister Anwar , one of the greatest economic experts in the whole region .
He was regarded by several newspapers as one of the genuine hopes for the future of Malaysia , and he was also someone who might actually have achieved something , particularly in these times of serious economic crisis .
Of course , the Anwar case also shows us that something is wrong with Malaysia 's basic laws .
It has already been stated that under the Internal Security Act people can be detained without a warrant , for an investigation period of up to 60 days , if they are suspected - only suspected , mind you - of threatening Malaysia 's national security or economy .
Furthermore , the Minister of Home Affairs may issue a detention order of two years without any significant reason .
We must protest against this and stand up for this man .
Madam President , in recent years Malaysia has enjoyed the benefits of being at the centre of the economic boom , and human rights violations have not been a central issue , any more so than the Internal Security Act , a law from the colonial period .
For as long as I have been in this Parliament , we have criticised this law as being clear proof that Malaysia is not a democratic constitutional state .
We have now been alarmed by the arrest of Anwar Ibrahim , the former deputy prime minister , and a further eleven people who were detained with him under the Internal Security Act , and by the arrest of Mr Nallakarupan , a businessman .
We fear that they have been subjected to ill-treatment during their detention .
Why ?
This Internal Security Act is an arbitrary law .
People can be arrested simply on suspicion .
They can be held in detention and then imprisoned for two years , which can be extended indefinitely .
Currently , 200 people appear to be held in detention , and we demand their immediate release .
We also condemn the Malaysian penal code , under which homosexual acts between consenting adults are punishable by up to 20 years ' imprisonment and whipping .
Some people have been imprisoned on these grounds , and we call upon the government to act in a constitutional manner and to release these people immediately .
Mr President , most people think that the situation in Iran has changed slightly in recent times but it is still very much the same .
I want to mention that during the first year of the new President there were 260 public hangings , hundreds of secretly-executed political prisoners ; 7 people stoned to death in public , not to mention those stoned to death in secret .
Very recently the authorities have brought in new legislation for separate single-sex hospitals .
Women will be in one , men in another .
Women will be treated only by female doctors and men only by male doctors .
As we know , the vast majority of patients in hospitals are women .
This happens for a variety of reasons , not least because they are the ones who give birth .
The numbers of patients will be far in excess of the doctors available , who are mostly male .
This situation has to be addressed .
You cannot have single-sex hospitals .
The fact is that Iran has changed very little in recent times .
The only thing that has changed is its PR approach .
Salman Rushdie 's death penalty has not really been lifted .
We have to be vigilant .
Mr President , the reason for this resolution on Iran is that once again two death sentences have been passed on Baha 'is in the country .
We should remember that since the Islamic government came to power in Iran , in 1979 , death sentences have been carried out on 200 Bahai 'is , but that these stopped in 1992 following international protests - until this summer , that is , because in July another member of this group was executed .
That is why we are very concerned that these two individuals who have now received the death sentence may in fact be killed .
The first appeal in this resolution is an appeal to Iran not to take this road once again and to allow some religious freedom and certainly not murder people for their religious beliefs .
This violates every international convention in the Western world , and I believe in many more countries too .
Asia also rejects such practices .
This then is the first and most important aim of this resolution .
But I should also like to take this opportunity to express my great concern at what is happening in Iran .
Because Iran is now showing two faces to the world .
One face that suggests a little tolerance , a slightly improving situation , the famous show by Mr Cook and the Iranian Foreign Minister in New York , while on the other hand there is the repression which is not letting up at all , just taking place a little more behind closed doors .
There are many indications of this , but they are now rather more hidden , such as death sentences which in general are still being passed , but are now being carried out in private courtyards rather than on public squares in front of the cameras , as was previously the case .
Someone even told me that smaller stones are now being used and no longer the large rocks .
To be honest , I do not know which is worse , whether you are stoned to death in a private courtyard with small stones or with large rocks on a public square .
The repression against women is also continuing unabated .
Recently this has taken on an additional and very serious form .
Women can no longer be treated by male doctors , which has led to women dying in regions where there are no female doctors .
The fact is that it looks better than it is , that we must not allow ourselves to be deceived and must know the truth about Iran and therefore keep up our protests until things are put right , not just on the public stage but behind the scenes too .
The human rights situation in Iran remains unacceptable .
Mr President , in view of what my colleagues have said , I find the situation in Iran worrying because we have sufficient information to imagine what turn political events might take .
We know that a violent State regime generates violence and resistance . And we risk focusing our attention solely on the plight of women , trade unionists and other religious groups , when we really should be concentrating on the development of the fundamental right of association and political expression .
What can the European Union do in relation to this matter ?
In my opinion , this critical dialogue has failed and we must doubt whether sufficient changes have taken place to enable the people to express political opinions without being suppressed .
I am therefore appealing for us here to focus our attention on the political developments that are needed .
Mr President , the issue here - the eternal persecution of the Baha 'is - is similar to one mentioned earlier .
The Iranians always say that these people are enemies of the country as the core of the Baha 'i religion is actually based in Israel .
This is the pretext that is always used .
We should do everything in our power to help the Baha 'is to regain the religious freedom that they had before Khomeini seized power , and the freedom to which they should be entitled once again .
There have been positive signs , but unfortunately the opportunity passed all too quickly .
I would strongly urge that we should begin our protests once again , as they helped in the past .
If we continue they should help this time too .
Mr President , one of the things that fill me with pride at being a European and belonging to the European Union is the clear stand we have taken and continue to take in this part of the world against the death penalty .
What is happening in Iran is terrible .
It applies of course not only to the exposed group associated with the Baha 'i movement , but also to a great many other people who are being put to death by the Iranian authorities .
We must protest at this process in all its manifestations .
One of the consequences of it is that it casts a shadow over the religion of which those in power in Iran say they are the staunchest interpreters .
I refuse to believe that Muslims act that way or advocate the kind of action pursued by those in power in Iran .
I think we must unequivocally condemn their measures and proclaim that they are in contradiction , not just with the principles of humanism , but with those of all reputable religions .
Capital punishment in the United States
Mr President , we are calling for the death sentence on Rocco Derek Barnabei , due to be carried out on 28 October in the American state of Virginia , to be commuted or at least for a stay of execution to be granted .
Rocco , a young man of 31 , the grandson of an Italian emigrant , was accused of killing his fiancée in 1993 .
His financial circumstances did not permit him to prepare an adequate defence .
New evidence has come to light which I gather may change the guilty verdict .
The condemned man should have the right to prove his innocence .
So the death penalty must not be carried out .
Furthermore , the resolution of 3 April 1998 of the 54th UN Commission calls for a moratorium on executions with a view to complete abolition of the death penalty .
This resolution must not fall on deaf ears yet again , nor must the General Affairs Council decision of 29 June 1998 , requiring constant and determined action by the European Union at international level against capital punishment , be regarded as an empty statement of principle .
Save Rocco Derek Barnabei 's life !
No court , no judge , no power can take the life of a human being .
Anywhere where this dreadful barbarity survives and has not been stamped out cannot claim to respect fundamental human rights .
Mr President , this year , for the second year in succession , the UN Commission on Human Rights passed a resolution calling on those states which still have the death penalty to impose a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty .
The United States is , of course , one of the countries which owes the largest amount of money to the United Nations .
As a so-called civilised country , it totally ignores international opinion on this issue .
It is completely unacceptable that it carries out the same barbaric acts as countries like Iran -it is basically in the same category as Iran .
Despite the fact that it holds itself up as the moral police force of the world , it is murdering people every year - and thinks that is right .
A strong message has to be sent out and it has to be forced to toe the line on this issue .
In this case , in particular , the fact that although fresh evidence has come to light and a re-trial has been denied is despicable .
This is someone whose life is going to be terminated and his right both to produce new evidence and a fair trial has been denied .
It is of fundamental importance that the United States adheres to the principles of human rights .
I would like Mary Robinson , the UN Commissioner on Human Rights , to put pressure on the United States to abolish the death penalty .
It is long overdue for a so-called civilised country to abolish such a barbaric act .
Mr President , battles are often fought - if not won - over similar situations in our countries - and some of these battles give rise to a sense of unease .
While we can feel sure we are doing the right thing , because any battle against the death penalty reinforces human dignity , there is also a feeling of deep regret for all those who are condemned to death , yet do not find a sympathetic audience like our Parliament .
Today we are dealing with an urgent individual case , where there is possible new evidence and an inadequate defence which might now be better presented .
But I think we should be starting from the decision of the General Affairs Council aimed at strengthening the European Union 's international action against the death penalty , because these individual cases are increasingly becoming the focus of our determination to urge the United States and the United Nations towards a moratorium on executions . The final outcome of such a moratorium must of course be the abolition of the death penalty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is not much to add to what has already been said by previous speakers in this debate .
But it is still worth emphasizing that there are two sides to the case of Rocco Derek Barnabei : one is the European Union 's overall , clear , precise and agreed condemnation of this barbaric punishment over many years , and the other is the rights and wrongs of the individual case , it being understood that we refuse to accept the legitimacy of the death penalty .
In this particular case rights of defence and full presentation of evidence were not guaranteed , and those are fundamental to a legal system like that of the United States , where advocacy of civil liberties is a matter of pride and it is often considered preferable to let the guilty go free than to condemn the innocent .
That is precisely the point we must rely on in calling for the sentence to be commuted or , if necessary , for a stay of execution , at least .
Leyla Zana
Mr President , by awarding the Sakharov Prize to Leyla Zana , our Parliament has taken a clear position against the violation of human rights in Turkey and in favour of a negotiated and political solution to the Kurdish issue .
We do so on behalf of universal values , but also drawing lessons from situations of conflict in Europe , such as Northern Ireland , and in the world , and from the way in which they have been resolved .
Obviously , the leaders in Ankara are refusing to listen to this message from the democratic and progressive forces of the Union .
Worse still , the new sentences that the country has just passed against Leyla Zana and that threaten many leading members of HADEP , show that those leaders are locked into a repressive and military strategy from which there is no escape .
In this situation , our Parliament must not only demonstrate its human and brotherly solidarity with our colleague Leyla Zana and all those who are the victims of repressive measures , but it must also reaffirm its total support for all the forces that are fighting in Turkey to achieve democracy in that country .
This is the aim of the resolution that we have tabled , which calls , in particular , for the immediate release of Leyla Zana and all the political prisoners , and for a peaceful , political solution to the Kurdish issue through direct negotiations with the representatives of that people .
Mr President , the Leyla Zana case is unfortunately symptomatic of the whole Kurdish problem in Turkey .
When we go there we are told by the PKK that this is the last battle .
The Turkish side answers with the same argument , that it is the last advance against the PKK .
There are several reasons why a solution has not yet been reached .
On the one hand , the Kurdish forces are fragmented ; on the other hand , there are areas of withdrawal and also support from outside .
Therefore , I support the resolution , which demands that a political solution be found , as a military solution has so far not succeeded .
The current situation , in which there is considerable tension between Turkey and Syria , shows how dangerous it is to delay a political solution .
I myself once visited Leyla Zana in prison .
She was paraded as their star inmate .
I find it outrageous that a country that aspires to join the EU should imprison people because of their political beliefs .
Mr President , I am pleased that the whole Parliament is so united on the subject of Leyla Zana .
But if I may , during the one minute 's speaking time allotted to me , I should like to point out that this subject has been on Parliament 's agenda at least five times in the past two years , and regrettably nothing at all has been done to improve her situation .
She is indeed a recipient of the European Parliament 's Sakharov Prize .
She has been sentenced to a further two years in prison and of course it is not only her , Leyla Zana , who is the issue , but also all the other Kurds and members of the so-called banned political parties who are being arrested and given long prison sentences .
This is a violation of human rights in Turkey against which we must continue to loudly protest .
The only thing we can do is to continue to bombard the Turkish Government with our views on the violation of human rights .
When I visit Mr Demirel in Ankara next week with an environment group , I will certainly present him with this resolution of the European Parliament and ask him to comment personally on it .
Mr President , first I want to express the support of the Green Group for this resolution from the members of the GUE Group . Our support also reiterates the commitment of the Greens to sending a tangible signal of support from the European Parliament to the Kurdish people , through Leyla Zana .
It is absolutely incredible that even though the European Parliament has sought to highlight the lack of respect for human rights in Turkey through Leyla Zana , today she is still under such a heavy sentence , with another two years in prison for the article she wrote .
Other Kurdish Members of Parliament are facing the same treatment and other people are in prison just for saying what they think .
The signal from the European Parliament would obviously look extremely weak if we did not use this vote to underline the significance of the award of the Sakharov Prize to Leyla Zana .
So I hope Parliament will recognise the importance of the resolution put forward by our GUE Group colleagues and that it can form the basis for creating the conditions to get the Turkish government properly involved in these issues .
As long as these things are happening , we cannot accept that there should be attempts at dialogue going on which do not stress the importance of human rights in Turkey .
Faced with a deteriorating situation - and certainly no improvement - we cannot , as the European Union and as the European Parliament , fail to uphold the commitment we have made in other resolutions and by awarding the Sakharov Prize to Leyla Zana , and we must forcefully stress that Europe and the countries of the world cannot tolerate countries which do not respect human rights and other people 's ideas , and which use incarceration as an instrument of political struggle .
Georgia
Mr President , we have already discussed various human rights issues at length .
Georgia , however , is quite a special case .
In April of this year the UN human rights section examined the case of certain prisoners in detail , obviously with the aim of setting an example for others , since it is the general treatment of people in Georgia 's prisons that is simply scandalous .
I was co-opted into the Georgia Helsinki Group a long time ago , and as a result I receive information directly .
It is shocking what people are going through there .
This was why it was good that the UN dealt with this .
It wrote a report , which was adopted by the UN , calling on the Georgian Government to put an end to this scandalous situation , particularly with regard to the three people I have named in the resolution .
Since then nothing has happened .
The UN has made several inquiries but there has been no reply from Georgia .
The government remains silent .
In my opinion , it is now time for us Europeans to have a say .
After all , we must not forget that Georgia listens to us very seriously .
Therefore , it would almost be a service to Georgia if we were to take up this issue and call upon the Georgian Government , as stated in the resolution , to finally comply with the UN 's proposals following lengthy , serious studies based on a broad range of evidence .
I only hope that the resolution is adopted in its current form , because I believe it can really achieve something .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr von Habsburg has already said that we have a fundamental problem here .
As we have seen , the signing of partnership , cooperation and interim agreements does not automatically improve the human rights situation in the partner countries in the manner provided for by European Commission of Human Rights .
Although the Commission always claims that these agreements are necessary in order to help improve the human rights situation , this is not the case .
Nothing is being done .
The interim agreement with Georgia was signed a long time ago and nothing has happened .
I believe that , particularly when a democratic society is being constructed , a democratic judiciary and humane conditions in prisons are a highly sensitive area .
Ukraine and Russia have an action plan in this field through TACIS .
Georgia does not .
This is why it is important that Georgia also has an action programme for democracy , in cooperation with the Council of Europe , through the TACIS programme .
I am pleased that Mr von Habsburg supports our amendments provided that the first amendment takes the form of an addition .
We would then make an oral amendment to the second amendment .
Mr President , the Commission has followed the case of Taslima Nasreen very closely since 1994 when she was obliged to leave her country to escape prosecution and death threats .
Article 1 of the new cooperation agreement to be concluded with Bangladesh makes clear reference to respect for human rights and democratic principles as laid down in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
This includes , of course , the freedom of speech and expression , as demanded in your resolutions .
I can assure you that , once concluded , the Commission will closely monitor the overall implementation of this agreement with special regard to the human rights situation .
Meanwhile , the Commission is preparing a human rights programme for Bangladesh of around ECU 1.5 million which will be accomplished before the end of this year .
The actions that we intend to finance are mainly in the sectors of women 's and children 's rights and voters ' education .
This programme will be implemented by different NGOs specialised in human rights issues .
With regard to the resolutions on Malaysia , the Commission deplores the recent events in Malaysia , in particular the arrest of Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim under the so-called Internal Security Act , which allows for indefinitely renewable detention without trial .
We also deplore the ill-treatment of Mr Anwar Ibrahim in detention , as well as the arrest of a substantial number of Anwar 's supporters also under the so-called Internal Security Act .
Therefore , the Commission associates itself fully with the declaration made by the presidency , expressing the Union 's concern about these incidents and calling upon the Malaysian authorities to guarantee the rule of law and to respect the human rights of Anwar Ibrahim and other detainees .
The release of some of the prisoners is a positive step forward as is the examination of Mr Anwar Ibrahim by an independent physician .
However , the Commission is deeply concerned by the current restrictions applied by the Malaysian authorities to the rights of assembly , free speech and communication .
The Commission has instructed its delegation accredited to Malaysia to follow closely developments in that country .
Regarding the death penalty , the Commission is keenly aware of the sensitivity of the imposition of the death penalty and considers that , in all cases , the guarantees laid down in the International Pact on Civil and Political Rights and the other international instruments ought to be respected .
Needless to say , because we have reaffirmed it quite often , we are firmly against the death penalty , whatever the situation .
In the case of Iran , the Commission is concerned at the continuing grave violation of human rights of the Bahai and calls on the Iranian authorities to refrain from pronouncing death sentences on the grounds of religious belief or apostasy .
Furthermore , the Commission deeply regrets the execution of Mr Ruhu 'llah Rawhani on 21 July 1998 .
An EU-Troika demarche to the Iranian Government in Tehran was made on this matter on 5 August 1998 .
However , I must say that we were satisfied with the clarifications of the Iranian Foreign Minister in New York on 24 September last concerning the death threat ( fatwa ) on Salman Rushdie .
The assurances given are a very positive step to remove one of the impediments to better relations with Iran which are being pursued in the new European Union-Iran dialogue .
In the case of the United States , the Commission believes that the legal system contains the guarantees necessary for a normal and objective discharge of justice , with particular reference to the right to a proper defence and the existence of appeal procedures .
With respect to the particular case of Rocco Barnabei , the Commission is able to provide the following clarification , as obtained from official United States sources .
First , contrary to the suggestions in the draft resolution before us today , there is no execution date set in this case and it is likely to be some time before one is set .
Second , we have been informed that Mr Barnabei is an American citizen and not , as indicated , an Italian citizen .
Third , the recent newspaper accounts of a US Supreme Court rejection of the case appear to be inaccurate .
Mr Barnabei has just begun all of his appeals and is a long way from a hearing before the US Supreme Court .
I am given to believe that the court has , in fact , not heard anything about this case because it is not yet time for the court to do so .
It seems from this information that there is nothing irregular in this case and its appeals process .
Nevertheless we will continue to be attentive to this matter and we shall reiterate to the United States , as we have done so often , that we are absolutely against the imposition of the death penalty .
The Commission shares the preoccupations expressed by the European Parliament concerning the fate of Mrs Leyla Zana and has insisted several times to the Turkish authorities that they make a significant gesture in this particular case .
The new condemnation of Mrs Zana by the Ankara State Security Court on 17 September is particularly worrying as it has inevitable consequences for the situation of freedom of expression in Turkey .
As you are aware , the Commission closely follows all aspects of the situation of human rights in Turkey .
In this context , the Commission fully agrees with the conclusions of the European Council held in Luxembourg in December 1997 which recalled that : ' strengthening Turkey 's links with the European Union also depends on that country 's pursuit of the political and economic reforms on which it has embarked , including the alignment of human rights and practices on those in force in the European Union ... '
In all its contacts with the Turkish authorities , and despite the decision taken by Ankara to suspend any political dialogue with the European Union , the Commission is determined to continue to express its concerns on these matters .
As for the situation in Georgia , the three prisoners referred to in the motion were condemned in 1995 for murder and terrorist acts .
The conditions under which they were tried and also the state of Georgian prisons have been extensively criticised both inside and outside Georgia .
An important step forward was the decision of the Georgian Parliament last November to abolish the death penalty .
Following this , the death sentences on Mr Gelbakhiani and Mr Dokvadze were commuted .
They are now serving 20 years in prison .
I know that the state of Georgian prisons was frankly discussed when the European Parliament delegation for the South Caucasus met with President Shevardnadze in June .
The Georgian Parliament and Ombudsman are actively monitoring this .
It is a promising indication for the future .
The Commission takes the view that Georgia has made important progress in strengthening its democratic institutions , especially its parliament , but that it must continue to reinforce the rule of law .
The Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , which we expect to enter into force next year , will provide us with a platform to address these issues directly , both through political dialogue and through meetings of the Parliamentary Cooperation Committee .
Mr President , the Commissioner has not responded to the worsening situation of women in Iran , as presented by three fellow Members , namely the fact that women can no longer be treated by male doctors and that women doctors in Iran are few and far between .
An extreme policy of apartheid has also been introduced on buses and elsewhere .
We should like to draw the Commissioner 's attention to this , and ask the Commissioner to be careful in creating the impression that the situation is improving , when for women the situation in Iran is in fact getting worse .
I believe that this should be clearly stated in the resolution .
Madam , I was addressing the issue of the resolution , not the speeches in Parliament .
But if you are asking what the position of the Commission is then , without consulting my colleagues , I can reassure you that this is absolutely unacceptable .
As you know - and this also concerns other discussions today in Parliament - the Treaty of Amsterdam rejects any kind of discrimination , as will any future treaties .
So it goes without saying that we ought to fight for that in all circumstances and especially when faced with clear-cut cases .
There is no doubt whatsoever about the position of the Commission .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0902 / 98 by Mr Collins , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on the closure of Levi Strauss factories in Belgium and France ; -B4-0903 / 98 by Mr Vandemeulebroucke , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the planned restructuring of Levi Strauss in Europe ; -B4-0910 / 98 by Mr De Coene , Mr Caudron and Mrs Van Lancker , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the planned closure of Levi Strauss works in Gits , Wervik , Deurne ( Belgium ) and La Bassée ( France ) ; -B4-0916 / 98 by Mrs Aelvoet , Mr Lannoye and Mr Wolf , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the closing down of Levi Strauss works in Gits , Wervik , Deurne and La Bassée ; -B4-0929 / 98 by Mr Chanterie , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on Levi Strauss restructuring plans ; -B4-0942 / 98 by Mrs Elmalan and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on restructuring of Levi Strauss textiles .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Levi Strauss affair is demonstrating once again how devastating the effects of a badly controlled globalisation can be in human , social and economic terms .
Beyond the reasons officially cited by Levi 's , the problem we are facing is , in fact , again one of relocations and social dumping .
The restructuring plan announced by Levi Strauss provides for the closure of four of its 12 factories in Europe .
Three of them are in Belgium and one in France , in La Bassée , a village in Nord / Pas-de-Calais , a region that is already severely affected by unemployment .
These closures will lead to around 1 500 job losses , 530 of which will be in France .
We cannot be indifferent and apathetic to these announcements .
Moreover , we have every right to question whether the closures are justified , particularly since we know that some of the factories in question are profitable , not to mention the fact that they have perhaps received aid from the European Union or the Member States .
Let us not forget that on top of the very painful human consequences of these site closures , an entire local economy is going to be turned upside down .
Are you aware that Levi 's has been in La Bassée for 30 years ?
It is true that a procedure has been announced for consulting the works councils involved , but this consultation is obligatory due to a directive that obliges multinational companies to consult union representatives prior to any restructuring .
This is why , while respecting companies ' freedom of management , we have to be vigilant on this issue .
We must do everything we can to find alternatives to redundancies .
However , allow me , in this respect , to express my doubt as regards the effectiveness of the pseudo-solution of the 35-hour week , as is proposed in France .
I would prefer to see a discussion on reducing social costs along with the necessary safeguards to avoid the negative effects of such a reduction .
Levi Strauss is citing overproduction as justification of its decision , but we have also learnt that it has signed a contract with a Turkish subcontractor whose production costs would be much lower .
We are therefore dealing with a de facto relocation .
However , since we have to consider all the eventualities , if the site closures were unfortunately confirmed , we would insist that strong measures be taken as a result .
I would point out , in particular , that the La Bassée area , and the Nord / Pas-de-Calais region in general , is already experiencing serious economic and social problems .
It therefore has every right to expect a level of support during the restructuring of the site that is worthy of the name .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for some time now multinationals like Levi Strauss have no longer lived inside our societies but outside them .
They have their own isolationist code of practice , their own high technology and even their own kind of democracy , namely the so-called democracy of the shareholders , no more and no less .
Human or social considerations have no place in this world , where there is just one ideal : profit .
Of course the very high wage costs have been invoked .
That is true , but it is also totally inadequate .
Compare the figures : in the United Kingdom wage costs are 11 dollars an hour , in Hungary three dollars an hour , in China 0.56 dollars an hour .
So much more is required than simply invoking high wage costs .
Back on 14 July , the European Parliament stated that the Commission 's plan for this sector was insufficient and should be more practical and above all more concrete .
I should like to refer to the compromise resolution , and in particular paragraph 7 .
In this we demand a clear and comprehensive overview of all subsidies Europe may have granted to Levi Strauss .
Were there any subsidies under the Retex textile and clothing industries , under the TACIS , PHARE and ESPRIT programmes , or under the Structural Funds ?
The Commission has known the answer to this question for some time already , and I would now like to receive a clear reply .
I should like to point out that Mr Vandemeulebroucke , who will be leaving the House after 18 years , has just made his final speech .
I had the pleasure of sitting with him as a group chairman some years ago now , and we all wish him every success .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Levi Strauss , the jeans manufacturer , wants to close three factories in Belgium and one in northern France by the end of the year , with the result that 1 461 people will then lose their jobs .
This action by Levi Strauss can only be described as perverse , because they first organise overproduction outside the European Union precisely in order to subsequently invoke this overproduction as a major factor in deciding to make these closures .
Levi Strauss is honest enough to admit that it has a marketing problem , and apparently , at least judging from the reports of the Board of Directors , nothing , absolutely nothing , has been done about that marketing problem for the last ten years .
So it is therefore people lower down the ladder , the ordinary workers , who have to pay for the failure to take the necessary initiatives .
I should also like to point out that in 1997 , Levi Strauss recorded net profits of more than BEF 430 million at its Belgian factories .
This is the Levi Strauss which , at these Belgian factories , was able to transfer BEF 380 million to the financial reserve for restructuring , the Levi Strauss that in Belgium was able to set aside an even greater amount , in order , it was claimed , to be able to pay the workers a double wage in 2002 .
So these are not people on the breadline , these are not poor people .
It is a company which is perfectly able to keep open its factories in Belgium and northern France .
What is more , the workers in Belgium and northern France have themselves made the necessary efforts to secure their jobs .
They have accepted shorter working hours with wage cuts .
They have accepted greater flexibility . But all to no avail .
This is why we in the Socialist Group are calling on Levi Strauss , when the trade unions submit their alternative plans tomorrow , to seriously discuss them , to seriously consider them , so that there can still be a chance to offer the company a future , including in our regions .
Together with my colleagues Gérard Caudron and Anne Van Lancker , I have tabled a motion for a resolution , because there is European work to be done .
We can actually do something , and yet Liberal Members say that this is a non-event .
Well , it is not .
We must tighten up on the directive on collective redundancies , and we must tighten up the directive on European works councils .
There is also something else on the political agenda .
The European Union can lend the Member States a helping hand in reducing social wage costs .
For this , we must coordinate our tax policy on companies and capital earnings .
That is the only way of putting a stop to the lethal competition in the fiscal area .
We therefore call on the Member States to follow up on the efforts of the European Commission and Commissioner Monti in particular , and for an agreement to be achieved .
Mr President , Levi Strauss intends to close various factories in Belgium and France and to cut 1 461 jobs .
The group was not making a loss ; on the contrary , it made a profit last year of several hundred million Belgian francs .
It is the company 's relocation policy .
A new factory has been opened in Turkey , and the factory in Hungary has even doubled its output .
We disapprove of the strategy of the group 's management , which has announced that it is restructuring because of overproduction while increasing production in low-wage countries .
There has also been talk of a hearing for the employees .
This hearing , or this promise of a hearing , is a joke ; if restructuring is ready to go ahead , any hearing has to be a sham .
We declare our solidarity with the employees , and for this reason our first demand is that the project be stopped .
Secondly , we call upon the Commission to request that companies that have received subsidies from the European Union budget or the Member States ' budgets should refund what they have received in the past five years if these companies have undertaken mass redundancies despite having made a profit .
Thirdly , we call upon the Belgian Government to finally introduce implementing regulations for mass redundancies so that sanctions can be imposed in the case of closures and redundancies which are not carried out correctly .
I consider these measures to be necessary in the interests of the employees and in order to solve the problem of unemployment in the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Tuesday 29 September 1998 will be known as Black Tuesday among the workers at Levi Strauss , because in a single morning 1 500 people were sacked , despite the repeated assurances by management throughout the year that there would be no job losses .
Closures and redundancies must respect the legal obligations which apply in Belgium and the European Union .
These obligations must not be seen as a formality .
It is dishonest to submit to the workers a redundancy proposal when that proposal is already a company decision and simply remains to be implemented .
On behalf of the PPE Group , I say that workers must be given full and proper information .
It is doubtful whether this happened in the case of Levi Strauss .
Consultation must mean giving the workers the chance to submit their suggestions and alternatives , and these must be seriously discussed .
It is therefore doubtful as to whether or not the Levi Strauss management is prepared to take any other new factors into consideration .
The aim of the whole dialogue and negotiating process must be to save the maximum number of jobs .
Secondly , we must look at the situation of the factories which are to close and the development of the whole group .
It is unacceptable for a profitable factory to close , factories which are among the most productive in the whole group .
It is certainly not a question of closing old factories at one location for reasons of overproduction , when at the same time new factories are being opened at other locations .
Thirdly , there must indeed be stricter European regulations on closures and redundancies .
I should like to end by saying that you do not build a social paradise in an economic graveyard , but neither do you build an economic paradise in a social graveyard .
Companies also have a social responsibility , which is something that Levi Strauss has totally forgotten in this case .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a few weeks before announcing the closure of four of 12 factories in Europe , three of which are in Belgium and one in France , the Levi Strauss management congratulated itself on profits that had quadrupled in four years , reaching more than FRF 5 billion in 1996 .
So what do they care about the consequences of more than 1 500 redundancies for the employees concerned and their families or for the economy of the region , which already had high unemployment !
What is more , Levi Strauss is also announcing redundancies in other factories , while increasing its production capacity in low-wage countries .
Following on from Renault in Vilvorde , Levi Strauss has chosen the destructive route , which is an even more unacceptable decision since the workers have made major efforts to improve productivity .
Following Vilvorde , Levi Strauss ' attitude demonstrates once again the results of a European policy that gives priority , within the context of the Maastricht Treaty , to competition and the liberalisation of capital and , as a result , restructuring and relocations .
It is profit versus employment and social progress . It is the financial crisis that is crushing all economies .
In this context , we must undoubtedly welcome the response from the workers in all the group 's European factories , and their demonstration on 5 October , which reduced the management 's attempts at division to nothing and meant that some initial results were achieved .
Our group , which deplores the decision by Levi Strauss ' , welcomes the determination shown by the workers and their unions .
We call on its management to reconsider its decision and to negotiate with the unions in order to draw up an alternative solution to the closures , particularly through a reduction in working hours , which would preserve jobs .
At the same time , we propose that new rights should be granted to workers and that European works councils should be strengthened in order to fight relocations that put populations in competition with each other by playing on social and wage differences .
Above all , however , the decision by the management of Levi Strauss and the reaction of the employees show once again that it is necessary and possible to change the direction of the construction of Europe in a progressive way by freeing it from the domination of the financial markets , by making it democratic and by ensuring that its central aim is to respond o the needs and aspirations of its citizens .
Mr President , let me first of all express the regret of the Commission at the proposed closure of four units of Levi Strauss in Belgium and France and the loss of more than 1 400 jobs .
Let me also give you complementary information on some aspects related to Levi Strauss 's announcement and , in particular , on the way in which things are being conducted .
The Levi Strauss management engaged last week in discussions with worker representatives , both at national and European level , and worker representatives are apparently now preparing proposals with a view to finding alternative solutions to the closure or to the dismissal of the workers likely to be affected .
Therefore , we should welcome the fact that the concerned parties are finally sitting around the table to discuss the current situation .
It is to be hoped that these discussions are productive and contribute , at least , to alleviating the social impact of the closures .
The relevant European Union legislation appears to have been properly respected .
Both the Collective Redundancies and the European Works Council Directive have proved again to be useful instruments in ensuring that decisions seriously affecting workers ' interests are taken and implemented within an adequate social framework .
The Commission is certainly aware of criticisms of the manner in which the rules concerning membership of the European Works Council may give rise to an imbalance in the numerical representation of workers .
The Commission will , next year , evaluate the way the European Works Council Directive is working , and how issues like this are dealt with will inevitably form part of that evaluation .
But even if the provision of these two Directives appear to have been properly observed in this case , there is a general question of how best to deal with major crises within companies and how best to avoid closures .
Anticipation of changes in the market and their effects within companies is crucial .
This requires much more permanent , employment-geared and forward-looking information and consultation procedures , compared to the formality of much of the present rules in this field .
It is this that is behind the current initiative of the Commission on ' Information and Consultation of Workers in the European Community ' .
We are waiting for the final decision of UNICE next week as to whether or not it will engage in negotiations with the ETUC on this issue .
The Commission believes that ideally the European-level social partners should decide to take in their own hands this task which concerns them primarily .
But , if there is no agreement among them , the Commission will put forward a proposal for appropriate legislation in this area .
Anticipation is also a central element of the European Employment Strategy .
On 14 October , the Commission will adopt proposals for the 1999 employment guidelines , together with the assessment of how the Member States are implementing the agreed employment strategy , and a report indicating areas where Europe 's employment performance has a real potential to improve in the future .
An announcement like the one Levi Strauss made last week is always regrettable .
Let us hope that the current discussions lead to acceptable solutions for the people concerned .
Closures such as this underline again the need to work to put the European employment strategy fully in place to prevent long-term unemployment and to promote new employment .
Finally , as to Mr Vandemeulebroucke 's request for data on potential support for Levi Strauss , I am sorry that is not possible .
But we will try to comply with the one-month period laid down in the resolution , although even one month is very short .
We will try our utmost , because it is politically important for the House and for us all to know whether any European money has been given to Levi Strauss .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0901 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on payments to the United Nations ; -B4-0907 / 98 by Mr Collins and Mrs van Bladel , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on the financial crisis in the UN ; -B4-0912 / 98 by Mr Ford and Ms Oddy , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on payments to the UN ; -B4-0918 / 98 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on financial contributions to the UN ; -B4-0922 / 98 by Mr Castagnède , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on payment of contributions to the UN ; -B4-0932 / 98 by Mr Provan and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on contributions to the UN ; -B4-0943 / 98 by Mrs González Álvarez and Mr Ojala , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on payments to the UN .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the United States owes the United Nations about USD 1.6 billion for the regular peace-keeping budgets .
How are we to judge that ?
In what I like to call a geo-political way .
Since the fall of the Soviet empire , the role of international policeman calls for rather more delicacy .
To prevent that role being carried out only by the United States , the only solution is for such action to take place under the aegis of the United Nations .
So it is rather worrying that the United States is failing to pay its dues to the United Nations . This could be the prelude to a deliberate devaluation of the role of that highly important international organisation , perhaps with a view to its explicit replacement by the United States itself in order to gear all international policy to its own interests .
Mr President , on 27 June of this year Glyn Ford and I attended a vigil outside the US Embassy in London to protest against the United States Government 's failure to pay its dues to the United Nations .
USD1.55 billion are owing , which is approximately two-thirds of the total UN budget .
There is a mass campaign in the United Kingdom .
110 MPs have signed in support of the vigil , plus 58 peers and and 27 MEPs .
The governments of France and the Irish Republic have also joined the campaign as of that date .
The fact that we now have cross-group support for this resolution shows the intensity of feeling which exists in this House against the iniquitious failure to pay by the United States .
The United Nations is a very important global organization .
Its responsibilities have increased with its peace-keeping role and I know from my own experience in Sri Lanka from where I brought thousands of documents about disappeared people , that the United Nations needs more money .
When Alex Smith and myself delivered the documents on disappeared people in Sri Lanka , only four people in the United Nations were working on disappearances for the whole world .
The budget of the United Nations should be increased , not decreased in this very unfair way by the United States .
It should be setting a much better example .
Mr President , I rise on this subject with more than my usual ambivalence .
While I accept that the behaviour of the US Congress is reprehensible , I am more interested in the detailed problems which face the reform of the United Nations , and the whole governance process at global level .
We in Parliament should be devoting ourselves to questions of how to find new resources to finance the United Nations that are not dependent on this problem of the American veto , and of reluctance to pay by national governments .
I would like parliamentarians to have a say in providing those resources so that we , as parliamentarians , feel some sense of ownership in the United Nations .
While I am sympathetic to the aims of what we are trying to do , I very much doubt that an 11-minute debate under the urgency procedure is the right way for Parliament to deal with this matter .
There is , at present , a report before the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy looking at the whole question of UN reform and UN governance .
I doubt also that it is going to move one single vote in the US Congress , even if someone as distinguished as Christine Oddy shouts at them across the Atlantic .
I am sympathetic to what Parliament is trying to do but , yet again , the mechanism which we have chosen gravely risks interrupting our own credibility in this matter and limits our ability to make a difference .
I commend the resolution to the House , but I hope the House will return to it with greater wisdom and thought , and perhaps with an occasional new idea at some stage during the rest of this mandate .
Mr President , I completely agree with Mr Spencer that we perhaps need to act with greater wisdom .
A resolution may not be enough for a problem of this nature .
We were also critical of the current structure of the United Nations .
We think that it should be more independent , more transparent , and that it should work towards removing the right of veto .
In other words , we believe that the United Nations should be more democratic .
But we do not want to call on the countries of the European Union - which are net contributors - to withdraw funds , because we are aware that the work it carries out on peace and humanitarian issues is very important .
That is why I agree with Mr Spencer that we have to find better solutions .
In any case , allow me one final joke , even though the Commissioner is no longer present . Many of us would like to say to the United States : look here , Article 19 of the United Nations Charter states that whoever does not pay will have no vote , and just for once , we could adopt the same attitude as they usually do and tell them that they have lost their right to vote .
But do not worry , we are all very benevolent and democratic in this Parliament and we will not deny the United States its vote .
But we would call on the United States Congress to at least accept Mr Clinton 's request to release part of the funds that are owed to the United Nations , not to mention from the more imaginative solution that we shall continue to work towards , as suggested by Mr Spencer .

Mr President , the US political strategy in this area is dangerous .
It is indeed a political manoeuvre we are talking about since the USA , by not paying its debt of USD 1.6 billion , is using blackmail in order to attempt to control UN policy and prevent the reforms the UN needs , which I think we are all agreed on in this Chamber .
The UN is important and needs to be developed .
Development demands reforms but , as long as the USA does not pay , it is tremendously difficult to get any major changes put into effect .
Other countries have paid their dues to the UN .
Despite formidable economic difficulties that many countries face , they have paid nevertheless , which the USA naturally should also do .
For in a ' green ' world order , the UN has a key role to play .
One country cannot be allowed to set the agenda and direct policy at world level ; it must be done through the UN itself , so that individual states cannot throw policy off course and steer it in a particular direction .
Mr President , Bill Clinton can pile all the blame in the world on Japan , the American Congress or the crisis in the world 's financial system .
But the United States ' 1 , 500 billion dollar debt to the United Nations is to be attributed to other reasons of a political nature and , more particularly , as has already been said in this House , it has to do with the desire to undermine the United Nations itself in order to promote the role of the United States as policemen of the world .
The fact is that Japan , despite its domestic difficulties and in a climate of sharp recession , meets its international commitments and owes nothing to the United Nations ; the fact is that the political pornography novel between President Clinton and Congress has only recently escalated ; the fact is that , only four months ago , the stock market euphoria and the expectations of world economic growth remained high , just as the American economy was in excellent health .
But the United States ' arrears to the United Nations are not recent .
It is a growing debt that has accumulated over the years .
The Americans did not pay , because they did not wish to , just as they are not participating in the capital injection for the IMF to the tune of the 18 billion dollars as is their allocated quota .
This is an extremely serious precedent , it is an appalling example on the part of a country which aspires to be world leader and it jeopardises all humanitarian aid and peace-keeping activities and indeed the very future of the United Nations .
Unfortunately , the current political weakness of the American Presidency , which discredits that country in the concert of nations , offers no guarantee that this situation will be resolved in a positive and prompt manner .
But the pressure of the international community on the United States , headed by the European Union , must not flag .
Mr President , the fact that certain countries - the United States first and foremost - do not pay their full contribution to the UN budget should be regarded as evidence of the malaise the international community is suffering from .
These debtor countries are to be criticised first of all because their failure to pay reduces the UN 's total resources and hence its ability to intervene in crisis sectors , thus limiting peace-keeping possibilities ; and they are even more to be criticised because their example - and what an example , when we are actually talking about the leading world power ! - might have a domino effect bringing all UN activity to a halt and might make countries which have accepted the terms of UN resolutions in full , and have participated , like Italy , in peace missions , much more cautious , not to say reticent .
But the Alleanza Nazionale delegation calls on Parliament not only to condemn the defaulting countries , but also to enquire into the real reasons for the crisis facing that institution .
In our opinion there are ethical , structural and political reasons : ethical , in that the various episodes of waste and sometimes of corruption , nepotism and patronage which have occurred in this increasingly untransparent organisation are notorious ; structural , because the staffing levels and organisation have become elephantine and bureaucratic , hindering rapid and efficient decision-making ; political , finally , because the majority of UN resolutions remain dead letters , and they will continue to remain dead letters until there is a proper executive arm or alternative strict sanctions to enforce respect for those resolutions .

Mr President , as you know , the Community contributes substantial funding to projects carried out by the United Nations ' funds , programmes and agencies .
However , as an observer , it does not contribute to the United Nations general budget .
Nonetheless , overall , the Member States of the European Union contribute some 36 % of the United Nations ' operating budget together with some 39 % of the budget it allocates to peace-keeping activities , .
These levels are considerably higher than the percentage of the world 's gross national product accounted for by the European Union , which stands at 30.8 % .
Moreover , the Member States of the European Union pay what they owe in full , promptly and without conditions , and the European Union makes a point of insisting that the other members of the United Nations comply in the same way with their international obligations .
The current payments crisis undermines the efficiency of the United Nations , jeopardises current endeavours to reform the organisation and is extremely unfair for other contributors .
On 31 August 1998 , the United States owed the United Nations 1 , 613 billion dollars , accounting for 60 % of the arrears owed to the United Nations .
The American Congress has adopted legislation authorising the payment of 926 million dollars .
However , this legislation will doubtless be vetoed by the President since it also contains a provision which bans support for organisations which defend abortion .
In all events , even if these measures were carried out , only 57 % of the United States ' arrears to the United Nations would be covered .
The European Union has repeatedly expressed its concern regarding this American legislation which provides for insufficient payment under unacceptable conditions .
The European Union has taken steps in connection with this matter and the Presidency , the Member States and the Commission will continue to raise the issue with the American administration and with members of Congress whenever the opportunity arises .
That concludes the debate on payments to the UN .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
We shall suspend the sitting for a quarter of an hour to enable Members to take their seats for the vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.15 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

We now come to the vote .
After the vote on Slovakia
Mr President , in my hurry to join the vote I pressed Mrs Reding 's button instead of my own .
I would like the record to show that I only voted once but I voted in the wrong spot .
Mr President , I can only presume that in Mr Cassidy 's hurry to join the Socialists he forget to tell us .
Well , there seem to be Conservatives joining every group in this Parliament so why not the Socialists !
Mr Cassidy , are you going to join the Labour Party ?
I walk into the Chamber and here he is !
I am not sure the Labour Party can swing that far to the left .
Mr President , I am very pleased that so many of colleagues pay such attention to where I sit in the Chamber .
Unfortunately , the PES is not yet lucky enough to have me .
Mr President , the question you could pose is : Is there any difference between Old and New Labour and between New Labour and the Christian Democrats ?
Mr President , I should just like to note for the record that this afternoon our colleague Mr James Moorhouse MEP joined the Liberal Democrats .
I look forward to welcoming him as a member of our group next week .
Mr President , in the public gallery we have a delegation from the Upper Austrian Parliament 's Committee of Experts on Europe .
I would like to welcome them very warmly .
( The sitting , suspended at 5.45 p.m. , was resumed at 6 p.m. )

JET
The next item is the report ( A4-0311 / 98 ) by Mrs Ahern , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy on the Proposal for a Council Decision approving amendments to the Statutes of the Joint European Torus ( JET ) , Joint Undertaking [ COM ( 98 ) 0013 - C4-0137 / 98-98 / 0063 ( CNS ) ]
Mr President , the EU fusion project has just completed a six-year engineering design activity at a cost of nearly ECU 1bn .
Meanwhile the US Congress is expected shortly to pull the plug on US involvement in the international thermonuclear experimental reactor , a 6-billion nuclear fusion project .
In July this year , the USA was unable to sign the proposed extension to the ITER-EDA , essentially because the US Congress is currently unwilling to provide any more money for continued US participation .
EU fusion design teams are in place in San Diego , Naka in Japan and in Garching in Germany .
But what legal basis now exists for their retention , continuation or even for the payment of their salaries ?
This question is particularly crucial given that in December 1996 the European Court of Justice delivered a judgment ruling that the different treatment of employees at the European Joint Fusion Project , JET , was illegal .
The Commission proposal is intended to implement the Court judgment by amending the JET statutes so as to remove the discriminating elements .
According to the 1978 Council decision on the establishment of JET , the project was to be completed by 1990 .
Since then a number of extensions to the project have been agreed , most recently until December 1999 .
The JET statutes state that the staff provided by the host organisations , the UK Atomic Energy Authority , will remain in service to that organisation .
The staff provided by the other members of JET were temporarily seconded from their national laboratories and all received temporary Euratom contracts .
Finding this difference in treatment a form of unjustified discrimination on the grounds of nationality , the staff brought a series of cases in the Court of Justice of the European Communities .
In 1987 the Court ruled that there was indeed discrimination but that the discrimination was justified owing to the temporary nature of the Joint Undertaking .
The changes in staffing provisions are of significance , even if they will only apply to new recruits up to 1999 , and there are not expected to be any .
They will constitute a model for a possible JET staffing system after 1999 with a new legal structure .
In order to put an end to the present unlawful system , a new uniform system of secondment of personnel from the members of the Joint Undertaking is proposed .
In future , all staff who might still be recruited after modification of the statutes will remain in the employ of the member organisations .
The new formulation stipulates that there will be only one category of new staff to be recruited , namely staff seconded by their national laboratories .
But the precise way in which these changes are to be implemented and , more remarkably still , the new conditions of service which will apply to new JET staff , are not included in the Commission proposal at all .
Rather , they are left to the discretion of the JET Council , presumably under the assumption that they are mere implementing measures .
This really will not do .
Fusion 's lack of transparency and democratic accountability has now clearly been shown to have had disastrous consequences and has , in fact , probably damaged the project itself .
The notion that staff pay and conditions in a project largely financed by the Euratom budget should be decided by a body which is completely unaccountable to one half of the budgetary authority , namely the European Parliament , is simply unacceptable .
There is another problem .
The first part of the new Article 8.4 reads as follows : ' staff made available by Parent Prganisations shall be seconded to the Joint Undertaking and shall ... remain throughout the period of secondment in the employment of their Parent Organisations on the terms and conditions of service of these Organisations . '
Article 8.7 states : ' All staff expenditure , including reimbursement of staff expenditure incurred by the seconding Parent Organisations ... shall be borne by the Joint Undertaking . '
Why is this peculiar system being proposed ?
Simply because if the Parent Organisations had to pay the national salary component - as they do for teachers in the European Schools and all other seconded national experts working in the Community institutions - the Member States would , in effect , be asked to provide a net increase in the already agreed fusion budget - a prospect they would not relish .
While there is agreement to amend the JET Statutes in line with the European Court of Justice ruling , Parliament must be consulted on any proposal based on the Euratom Treaty to extend the life of JET beyond 1999 .
It would be completely unacceptable to make this extension , with such significant implications for the EU budget , an executive implementing measure within this specific programme , on the basis of confidential contractual arrangements with the national associations .
In regard to the reimbursement of the national salaries of seconded national experts from the Euratom Community budget , such a thing is normally illegal in the Commission , i.e. contrary to the Financial Regulation , since it mixes up parts A and B of the budget .
The JET plan may get around this because it will be done via a series of contracts with national associations to provide services .
It sets a remarkable precedent for the renationalisation of the European civil service .
The Committee on Budgets has added its opinion on this report , but it is not as stringent as we would normally expect of this committee .
I wonder whether this is because pork-belly politics are being played out by some members of the Committee on Budgets .
I refer in particular to Mr James Elles in whose constituency the JET undertaking is .
I would like him to be as stringent on JET in his constituency as he is normally in the budgetary considerations of the European Union .
Mr President , I must confess that there were considerable periods during Mrs Ahern 's speech when I wondered if she was addressing the report which is under her name .
I should like to draw to your attention paragraph 1 of the draft legislative resolution which states : ' The European Parliament approves the Commission proposal ' .
That indeed is the motion that is contained in the report .
The Socialist Group welcomes the Commission 's proposal for the alteration to the JET statutes .
Let us put the matter in a more reasonable context .
The situation regarding staff goes back for a good number of years .
Perhaps we ought to reflect that the terms of employment for various people may at that time have seemed reasonable , and were certainly accepted by all the people that were employed , but that was 20 years ago , perhaps more .
Conditions change .
Therefore it is not unreasonable that , over that period of time , situations arose where the British staff were dissatisfied with the situation and took the matter to court .
The resolution of that has certainly been long-winded and that it has taken so long reflects no credit on the Commission , the JET Council or anybody else .
We started on this in the last Parliament , not this one .
At least we have got somewhere .
We have not been able to complete the arrangements for all the staff for the simple reason that there are still court cases pending .
That is why the situation only applies to new staff .
The arrangements that will - possibly - apply beyond December 1999 I think are quite reasonable .
I hope that they will be acceptable to the staff .
Certainly , if they are not , there are procedures in place whereby they can be changed again .
I hope that it would not take so long .
There are a lot of comments made in the report about the fusion programme , but they are not relevant to this particular discussion .
However , since a lot of comments have been made , perhaps I ought to say that there are some of us in this House who believe that the fusion programme should continue .
We are not certain how it is going to work out , any more than we are certain about any research programme that we have .
But it has made considerable progress .
If Members want further information I can assure them that all they have to do is to lift the phone and get on to the people at JET and ask the director for information .
I have never had any difficulty in getting any information about the project at any time .
This is what Members have to do if they want the information .
It is very easily done .
I have to admit that the most recent report I have on the advice of the JET Scientific Council is a little bit difficult to understand .
I will deal with this situation by phoning the director and asking if this cannot be put in slightly more understandable language for the Members of this Parliament .
That is the sort of approach we want , not a great harangue about obscure points which do not help anybody in this debate .
That is the approach of the Socialist Group .
We welcome the Commission proposal .
We hope that the disagreements amongst the staff will be completely resolved very soon .
We believe that they have worked very hard , that they have worked very successfully .
We in the Socialist Group wish them well .
Mr President , I would like to commend Mrs Ahern on the brevity of her report .
I cannot say the same , however , for her unwelcome slurs on my colleague Mr Elles , particularly as he is not here to answer them .
I hope Mrs Ahern will reconsider what she has said .
It seems that when JET was set up , the original arrangement was a pragmatic attempt at fair treatment both of the UK employees , in relation to their corresponding numbers at UKAEA , and of staff from other Member States , in an attempt to secure continuity of employment rights for all .
However , it clearly did not take very long for the differences in salary and conditions between JET and the AEA staff to emerge , and unsurprisingly the latter wanted a better deal .
I share Mr Adam 's view that it is a pity it has taken quite so long to sort it out .
It seems to me , however , that the Commission 's present proposal is basically a tidying-up operation to amend the Statutes and remedy the situation for any future recruits .
This seems to be a typically European solution , rather an elegant one , which only applies in future and therefore has no budgetary implications here and now .
It is particularly cunning since the future of fusion research , once the current phase of JET ends next year , is clouded in uncertainty .
The only certain aspect seems to be the consistent prediction that fusion will come good as a major source of renewable energy in 50 years time .
Twenty years ago it was going to be happening in 50 years time .
Clearly , the ECJ was correct to conclude that this is not a short-term project , although the jury may still be out on the word temporary .
This situation highlights the risks in having any sort of job which has a different rate of pay if performed at European level rather than at national level .
For example , proposals in this House for a Common Members ' Statute would expose Members of this House to criticism from national members of parliament in their own country if MEPs were to be paid significantly more .
In other words I support the principle that if you are on secondment , and we are only here on a five-year term after all , the rate of pay should be at national levels , but reimbursement of expenses should be at a common level .
That seems to me the fair and equitable approach .
The other substantive point about this set of proposals from the Commission is made both in the explanatory statement of the report and in the opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
It is that , although the European budget pays most of the cost , it does not have most of the say .
I urge that this be looked at when the project moves on to its next phase .
Mr President , these amendments to the Statutes are indeed necessary , good and keenly sought , both the amendments which the Court of Auditors has recommended and those resulting from the judgment of the Court of First Instance according to which the illegal discrimination clauses had to be taken out .
In the new wording for the passages in question , the Statutes stipulate that there shall only be one category for new staff taken on , namely staff seconded by their national laboratories .
Thus there is still an element missing , namely stipulations on how the rules are to be applied to the new staff .
The new conditions of service are not covered at all by the Commission proposal , which one could cite as a deficiency .
They are now left to the discretion of the JET Council , presumably on the assumption that they are only implementing measures .
This will not really do .
The lack of openness and democratic accountability of the fusion programme has been called into question and must be made good .
I do not think it is enough to know that we parliamentarians can telephone JET and ask for information , I think that it should be regulated somewhat better .
What is at issue is , after all , the parliamentary scrutiny and control of JET , which is extremely poor at present .
We must exercise better supervision over the EU 's fusion programme , because it is tremendously complicated , as Mr Adam pointed out .
It is technically very complicated .
Certainly we have become knowledgeable in Parliament through the reports we have presented , for example Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel 's report , and have improved our knowledge , but how do matters stand with expertise in the Council of Ministers , where the decisions are taken ?
It is hard to say .
The Green Group put forward a number of amendments in committee , precisely in order to ensure that the European Parliament becomes more involved and can find out what has happened .
I think it a pity that these amendments were voted down in committee , as I believe they were a very good and necessary improvement .
However , that is a matter to which perhaps we can return .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Parliament and the rapporteur Mrs Ahern for their work on the Commission proposal .
As you know , we are proposing the approval of a number of changes which the JET Council wants to make to the Statutes of the Joint Undertaking .
Some of these are technical adaptations .
A substantive change is the introduction of a new system of providing staff to the project as a response to the findings of the Court of First Instance that certain aspects of the existing system are unlawful .
As you know the Joint Undertaking will expire at the end of 1999 so these proposed modifications will only apply in principle for a limited period of time .
Your Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy and the Committee on Budgets has approved the proposal without modification and I am confident that you will follow their recommendation and support our proposal to approve amendments to the Statutes of the JET Joint Undertaking .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
EEC / San Marino : Protocol to the Agreement
The next item is the recommendation ( A4-0238 / 98 ) by Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the Protocol to the Agreement on Cooperation and Customs Union between the European Economic Community and the Republic of San Marino , consequent upon the accession of the Republic of Austria , the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden to the European Union ( 6788 / 97 - C4-0262 / 98-97 / 0022 ( AVC ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , the current recommendation concerns the Customs Union and cooperation between the European Economic Community and San Marino .
Perhaps I should give a brief historical outline of the way in which this agreement came into being .
It was signed on 16 December 1991 , and its aim was to consolidate and extend the existing close relations between the European Economic Community and the Republic of San Marino .
It establishes a Customs Union between the two parties and seeks to introduce the most extensive cooperation possible in a wide variety of areas : industry , services , environmental protection , tourism , communications , information , culture and social policy .
It is administered by a cooperation committee operating on the same lines as those set up under various similar agreements concluded by the European Community , and is not expected to raise any particular problems .
That was in 1991 .
An interim agreement on trade and a Customs Union was signed in Brussels on 27 November 1992 and entered into force on 1 December 1992 .
However , the process of ratification by the 12 Member States then took over five years .
It was an agreement in which the Member States did not really have any particular national interests to defend , with the possible exception of Italy , so there were no significant objections to it .
However , although there were no problems , there was a ' minor agreement ' that ended up being left to one side for a long time , and this is really not an acceptable state of affairs .
What happens in San Marino may not be of much interest to citizens of the European Union who do not live in the immediate vicinity , but we should not forget that the citizens of San Marino are extremely interested in developments within the European Union .
It really is a disgrace that they had to wait over five years for this agreement to be ratified in the various countries .
It all took a long time , and in the meantime additional countries - Austria , Finland and Sweden - had joined or applied to join the European Union .
This in turn created a new situation , as an addition to this protocol had to be drawn up .
We should not forget that this again took a relatively long time .
I myself was appointed rapporteur in February 1997 .
The report was completed by June 1997 , but it lay around again for a year , until 3 June 1998 , without anyone really doing anything about it apart from Parliament , I would stress .
Now , thankfully , this topic has come before the House and will , I hope , be adopted at the vote tomorrow morning .
San Marino is a beautiful , very interesting - if very small - country , which over the centuries maintained its independence like no other small state in Europe .
Perhaps I may add one or two historical facts : when Napoleon offered San Marino the opportunity to increase its size at the expense of its neighbours , this was rejected in a referendum and it chose to remain the same .
Because of this , it had the opportunity to attend the Congress of Vienna as a party to the agreement and to make an active contribution ; even then it emphasised its particular independence , its special position .
We should not forget either that later - during the Second World War - when San Marino , which is situated in the centre of Italy , was surrounded by a Fascist regime , it spared neither expense nor effort to offer refuge and protection to as many as possible of the refugees and the needy .
This shows that the inhabitants of San Marino have always demonstrated great independence , a particular character which they have retained to this very day .
A further aspect which we must mention today , and which we must also welcome , is the fact that San Marino is one of the few small states in Europe to have always refused to become a tax haven , and for this reason it has always had good relations with its larger neighbour , Italy .
It is important to point out here that we should not forget how near San Marino is to us .
A few months ago the decision was taken as to which countries should be involved in the euro and adopt the single currency .
We always talk about 11 countries , but in reality there are one or two more .
After all , San Marino 's currency is the lira .
They also speak Italian there .
It is basically the twelfth country in the euro zone .
We should bear this in mind and give San Marino the attention it deserves .
To sum up , it is highly regrettable that the Member States of the Community of the Twelve took so long to ratify an agreement which , from the outset , did not give rise to any particular criticisms or objections .
The European Parliament delivered a favourable opinion on the agreement on cooperation and the Customs Union as early as 9 June 1992 .
As the additional protocol only concerns formalities , I hope and believe that the European Parliament should vote in favour tomorrow , to bring this long and rather unpleasant saga to an end and improve our relations with San Marino .
There is still a great deal to be done .
It also gives me great pleasure to inform you that Laura Bologna , the representative of San Marino , has been with us in Parliament today to find out exactly what is happening with this report .
Let me start by thanking the rapporteur for his report and for the words he has just pronounced .
A positive opinion of the European Parliament marks an important step forward in the conclusion of a long ratification process and brings nearer the actual implementation of the agreement .
This agreement , signed in December 1991 , should be the centrepiece in the process of deepening and broadening our relations with San Marino .
Besides its customs and commercial provisions , the agreement allows for a widening of cooperation in different areas , including social policy .
The Commission regrets that the agreement has not yet entered into force .
I hope that the often complex ratification procedures will be completed soon by the national parliaments in order to allow for the effective implementation , in the near future , of the agreement with that very beautiful country .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Community Statistical Programme 1998-2002
The next item is the report ( A4-0321 / 98 ) by Mrs Lulling , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Proposal for a Council Decision on the Community Statistical Programme ( 1998-2002 ) [ COM ( 97 ) 0735 - C4-0197 / 98-98 / 0012 ( CNS ) ]
Mr President , I am one of the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy who cannot produce a so-called ' big ' report , in line with the theory that small reports are for small countries .
However insignificant our Bureau considers this report on the five year statistical programme to be , the overall effect of this is that we are discussing it today at an evening sitting and will vote on it tomorrow , Friday , when not even half of the Members of this House will be present .
I know , of course , that we cannot fire the public with enthusiasm by means of statistics and reports ; these will not arouse anyone 's interest .
Nor are those who have to provide the information for these statistics particularly enthused by having to fill out so many questionnaires , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises , which consider statistical questions to be a tiresome duty .
I know about this as rapporteur for the SLIM programme , which aimed to simplify statistics for cross-border trade in the internal market .
However , it is not the case that industry as a whole is fighting against statistics , as it needs good statistics , such as on trade within the Community , to develop its commercial policy .
As rapporteur , I have been in a situation where European organisations , such as COOP or even Comité Vins , have begged me to compile statistics on , for example , how much white wine or red wine is exported from Rioja to Bavaria .
I must point out , of course , that if the Amsterdam Treaty were in force , the codecision procedure would be applied here , which would of course make our colleagues pay more attention and make the Commission and the Council pay greater heed to our opinions .
Be that as it may , we must not forget that political decisions of the utmost importance are going to have to be made during this programme which runs from 1998 to 2002 : the reform of the common agricultural policy , enlargement of the EU , and the operation of the single currency , which will require highly harmonised statistics on the convergence criteria for the euro zone and compliance with the Stability Pact .
The development and monitoring of the labour market following the Luxembourg Employment Summit and the preparations for the definitive VAT system are further challenges for which all decision-makers will need as much information as possible .
As I have often said , a poorly informed citizen and in particular a poorly informed politician make poor judgements and poor decisions .
This being so , we need the best possible comparable and independent data for all the decisions I mentioned , and we need to have them in good time .
This will only be possible if we provide Eurostat with the necessary resources .
It is impossible , particularly in this area , to continue to demand better and faster information and studies and at the same time to try to reduce resources for Eurostat .
Reductions of this nature cost the Community , the Member States and the citizen much more money than timely , reliable statistics .
It would be preposterous if , for example , we were to measure inflation using consumer indices which are not sufficiently harmonised , if we were to calculate budget deficits and long-term debt as a percentage of domestic products which are calculated so differently that one includes the black economy , including prostitution , and the other includes unpaid work by housewives as a net product .
This may be appealing .
But if these calculation bases are not harmonised , the countries which boost their gross domestic product in this way are , of course , more likely to fulfil the Maastricht criteria than those which do not .
Countries which include in their unemployment statistics only those who are entitled to benefits and not those who are looking for work will have a lower rate of unemployment than Member States which do not do this .
These are only a few examples to show just how important the five year programme is .
I must congratulate the Commission on its clear presentation , which is why we had to reject the request by the Committee on Budgets to delete the stated aims from the appendix .
This would be tantamount to ruining a very clear , comprehensible text .
We have included in the report the reasonable requests of all the other committees , twelve of which were asked for an opinion .
The Commissioner is now sure to tell us that they all find favour with him .
I would like to thank the committees asked for an opinion , which provided us with useful suggestions .
Apart from the amendments adopted unanimously in committee , we have only one additional amendment , from Mr Blokland .
I do not like it .
In a text which says that the statistical programme must take into account the priorities arising from Community policy , which include competitiveness , growth and employment , Mr Blokland wishes to replace the word ' growth ' with ' sustainable and environmentally friendly development ' .
This terminology is not found anywhere in the Treaty , nor does it appear in the conclusions of the Amsterdam Summit as a replacement for growth .
For this reason , I think we should reject this amendment .
By my calculations you exceeded your time by 20 % but since you are always so entertaining we do not mind .
Mr President , statistics can be quite tedious , but they are also immensely important .
Eurostat usually produces the statistics on which the decisions we take are based .
It is mostly politicians like us who use statistics in one way or another .
It is therefore of great importance that the statistics should be produced correctly , that they should be made comparable , and so on .
It is becoming increasingly difficult for Eurostat to provide all the statistical information needed to keep track of the growing policy requirements arising in the EU .
Through the Treaty of Amsterdam the EU has acquired even more power , which means that we shall be taking more and more policy decisions , which means in turn that we need better documentation on the basis of which to take our decisions , and this must be supplied by Eurostat .
This applies to both old and new areas .
We must also remember that the relationship between Eurostat and the national authorities is based on the subsidiarity principle .
The Commission document says : ' this present level of resources cannot satisfy all needs ' .
It is rather sad that priorities have to be set when it is a question of policy decisions for which the EU is responsible .
In the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy we have concentrated on the parts dealing with research and technological development and with energy questions .
One of the important points to which we draw attention is that Eurostat must be accessible when it is a question of disseminating information within the research community , on what has been produced and how it can be used in different contexts as an innovation indicator .
The same applies to the energy field : in order to pursue a sound policy on energy and the environment , we need to have the same statistical background and to be able to make comparisons so that we can take the right decisions , decisions that are necessary in order to bring about sustainable development , amongst other things in the context of the strategy laid down at the Kyoto Conference on climate change .
In this connection statistics are immensely beneficial , usable and necessary .
Eurostat thus needs resources in order to cope with these demands , which is important in view of the fact that much of the decision-making is being moved from the Member States to EU level .
Mr President , I will begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Lulling , for giving close attention to , amongst other things , the conclusions we reached in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
There is an increased need to improve statistics in this field , not least following the Luxembourg summit .
We now have to monitor the guidelines which were adopted there and which are now resulting in national action plans .
There are still deficiencies , particularly as regards comparability .
There are also other deficiencies , however .
The process takes too long , for example ; we could do with shorter time lags before we can make comparisons .
We have set quite a lot of priorities in committee in those areas we are responsible for , i.e. employment , but also social affairs and education .
They apply of course to the four pillars of the Luxembourg guidelines .
They apply to statistics on active or passive measures for labour market policy .
They apply to hours worked per year and per week ; in this context it is important to have sex-specific data , for example , in order to see how much unpaid work has been performed and what persons perform that unpaid work .
Those were some of our priorities .
As regards the social field , household budget surveys should be carried out more often .
Statistics are also needed on supply and demand for child care and on parental leave .
In the education field , it is important to see how the transition from vocational training to the labour market operates , to compare school drop-out rates in the various Member States and to see how the transition from sheltered employment for the disabled to the open labour market operates .
These are some examples of priorities we have in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
We look forward to receiving better statistical information from the Statistical Office in this area , especially as we have new tasks to accomplish since the Luxembourg summit .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , I should like to wish Mrs Lulling the best of luck with her report .
On a number of cardinal points , she has commented on the European Commission 's programme and put forward amendments .
I agree with her that the European Parliament must be careful to ensure that Eurostat is independent .
In a democracy , statistics must be objective and reliable , which requires sufficient financial resources .
I should like the Commissioner to consider making Eurostat independent of the European Commission , because only then can it be really free of political influence .
I am curious to know his reaction .
A second point identified by the Environment Committee concerns the absence of priorities per policy area .
There are limited financial resources .
So why does the Commission not set priorities ?
And how does the Commission think it can make a meaningful evaluation , without making clear from the outset the most important key points of policy for the next four years ?
On behalf of the Environment Committee , I would urge that environment policy should give priority to providing insight into pressure on the environment in those sectors of the economy facing the biggest environmental problems .
I hope that the Commissioner agrees with this and will give a positive undertaking here this evening .
Thirdly , I would draw your attention to Amendment No 15 , which relates to Article 2 of the draft decision .
The objective of ' growth ' as it is formulated in the Commission proposal contradicts both what Mrs Lulling said and Article 130 , second paragraph , of the Maastricht Treaty .
Nor is it in line with the fifth action programme on the environment , as drawn up by Parliament and the Council .
Why once again this uncompromising striving for economic growth ?
This is not in the interests of society .
I have repeatedly stressed that it is in the interests of citizens and companies for economic growth to be ecologically acceptable .
I hope that Parliament , the Commission and the Council will now take this aim seriously and no longer regard the Treaty as a paper tiger on this point .
So let us in future always speak of sustainable development , if we are interested in more than the rise or fall in the gross national product .
The gathering of statistical data is intended to provide information which can be readily used in decision making , in the widest sense of the term .
I therefore urge Eurostat to provide an insight into the links between developments in the fields of the economy , environment and employment .
There is no point in compiling separate statistics for these three fields .
They must be linked to the different economic sectors in the national accounts .
How can you make policy adjustments if you do not know what developments are taking place and the links between them ?
I am sure Eurostat shares this view .
In November 1995 , Parliament also made clear statements about this , in the Díez de Rivera Icaza report .
It is important to be able to identify the pressure on the environment from each area of economic activity .
That is the purpose of Amendment No 13 .
The accession of the Central and Eastern European countries is a major challenge .
A sound environment policy is a key point in adapting to the acquis communautaire .
Eurostat must ensure a complete gathering of statistics in this field of policy and in other key areas .
Yet this point is not featured in the present programme .
What reason does the Commissioner give for this ?
Finally , there is the definitive VAT system .
I wonder whether the original principle is so flexible in practice .
A new statistical system is needed in order to levy VAT on intra-Community supplies .
Canada spent CAD 90 million on such a system , and the Union must make a similar effort .
In addition , companies which are now used to the transitional system will be burdened with additional administrative tasks .
For these reasons , I believe that it is better to agree with the Council 's view that the transitional system should remain in place for now .
Mr President , Commissioner , the objectives of improving and extending statistics as provided for in the Community programme for 1998-2002 deserve our full support when , as emphasised by Mrs Lulling , we are facing extremely important challenges which include enlargement , the functioning of the single currency with the pact for stability and growth , the reform of the common agricultural policy , the preparation of the final VAT system and even , for example , the development and monitoring of the labour market .
Since I am the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on External Economic Relations , it will be clear why I particularly emphasise the need to ensure the same quality in gathering statistical information in third countries , including some countries that are closest to us .
Since the EFTA countries are already covered by the system , the greatest urgency no doubt lies , as has been correctly stated , with the countries of central and eastern Europe which have applied for membership , since this will be the only way in which to prepare adequately for their accession .
Thus , there is every reason to provide the necessary support .
However , in a global economy in which multinational corporations are assuming an increasing prominence , we cannot confine ourselves to the European area .
Moreover , we cannot confine ourselves to the flow of goods in a world in which other economic flows are assuming increasing importance , including the provision of services and capital flows such as foreign investment .
At all events , a correct balance must be found between the need to provide the most extensive possible information , and the need to refrain from excessively burdening companies , particularly small and medium enterprises , and citizens in general .
Indeed , experience shows that when you ask too much , you receive less than you have asked for and bad quality at that .
Lastly , it does no harm to emphasise that statistics , which are a public asset , must be accessible to everyone , including small entrepreneurs or students , which is why the increasingly prevalent practice of requiring that they should be paid for not acceptable , since that effectively restricts them to selected sectors with the greatest purchasing power .
In addition to general economic interests , what is at stake here are the values of a democratic society in which the conscious participation of properly informed citizens is required .
I think this is a point to which attention must also be drawn .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for the five year statistical programme contains a series of interesting projects .
Implementing these could really provide us with very useful insight .
During the period of the preceding programme , demand for harmonised statistics increased greatly , particular in relation to the convergence criteria .
I consider this to be a very important factor in our decision .
The Commission 's demands for statistics that are comparable and of a high quality are , therefore , legitimate and understandable , and should be supported by Parliament .
However , as many speakers have already mentioned , this creates an enormous bureaucratic burden for many small and medium-sized enterprises .
The lesson to be learnt here is obvious .
What appears to be needed urgently is a period of consolidation , a pause for breath .
Priority must be given to this in the new five year programme .
It would also be useful to appoint an ombudsman specifically for issues relating to the statistical burden .
Just two days ago , Parliament decided that the burden placed on companies as a result of the European Central Bank 's statistical reporting requirements must be kept to a minimum .
As a monitoring authority with corresponding powers , an ombudsman could ensure that such principles are observed .
He would be a point of contact for those affected , either by being asked to provide disproportionate detail or by quality requirements .
We must not lose sight of what is feasible using statistics and of the burdens associated with them .
For the future and for the current five year programme we need regulation of this kind more urgently than ever before .
We must avoid the risk of endangering the whole statistical system by imposing an unnecessary burden , as without the cooperation of those concerned and of the various companies , it is not possible to compile high quality statistics .
Therefore , it should be a goal for all of us to convince the companies .
They must come to have confidence in the fact that they will only be asked to do what is absolutely necessary .
We should consider putting this on a voluntary basis and setting up a system of incentives instead of penalties and threats .
We should also consider how we can advance automation and avoid duplication of information collected .
Possible methods include sampling , market research , opinion research ; I believe it pays to consider how we can obtain statistics more quickly and more efficiently .
Mr President , it is immensely important , perhaps the most important element in the report , that Eurostat is being called on to provide sex-related statistics .
I therefore congratulate my namesake for that .
The word I use in Swedish , ' namna ' , does not really exist . I have coined it for the occasion , because the rapporteur and I have the same first name .
I congratulate her on the requirement of sex-specific statistics .
What I find missing , however , is a reference to the need for statistics in future to be produced in such a way that they can be coordinated with geographic information , so that Eurostat can form part of a process of Europe-wide cooperation in this area .
We should , however , be able to popularise the information available on statistics in our countries .
Then they could become more comparable .
I hope that we shall soon get a communication on this , so that we can have common standards and can popularise this better .
Commissioner Bangemann has promised such a communication , and Eurostat is mentioned explicitly as a cooperation partner in the draft for the communication .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs was looking for better unemployment statistics and labour market statistics .
This is a perennial problem , but I actually think that the solution has already arrived .
According to my information , on the one hand we use statistics more often - every month data have to be sent to Eurostat - and on the other hand we can have more uniform statistics by applying the ILO Convention .
I wonder what needs to be improved .
What perhaps needs to be improved is the production of statistics at regional level ; but that is precisely something we can use the geographic information for .
Also , in other discussions during this part-session , we have sought better information from the European Information Network on Drugs and Drug Addiction .
I wonder whether , as I hope , Eurostat and this network could in the future cooperate , so that we could get common definitions and could get the authorities actually to supply the information needed .
Finally , let me say that nothing lies like bad statistics .
In our country we experienced the consequences of that when we passed on statistics on violent crime to Eurostat , including both homicide and attempted homicide .
After that , reports circulated in the British press that Helsinki was the most violent city , whereas others had supplied statistics in which only the number of assaults which had actually led to fatality was given .
Remember the old saying : ' lies , damned lies and statistics ' .
It must not be like that in the future !
The arguments put forward by the rapporteur , Mrs Lulling , in favour of allocating a sufficient budget to support the Community Statistical Programme 1998-2002 , are entirely convincing .
Eurostat must be in a position to compensate for the lack of efficiency of national statistical offices .
Apart from the fact that they do not have the resources to effectively carry out their role , they are too often under the influence of the government , which prefers to ignore figures or , worse still , to manipulate them in order to better convince citizens that , all things considered , ' Everything is fine , Madam ' .
Are you aware , for example , that in Belgium - just to take my own country as an example - the Minister for Employment and Labour cites a figure of around 500 000 unemployed people for the entire country , which is gross misinformation , as the Minister only takes into account those who are fully unemployed , who are on benefit and seeking employment ?
Intellectual honesty would require the Minister to add to this the unemployed who are on benefit and not seeking employment , those who are exempt from checks , and those in agreed early retirement . He should also add those on guaranteed minimum income benefit , that is , those dependent on welfare , the homeless , the disabled who receive sickness and invalidity insurance and those who receive benefits from insurance companies due to accidents at work .
This would increase the published figure of 500 000 unemployed to 1 million .
Are you aware that in Belgium it is impossible to find out how many illegal immigrants there are or how much the immigration policy costs the taxpayer ?
Are you aware that in Belgium , while we know the volume of trade with foreign countries , we do not know anything about what the Walloons buy in Flanders , and that there is a refusal to carry out any sort of linguistic census in Brussels and its surrounding area ?
Ladies and gentlemen , in order to have better transparency and real democracy , I think that Eurostat should be given the necessary resources to respond to our legitimate questions .
Mr President , may I begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Lulling , for the quality of her report .
In addition to the Committee on Economic Affairs , a further 12 committees participated in the drafting of your opinion on the draft Community Statistical Programme submitted by the Commission .
This bears clear witness to the interest devoted by your institution to the introduction of a coherent , transparent and reliable system of Community statistics .
The Commission welcomes this commitment .
You share the convictions held by other institutions of the European Union that the successful democratic operation of our institutions is not possible without good Community statistics .
Before giving the Commission 's opinion on Mrs Lulling 's report , I would like to say a few words about Community statistics .
Over the last decade , their role has been considerably strengthened .
Many important political decisions require a very stringent level of comparability and , therefore , a high level of harmonisation of Community statistics .
These naturally include the introduction of economic and monetary union but also , for instance , the common agricultural policy , economic and social cohesion and budgetary policy .
If further evidence were needed , you would only need to look at the report approved during the last meeting of the Commission on the possible modification of the own resources system to see the importance of having reliable and comparable statistics .
During the last five-year statistical programme , the first priority centred of course on statistics relating to the convergence criteria , which were completed on time and with the necessary quality to serve as a basis for the decision taken on 2 and 3 May this year .
Another important priority for EUROSTAT was the preparation of statistical data for the Employment Summit which took place in November 1997 , and the preparation of indicators for monitoring the employment guidelines adopted at the summit .
The Commission decided to make the Member States wholly responsible for gathering statistical data , in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity .
Thus , a sort of network was created between the statistical systems of the Member States .
This network jointly lays down the harmonisation methods to be adopted and its implementation will reap the full benefit of the experience of some 70 000 statistical experts involved .
In the context of its commitment to ensuring efficiency in the administration of the resources at its disposal , EUROSTAT , in conjunction with its national partners , introduced a series of measures intended to boost productivity , limit the volume of data submitted by companies ( particularly by small and medium enterprises ) , adopt the methods offering the best cost-benefit ratio , improve the overall quality of its products and , lastly , to assess the results of these products .
On the subject of Mrs Lulling 's report , the Commission cannot fail to welcome the improvements proposed , particularly in the areas of employment , the environment , equal opportunities for men and women , as well as in the area of statistics connected with a future VAT system .
However , the Commission cannot support Amendments Nos 5 , 7 and 8 and , in part , 9 , for the following reasons .
Amendment No 5 is redundant in the light of Amendment No 4 .
It should be pointed out in this connection that the scientific independence of statistics experts is one of the fundamental principles embodied in Council Regulation No 322 / 97 regarding Community statistics .
The principle is likewise embodied in the new Article 285 of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The Commission cannot support Amendment No 7 since it intends to retain responsibility for assessing this programme .
This does not of course exclude the possibility of calling in an independent expert or experts to assist in this task , as provided for in Commission communication SEM 2000 .
The Commission likewise intends to call in the European Advisory Committee on Statistical Information in the Economic and Social Spheres ( CEIES ) , which includes users ' representatives .
Amendment No 8 would not appear to be relevant since the ' other spheres ' referred to are covered by the programme in question .
Lastly , the Commission does not support the first part of Amendment No 9 since EUROSTAT does not have the power to draw up forecasts .
In conclusion , I would like to emphasise the importance of this new Community Statistical Programme for 1998-2002 .
The Commission welcomes the excellent cooperation between our two institutions , which augurs well for the imminent implementation of Article 285 of the Treaty of Amsterdam providing for the establishment of the co-decision procedure in the sphere of statistics .
In connection with the question raised regarding the independence of EUROSTAT , I would like to add that the Commission makes it a point of honour not to exercise any political influence whatsoever over EUROSTAT .
This was clear , indeed , when EUROSTAT had to publish its statistics for Economic and Monetary Union , and departed from a specific decision of the Commission , not just for the purposes of that particular exercise , but as a point of honour in its usual practice .
Mr President , I think that as the rapporteur , I must respond to what the Commissioner has just said concerning certain amendments .
I agree that Amendments Nos 4 and 5 overlap .
If you do not want to state that the work should remain independent from political pressure , I could perhaps withdraw Amendment No 5 , because in a way it duplicates the previous amendment .
This does not however prevent us from adopting it and leaving the Council the option of choosing one or the other .
With regard to Amendment No 7 , I am somewhat surprised that you should want to evaluate your work yourselves .
This is indeed work that requires independent evaluation , and you state that the Economic and Social Committee should do this .
I personally know the Economic and Social Committee very well , as for some time I was the intellectual ' harlot ' of the unionists there , and I have to tell you that I do not see this Committee evaluating your statistics .
If you draw up a report , it could , if need be , provide an appraisal of it , but it will not do an evaluation report .
As regards the budget , I know that additional funds could turn out to be necessary .
If they are not necessary , all the better , but , if it appeared that they were needed , then it is better to say that we want the required resources to be available .
As far as Amendment No 9 is concerned , I think , Mr President , that there is a misunderstanding .
We are not actually asking Eurostat to make forecasts of the movement in agricultural spending .
We are asking for statistics ' enabling ' the political decision- makers to make such forecasts .
Eurostat will not make these forecasts , but we need its statistics to enable forecasts to be made of the movement in agricultural spending in the various areas .
I therefore think that there is a misunderstanding here .
I hope , nevertheless , that Parliament will support me in adopting these amendments , which we consider to be necessary and important .
Mr President , we are going to try to make this a little clearer .
With regard to Amendment No 7 , I would say that presenting an evaluation report is entirely the Commission 's responsibility .
Of course , when preparing these reports , we will be able to widely consult independent experts .
Their opinions will be included in the report .
Moreover , before the reports are presented , they will be submitted not to the Economic and Social Committee but to the European Advisory Committee on Statistical Information in the Economic and Social Spheres .
These are two different things .
Half of this body is made up of representatives of users of statistics outside the European institutions .
Finally , these opinions will be passed on to Parliament at the same time as the report .
This is what I wanted to say , Madam , in an attempt to clarify the reasons why the Commission does not accept this amendment .
Mr President , I have a point of order .
On a previous occasion , I requested that the results of votes be displayed for longer after the vote so that we can make a note of them .
Perhaps it would be possible to have access to the results of the electronic votes on paper so that we can follow them better .
I am told that the services can always provide you with a printout of the votes at any time after the votes have taken place .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.05 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I would like the Bureau to address the following problem . We discussed the urgencies yesterday , which included a motion for resolution I tabled on the situation in Georgia .
After the vote I discovered to my surprise that a letter , signed by an official of this Parliament , was sent to various Members - not to me , of course - on official Parliament paper , calling on them not to vote for it .
I would just like to know whether we have now reached the point where our bureaucrats can actually determine Members ' voting behaviour . Would you please investigate this ?
We take note of that , Mr von Habsburg , and I should be grateful if you could provide us with this letter .
I have it here with me , Madam President .
Madam President , on page 58 of the Minutes there is an account of an exchange between the President and certain Members concerning who is currently a member of the British Conservative Group .
Unfortunately , the President 's remarks have been edited and his full wit and humour have not been reflected in the Minutes .
Could we have a full record ?
Could we have an assurance from the Conservative Group as to whether Mr Donnelly and Mr Stevens are currently members of that group or not ?
I gather that yesterday they came in and out several times .
For the record , we should know what the current state is
That does not concern the Minutes , Mr Kerr , but the Verbatim Report of Proceedings .
It is the Minutes that we are currently approving .
Madam President , my comment is also on the Minutes , because I note that Vice-President Martin was successful in having expunged from the record his comments about having to telephone No 10 Downing Street for instructions on how to vote .
If that facility is available to Vice-Presidents - and good luck to him - is it available to other Members ?
By the way , Mr Kerr , the Conservative Group remains as it was yesterday .
That also does not relate to the Minutes , but to the Verbatim Report of Proceedings .
Madam President , this is , of course , a reference to the Minutes - page 21 .
Mr Cassidy apparently crossed the floor of the Chamber .
I would like some clarification from the Chair , because according to the Guardian newspaper today , John Stevens and Brendan Donnelly , members of the Conservative Group opposite , were expelled and then later reinstated by the Tory Party ; they later resigned and then , after a hasty compromise , were persuaded to stay .
Could somebody please tell the electorate in Great Britain whether these two people are now members of the Conservative Party or whether they are now independents ?
Ladies and gentlemen , you are persistently confusing the Minutes wit the Report of Proceedings .
We are only approving the Minutes here .
We have heard what you said , but it would seem that no one else has anything further to say about the Minutes .
Madam President , I wish to say , for future reference in this Chamber , that if Members want to behave like schoolboys , do it outside .
Some of us have other work to do .
( Mixed reactions )
Everyone has their own way of seeing things .
( The Minutes were approved )
Madam President , you referred to the common position on the directive on consumer goods and guarantees .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights was asked to deliver its opinion at the first reading .
It should do the same for the second reading , but it was not mentioned .
We shall look into that .
VOTES
Madam President , following the debate we had yesterday evening with the Commissioner , I should like to table an oral amendment to Amendment No 7 .
The other amendments can be put to the vote together .
We actually asked for an independent evaluation of an independent evaluation report on the programme . The Commissioner said that it was the Commission 's responsibility to produce this report and I understand that .
I would like , with your agreement , to propose deleting the word ' independent ' in the first subparagraph so that it reads ' will provide for a mid-programme evaluation ... ' And in the second subparagraph , I would also like to delete the word ' independent ' so that it reads ' shall provide for an appropriate evaluation report on the implementation of the programme ' , and adding the words ' taking account of the views of independent experts ' , as the Commissioner promised .
I would ask you to accept this oral amendment , which is justified , and with this amendment and your agreement , we can put Amendments Nos 7 to 14 to a block vote .
It is very questionable whether the EU should devote large amounts of funding to the fusion research establishment , JET .
It would be better to direct such funds to renewable energy resources .
I have therefore voted against the report .
Pigmeat
The next item is the statement by the Commission on pigmeat .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , to make things quite clear from the outset , the background to the difficulties we are currently encountering in the pig sector is probably the fact that 1996 and 1997 proved extremely productive years for the pig farmers , which led them to make enormous stock increases .
Furthermore , with the decline in swine fever , products from the Netherlands are fully back on the market again .
These two factors have increased European pig production to 17.2 million tonnes this year , an increase of about one million tonnes of pigmeat or 6 % more than in 1997 .
This trend obviously exerts enormous pressure on the European pigmeat market .
But the situation has become even more acute in the last few weeks with the almost total disappearance of the extremely important Russian exports , the falling demand in Far Eastern markets and the increasing competition from other exporting countries , especially the USA and Canada .
The Commission has taken a number of measures to support the pig sector .
In mid-May we re-introduced export refunds for fresh and frozen pigmeat on the bone .
At the time that stabilised the market for several weeks on end .
But when prices began to slump again in late July , the Commission increased these refunds by 50 % and introduced the same refund rates for meat off the bone .
That measure also had a very positive impact on exports .
But then , as I said , Russian exports fell drastically and were eventually blocked in mid-August , and European market prices fell by nearly ECU 10 per kilogramme in the space of three weeks .
To protect exporters from direct harm , we thereupon began by prolonging the validity of export licences to Russia by 60 days .
At the last meeting of the pigmeat management committee , it was decided rapidly to introduce private storage aids , which have been granted since 28 September .
This action allows the industry to freeze freshly slaughtered pigs at the Community 's cost and to store it for four , five or six months .
But when these products are taken out of storage , it is compulsory to export them to third countries .
Part of the stored amounts , together with the expenditure on this action , however , come under the WTO export obligations for the pigmeat sector .
Under this action , some 70 000 tonnes of meat can be stored in the 1999 financial year .
Let me stress that the traders can incorporate storage in their export activities in the appropriate way , which will also make them more competitive on third-country markets .
Some Members are in favour of a further increase in the refund rates and have called for that .
In this regard , I would ask them to consider that it is pointless to increase them , especially for exports to Russia , so long as the Russian market remains completely closed and we have no partners there with whom to conclude export contracts ; moreover , for the time being the other third-country markets do not need higher export refunds .
Of course we will follow further developments on the European pig market very , very closely and we will certainly discuss the matter further at the next management committee meeting , which is due to take place on 14 October . And as soon as the Russian markets open again , we will certainly review the refunds .
Let me conclude with a remark that some Members may not find very welcome .
In spite of the current crisis which , as I said at the outset , can be traced mainly to the expansion of pig stocks , there are still , particularly just now , some official organisations , advisory services and also regional authorities and even governments that are calling on pig farmers to expand rather than restrict pig production .
To be quite frank , I think that is bad advice .
The Commission may be able to moderate and cushion the effects of a temporary rise in production , but it cannot protect the sector from price falls caused by structural overproduction .
Madam President , I think Commissioner Fischler 's statement on the crisis in the pig sector showed a sense of responsibility and can be broadly supported .
Our group recognises that the Commission has taken action , partly at the request of the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture , in setting up this aid scheme for private storage as from 28 September and increasing export refunds .
As the Commissioner said , these measures are certainly not going to resolve the entire problem , but they can help us to deal with one particularly worrying element of the crisis . The crisis is actually very uneven , because although a highly globalised market is a feature of the pigmeat sector , there are segments within the European market which are holding up better than others .
The situation is serious even though , as you have rightly said , Commissioner , producers in the sector have been making good incomes in recent years and the swine fever crisis which led to the adoption of rationalisation measures has been pretty well overcome .
Now some very important producer regions - in France , Germany , Denmark , Holland and the United Kingdom - have seen prices collapse to an all-time low and that is why we should be very concerned .
The problem today is part of the international crisis affecting the world markets and the agri-foodstuff sector above all , and there are a number of possible routes we can take .
But I do not think we should follow the route of throwing everything over and abandoning all the Agenda 2000 plans to reform the CAP , because this crisis on the world markets has thrown everyone off-balance .
I am well aware that there is talk on the other side of the Atlantic of the United States re-opening the debate on the Farm Bill , because this crisis is also hitting American producers and calls for aid measures at the same time as measures relating to loans and financial guarantees . That could alter the rules of the game at international level and undermine European Union producers .
But I do not think that this means we should give up ; on the contrary , we need to deepen and extend the process of reform we have started , improving the internal market as well .
In fact I think the proposals to reduce cereal prices could also help the recovery of the pigmeat sector .
Finally , this crisis must not be used as an opportunity to water down environmental measures and abandon supply policies which are more indispensable than ever , in my view .
Commissioner , you have just reported to us on the steps the Commission has taken to resolve this desperate pigmeat crisis .
You also mentioned that one of its causes has been the huge increase in production .
But clearly that growth has not been the same in all countries , so the solutions cannot be the same for a country where over-production stands at 104 % and for others where the level of supply exceeds 470 % .
The measures you described could be improved and there are others which you did not mention .
An effort has been made on export refunds - we are pleased that boneless meat has been included - and also on the issue of private storage , but 70 000 tonnes is a very small amount especially considering that we have further reserves of over 600 000 tonnes from last year as well as the reserves from this year .
Furthermore , there are two other measures you did not refer to and to which I would draw your attention .
The COM is operating in a free market , and we can tell you here and now that Article 3 applies . This article states that in case of exceptional price falls , intervention buying can take place , and the price cannot be used as an excuse - which is what the Commission 's officials have done - because it is fixed in Article 5 in relation to the Community base price .
So intervention buying can take place .
What is more , we have the Community food aid system , which could help all the NGOs , charities , the Dominican Republic - which has suffered a terrible disaster - and Russia too .
There are solutions , Commissioner .
Let us be brave and take these measures .
In an exceptional market situation exceptional steps need to be taken .
Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Fischler for his statement , and I think the analysis he gave is essentially correct .
A pig cycle is nothing new .
Anyone here in the Chamber who knows anything of economics knows that pig cycles are mentioned in just about every economics book .
What makes the present cycle special is that it has coincided with the crises in Russia and Asia .
I think that the pigmeat sector can generally be proud of the fact that it costs so little .
Expenditure in 1997 was ECU 168 million out of a budget of ECU 41 billion , and in 1998 the figure is likely to be some ECU 330 million , which is an excellent achievement .
I therefore feel that the special measures being taken are fully justified , since crisis situations call for special measures .
The Commission says that the root of the problem lies in the fact that pigmeat production has increased so dramatically .
This is certain to be the case , since increased supply means lower prices .
But is not the Commission 's policy of reducing grain prices also to blame ?
And is the problem not simply going to get worse over the next few years when grain prices come down still further with Agenda 2000 ?
What does the Commission think the effect will be on pigmeat production then ?
All the types of meat produced using a lot of grain will have a clear advantage over other types of meat , it seems to me .
Does the Commission have any sort of long-term policy in mind here ?
I have another question : if reports are correct , something like six to seven billion dollars of extra support are to be made available to American farmers in the run-up to the elections .
What does the Commission intend to do about this ?
Is it going to react ?
My final question is this : if the Dutch newspapers are to be believed , Commissioner Fischler has praised the Netherlands ' policy on pigmeat production , which includes a quota system .
Is the Commissioner in favour of introducing this throughout Europe ?
Madam President , Commissioner , we have witnessed a breathtaking drop in the price of pigmeat since the end of the summer both in the European Union and worldwide .
The Community production sector , and particularly small family producers , are in a state of emergency .
What has happened ?
First of all , Europe has overproduced , as you said , Commissioner , largely due to the irresponsible expansion of some farms .
Supply in Europe therefore increased from 16 million to 17.2 million tonnes between 1996 and 1998 , which is an increase of 9 % .
At the same time , we have seen pig numbers in the United States increase by about 8 % in two years , which has allowed the Americans , who set unbeatable prices , to conquer the external markets to the detriment of the European Union : we are in the middle of an economic war .
The situation is also explained by the Asian and Russian crises , which also deprive the European Union of a potential market .
At present , we are seeing the consumption of pigmeat in the Community stagnate because of strong competition from other white meats .
The Commission must now resort to drastic remedies - as they say in my country - , otherwise the crisis will persist and drag on .
Emergency measures are necessary .
Firstly , the level of export refunds must be adjusted as needed to ensure that the markets can be recaptured , including the Russian market .
Secondly , a promotion campaign should be swiftly launched within the Community to increase awareness amongst the general public and boost consumption in Europe .
Thirdly , meat stocks in the European Union must be reduced by adopting the principle of humanitarian aid , particularly for Russia , yet without calling into question present commercial distribution and putting future distribution at risk .
Fourthly , supply and demand should be controlled , as well as production , and farms should be managed rationally .
Fifthly , we must ensure that the production of pigmeat is not transformed into a huge business that no longer has anything to do with agriculture , rural development and compliance with environmental standards .
However , I fear that it may already be too late as far as this last point is concerned .
Madam President , the origin of the current crisis in the pigmeat market lies in the supply and demand imbalance produced by the growth of industrial farming .
On top of that the heavy reduction in exports resulting from the Russian crisis has made this a crisis of unprecedented depth .
The victims of this crisis will be small and medium-sized farms .
The Commission ought to be proposing measures to correct this situation , using specific aid for small and medium-sized farms and disincentives against industrial farming .
All in all , the biggest problem is that the effects of the Russian crisis may also be repeated in other sectors .
This is the most serious aspect in my opinion , and the Commission is leaving itself without mechanisms for managing this crisis because the only instrument it is planning to use across the board is private storage ; this is to be the sole intervention mechanism in the majority of sectors .
The social fabric of Europe 's farming community cannot afford the destruction of its base - the small and medium-sized farms - or additional job losses .
So it is the Commission 's duty to correct the social impact of the structural crisis in pigmeat by providing aid for small farms and disincentives against industrial farming .
I want to draw attention to the most recent events , because if the Commission felt even the slightest sense of responsibility it would revise some of the proposals it is making with regard to the various COMs .
Any COM worth its salt must have market regulation mechanisms for dealing with cyclical variations in production or short-term crises in all sectors .
My colleagues in the committee are right to call for exceptional efforts in the face of increasingly ineffective measures .
Madam President , Commissioner , you should have begun with the observation you made at the end .
Everyone in the pig market knows why we have this crisis .
Our farmers ' associations are still busily trying to encourage the growth of the pig sector and argue in their publications that we should at last reacquire the market shares which the Netherlands lost as a result of swine fever .
Of course , the same applies to the Netherlands as to other Member States .
They are attempting to promote industrialisation in the pig sector , where possible with public funds .
They want the resulting market pressure removed by raising export subsidies .
The taxpayer who has to pay for it , the smaller undertakings and species-friendly stock rearing all fall by the wayside .
We must resist this attempt - and on this point I would contradict Mr Pérez , which also relates to the joint resolution , which we did not sign ; we must not give in to this attempt to set up a common organisation of the pigmeat market with state intervention , which would eventually lead to constant surpluses here too .
We must ensure that the market is cleaned up and dissociates itself from those who want it to expand and we must take measures to ensure that species-friendly stock rearing and small-scale pig-farming do not fall by the wayside .
That means that we must make it clearly understood by the Member States , at European level , that agro-industrial production is not entitled to privileges and may not be established in rural areas like other types of farm production , but must be treated as an industry ; that means it may only be established in industrial areas and is subject to the appropriate emission rules , like those which other commercial and industrial undertakings also have to observe .
Any privileges must go to farming based on land utilisation , which also applies to pig-farming .
We must also support the regional market .
I personally am not affected by this crisis with my pig production - which is , admittedly , rather small - because I market directly .
Nor am I affected by the collapse of the Russian and Asian markets , because my markets are on my doorstep ; the people who want to buy from me - and who are not concerned about Asia or Russia , nor do they believe they ought to eat more meat because of the growth of agro-industrial production - stick to their standards , as I stick to mine .
Nor have I expanded my production .
So I think this is a homemade crisis .
But it also shows the particular risks of gearing production to export and to the world market , because small parties then muddle up all manner of things that could in fact be regulated sensibly in the large single European market .
So I would ask you to let this pig surplus regulate itself and to protect those who must not be disadvantaged , namely small family farms , which might otherwise draw the short straw .
Madam President , firstly , I welcome the Commission 's statement here this morning on the crisis in the pig sector throughout Europe .
The fact that we received this statement means that the Commission recognises that there is a serious problem within the pig industry in the European Union .
In my own constituency of Northern Ireland , the situation is perhaps even worse than in other parts of Europe .
It was aggravated by the loss of one of the processing factories due to a fire last June .
I know the Commission is probably aware of this .
This resulted in a massive backlog of pigs on farms during July and August .
Despite politicians ' best efforts , no resolution could be found to this problem , either within Northern Ireland , in the Ministry of Agriculture , Fisheries and Food in London , or in Brussels .
No matter where we went , we were told ' we are sorry , everybody is on holiday ' .
The pigs did not go on holiday .
They had to be fed and we had a serious problem .
It is not very good to go to your constituents and say ' I am sorry but everybody is on holiday in Brussels ' .
While I appreciate that people are entitled to their holidays , in future there should be at all times an official of sufficient standing in every cabinet in Brussels who can make a political decision if a real crisis occurs in some part of the European Union .
It does not enhance the image of the European Union when we have a situation like this .
I know there are no easy solutions .
I know the crisis in Russia has aggravated the situation , but to simply start with the introduction of export refunds and aid to private storage is not enough . We need a better mechanism to recognise the problems before they arise .
The pig industry is important .
It keeps young people on the farms who might not otherwise be there .
It also provides substantial employment off the farm .
I fear the pig industry , in my particular area , is at a stage where it may not survive this present crisis .
I would ask the Commission to set up a task force to look into the situation and ensure that it is not repeated and that we can evolve a long-term policy for the future of pigs throughout the European Union .
Mr President , the pig industry in Northern Ireland has been hit worse than all the other sectors in agriculture which are already in crisis , as the Commissioner knows .
In the midst of the crisis the pig industry was robbed in one night of 40 % of its slaughter capacity and curing capacity . A new Malton factory costing £ 10 million was burned to the ground .
An industry already in crisis losing 40 % of its capacity is in danger of total collapse .
What representation did the Commissioner receive from the United Kingdom Government about this dire emergency ?
What proposals for financial help were requested ?
In any other region of this Union , if this had happened and 40 % of an industry had been destroyed something decisive would have been requested of the national government and undertaken .
The pig industry is a jewel in the crown of agriculture in Northern Ireland .
It is going to go under , as my colleague has mentioned , and cease to be viable if immediate aid is not forthcoming .
With pig farmers contemplating suicide , and some committing suicide as a result of the problems , the situation is desperate .
I would press the Commissioner to send one of his officials to Northern Ireland immediately to assess for himself the tragedy and gravity of the situation .
Agriculture is Northern Ireland 's largest industry . It accounts for £ 2.28 billion of its trade and employs 10 % of the total civil employment pool .
The whole industry is in crisis .
Farm incomes have been slashed .
In 1997 they were down 38 % from 1996 , to £ 203 million .
Finally , a further drop this year in farm incomes is expected , to the extent of £ 50 million .
That is the gravity of the situation .
We are looking to Europe to do something for us .
Madam President , I raised this question originally .
I am happy that a large number of people in this House and indeed , the Commissioner , are well aware of what the problem is and how serious it is .
It is not just a question of farmers failing to make a living .
It is a question of farmers losing money rapidly and being in danger of having to lose their homes and entire business .
Farmers throughout Europe see the European Union as being responsible for agriculture .
We spend 17 billion annually on arable crops .
We spend 5 billion annually on beef .
We managed to find 2 billion extra when the beef industry got into trouble even though the pig meat sector is twice as big - there is twice as much pigmeat consumed in the European Union as there is beef .
In the dairy sector we spent 3 billion .
We merely spent 300 million on pigmeat , a sector which is twice as big as beef .
It is extremely important that we take note of the situation and seek to find emergency solutions because this is an emergency .
To my colleague , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , who thinks about these things seriously , I have to say that there are big factory farms involved , but the ones that will be there when this crisis is over are the big factory farms .
The ones that are going out are the smallest and most vulnerable .
We do not make a case here today for the large factory farms .
We ask for emergency measures for the family farms that are in dire need .
They will go down first as the crisis develops .
Madam President , Commissioner , I thank Mr Fischler for his statement , which fully explained why the pig industry has reached this situation of overproduction .
The Commission 's decision to support private storage is right , but it is not enough on its own .
To reduce the size of the pigmeat mountains we need a proper injection of aid for exports , so that surpluses can be shifted onto the global market .
We have to find funding for that .
In addition , pigmeat production must be cut in the EU in relation to consumption and the existing outlets for exportation .
The responsibility for this lies with the Member States , which have been increasing their production beyond the level of consumption over the last two years .
In a case like this , those governments that are still recommending increased production are being irresponsible .
In reducing production we have to stress the importance of the effect on the environment of production , and reduce production particularly in environmentally protected high risk areas .
My question to the Commissioner is this : is it possible to spend EU environmental aid on reducing pigmeat production that puts too much of a burden on the environment ?
Balancing production is urgently required , as otherwise it will take place through a broad sweep of competition .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the crisis in the production of pigmeat is unacceptable for small and medium-sized producers .
It must lead to joint action in the form of effective financial measures on the part of the Commission and the Member States , in order to enable farms to get through this ordeal without any difficulties .
Yet , at a time when Europe has a surplus of 600 000 tonnes , how can we allow authorisation to be given to set up huge factory farms that give rise to opposition from the surrounding population and the farmers themselves ?
Does Europe not need a moratorium on this type of farm ?
The present situation in Europe and in the world must , in fact , result in a policy aimed at controlling production through a genuine common organisation of the market .
We need to ensure a decent income for small farms within the framework of small-scale production that generates jobs and guarantees respect for the environment and harmonious use of the countryside .
However , who within the Union 's bodies will have the will and the courage to change the direction of Community agricultural policy and attack this extreme liberalism , which , according to the chairman of COPA , is at the origin of the crisis ?
Can we believe that the Commission is prepared to act effectively to that end and against the collapse of pigmeat prices when it proposes an identical price trend for cereals , milk , and beef and veal ? Can we believe this when it proposes , with no real balancing mechanism , enlargement to include countries where agricultural prices are between 30 % and 60 % lower than those in the Union ?
And can we believe this when it relentlessly pursues this extremely liberal headlong rush by negotiating the opening up of the European market to the United States and to Mercosur ? Is it not urgent to escape from this market dogma that regulates the market , and to send the idea of the reform of the CAP and Agenda 2000 back to the drawing board ?
We are not starting with nothing .
When adopting the Cunha report a few weeks ago on the reform of the CAP , our Parliament outlined the framework of another agricultural policy . It is a policy that is far more concerned with society 's needs in terms of decent incomes , jobs , the quality of food and the environment , the balanced management of our territory and international cooperation .
This is the policy that should now be at the centre of debates within the Council and within our Parliament .
Madam President , like many Members here I have been in touch with pig farmers in my constituency during the last week .
I found that many of them are close to financial ruin .
People who have made a long-term commitment to producing a first-class product now suddenly find that pigs which previously sold for £ 34 to £ 40 are now being sold for £ 10 or £ 12 .
They are not asking for subsidies or for charity .
But they are asking for help .
There are several ways in which our pig farmers could be helped .
We could introduce an export credit guarantee scheme .
We could look at assisted retirement from the market .
We could look at ways of managing the rationing of new entrants to the market .
Referring to the point Mr Fischler made about the Russian market - Russia is in a state and our pig market is in a state .
So why do we not make a gift to the Russian people at least of our lower value cuts of meat .
Let us give it away ; let us put it on to the Russian market ; let the Russians use that meat to feed their people ; and let us relieve pressure on our own markets .
There are other issues .
British pig farmers have additional problems brought about by the unilateral adoption of stock-rearing rules .
We must make sure that these are consistent across the European Union .
We must also ensure that when imports come into the European Union they too conform to those rules .
Finally , rules on labelling should be tightened so that pigmeat can develop its own brand loyalty over time .
This will discourage the vast supermarkets switching sources so that they can follow lower commodity prices .
My pig farmers do not want charity but they do want a chance .
Madam President , the causes of this crisis have already been widely debated , but I would still like to make a modest contribution to trying to find some possible remedy .
The immediate solutions , which have already been mentioned , are institutional and they are the simplest to apply : private storage and export refunds - but the Commissioner is avoiding the latter as impracticable , because lack of demand means there are no exports , so even the refunds would automatically fall .
What other measures could be taken ?
There is a danger that everyone is preoccupied with their own problems , so Member States ' governments should be made aware that they must not take unilateral action - unidirectional action , I call it - partly out of panic and partly because of trouble-makers , since this would only have a palliative effect .
A second suggestion to the Commission is to take a firm hold of supply management , to get it back into balance and coordinate it .
Then , considering the United States ' close marking of the European Union on all issues affecting our international relations , why not counterattack , and find out if the United States really is breaking WTO rules by subsidising its producers ?
Further proposals would be to carry out a careful investigation of the fundamental causes of the Russian and Japanese crises so as to prevent further ill-effects , and , finally , to ensure that the major agri-foodstuffs companies share the responsibility .
In short , we cannot resign ourselves to the biblical prophecy about the seven lean years and the seven fat years .
If four years of high prices are going to be followed by four years of low prices , it will be a catastrophe , Commissioner .
Madam President , last Friday I too met with farmers in my constituencies .
They all have great anxieties about the current catastrophic decline in their incomes , in particular those in the pig sector whose animals are fetching such low prices in the market that they are making a loss on every animal .
British farmers , normally a very phlegmatic , law-abiding group of people , are far less prone to demonstrate than their opposite numbers in some other countries .
For them to take to the streets , as they did at the Labour Party Conference in Blackpool last week , or blockade a port to stop pigmeat being brought into the UK , as they did in Immingham in my constituency a few weeks ago , things have to be desperate indeed .
Travelling around my Lincolnshire constituency I often see pigs out in the fields enjoying a very normal active life with high welfare standards .
Their owners feel very bitter that the very low prices they are currently receiving for their pigs are not reflected in the prices of meat in the supermarkets which import meat raised to lower welfare standards .
Farmers need help now to get through to Christmas .
A number of short-term measures can be taken quickly to ease the situation .
Export refunds will help the market by assisting producers to find new markets outside the EU .
Private storage aids can relieve an over-supplied market in the short term .
However , when released , such meats should be exported or used as emergency supplies outside the EU - possibly to Russia , as has been said - to avoid recreating the problem of over-supply .
Export credit guarantees can help exporters to reduce risk and compete outside the EU with more confidence to find new markets .
An intensive marketing programme throughout the EU similar to that introduced for beef two years ago , for which I wrote the Parliament 's report , could also play a significant role in boosting consumption and thereby reducing surpluses .
There also needs to be help for farmers wishing to retire from the sector .
Measures should be the same throughout the EU to ensure no one Member State gets an unfair advantage .
Through you I urge the Commission and the Council to reach decisions and take urgent action following the meeting on 14 October .
Europe 's farmers need help now .
They cannot wait another two or three months for action .
Madam President , Commissioner , although it has all been said , not everyone has spoken yet .
So I shall be very brief .
I want to address four points .
One , pig prices for farmers have fallen more sharply than the prices passed on by the trade .
That too needs pointing out .
Two , the Commissioner said nothing about evaluating the results of the recent pig counts .
After all , he must have good figures here since his expert on pigs learnt his trade on my farm .
That is why he is such a capable man - let us say that quite plainly here !
Three , now would be the best opportunity , and here I agree with Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , to implement the directive on nitrates and to look into the excessive stocks of animals in the Community , so that we can bring them back to a normal level and establish a sensible ratio of fodder land to land spread with liquid manure .
This is the best opportunity to do so .
I am doing so , obviously .
We have all been doing so for ages .
Only the Lower Saxons are , of course , very backward here .
And nevertheless one of them has actually become Chancellor of Germany .
That just goes to show the possibilities in our country !
Four , it needs to be checked to what extent the sharp fall in the grain price has had an impact on or stimulated the processing industry .
The farmers are seeking higher value creation .
That is quite clear , and then we shall never be able to resolve this dilemma .
( Applause )
Madam President , there are two points I would like to make , but first I would like to make it quite clear that I welcome the fact that we are debating this issue this morning and I think that a number of measures are needed to help get us through this difficult stage .
To be honest , Commissioner , your latest statement did not surprise me , and I think we ought to distinguish between the structural causes underlying this crisis and the circumstantial causes which have aggravated it .
The Russian market , for example , has exacerbated a crisis engendered by over-production and the misguided policy some Member States have been pursuing .
This policy must be corrected because it threatens to penalise even areas which are traditional producers of pigmeat used primarily for quality products - for processed products like ham , salami , etcetera - which risk paying the price of errors in the calculation of demand .
The second point I want to make is that we should only intervene with contingency measures , and we should try not to use this crisis to move towards regulation of the sector , which up to now has managed fairly well without subsidies .
We must try to avoid going down the road of traditional assistance because of a short-term crisis in the sector .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to thank you warmly for this debate . I was asked whether I can show you the trend in production .
Production in the first six months of 1998 compared with the same period in 1997 was as follows .
In the Netherlands , production rose by 17.9 % - as I said , that was mainly due to the swine fever the year before ; in Spain by 7.8 % , so that Spain is now the second pig producer in the European Union ; and in Portugal it is also over 7 % .
But in some countries production actually fell , for instance in Italy , Luxembourg and Finland .
In Germany it rose by 4 % .
Let me now briefly answer the questions you raised .
On the specific question of the fire in Northern Ireland , let me say that , firstly , the UK Government has requested a national subsidy for this , which is currently under consideration .
Secondly , according to our information that firm has now bought a replacement slaughterhouse .
Thirdly , if structural aids for reconstruction are needed , they must be given under the structural programmes .
Fourthly , do not say we were not available !
In fact the matter was discussed with my services twice in August !
To turn to Mr Hallam 's question about giving food aid to Russia .
I believe that first of all we should talk with the Russians themselves .
It would certainly be counterproductive to make an offer - as some have already tried - when the Russians want nothing to do with it .
So far the Russian Government has declared that it attaches priority to the resumption of normal exports to Russia .
Moreover , if we considered such aid , we would first have to reach agreement at international level , to ensure that a food aid programme was not charged to our exports , landing us in further difficulties .
Above all , we must determine how this kind of programme would be financed .
So we are not against this kind of programme on principle , from the outset and under all circumstances , but first the conditions need to be determined .
We also consider it extremely important that , in the event that we grant this aid , we also receive guarantees that it will go to those in genuine need and not just to anyone .
On the question of price consistency from the producer price to the supermarket price , if you find that this is not the case in your country , the fault lies in weak competition and not with the Community ; it is in fact up to the consumer associations and other organisations to ensure this consistency .
I come now to the more long-term aspects .
In our proposals in relation to Agenda 2000 we considered the probable future trend of competition between pigmeat and beef .
Because we think that pigmeat , like all white meats , will have more advantages than disadvantages in future , we believe that is precisely why beef prices must be cut more drastically , to maintain a balance .
The trend of demand is more towards pigmeat .
I do not think when you add up the figures here that you should look at the billions the Community pays for field crops separately and pretend that it has nothing to do with pigmeat .
Quite logically , many pig producers in fact receive farm premiums because they produce their own cereals and fodder .
On the support for American producers , President Clinton has announced that he will give more support for American agriculture as a whole - which is indeed facing a serious crisis at present , especially grain cultivation .
But of course the same applies to the Americans as to us : they must comply with the agreed GATT undertakings .
Of course we will monitor this very carefully .
Should we find at any point that this is not the case , we will take the appropriate steps .
I must admit I see the question of a world market orientation rather differently from the way it was presented a moment ago .
Obviously we do not want to disturb the local or regional markets which , as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf described so graphically , continue to operate independently of the crisis ; on the contrary , we want to strengthen and support these regional markets .
But we cannot market the entire European production solely on regional markets , for there happen to be others too , and we cannot simply disregard them .
I agree with him on one point , which brings me back to Mr Mulder 's question .
The proposal on reducing stocks in the Netherlands is directly linked to the directive on nitrates .
The Netherlands is attempting to implement the nitrates directive in relation to pig production , and that is also how the Netherlands Government presented the matter .
But you all know that many Member States have still not implemented that directive .
I am quite willing , following the debate here today , once again to request the appropriate services and my colleague Mrs Bjerregaard to make the appropriate approaches to the Member States on this subject , for in my view that is the best way to protect indigenous production in Europe .
Thank you , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Joint motion for a resolution on the crisis in the pigmeat sector
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , pig farmers are quite familiar with the phenomenon of yo-yoing prices , and it is not for nothing that we talk about pig cycles in economics .
The decline of the substantial Russian market has produced the very serious problems which the pigmeat sector is currently facing , and I therefore welcome the fact that the European Parliament has made a statement on the subject .
We support the calls for the Commission to take further measures and we voted for the resolution .

But what do we mean by further measures ?
The general wording of the recommendations indicates that Parliament still has very different ideas about this .
One idea is to introduce a subsidy regime for slaughtering piglets , like the Herodes premium for calves .
We resolutely oppose this as being ethically unacceptable and bad for the image of the sector .
Other possibilities mooted include intervention for pigmeat and reducing the slaughter weight .
We have our doubts about both of these , since they would involve changing the entire organisation of the pigmeat market , which would take some considerable time .
It seems to make no sense to change a light-handed system into a heavy-handed one just because of the current crisis .
We would advise the Commission to make optimum use of the existing instruments , even though they are restricted to the light-handed system .
But by using the private storage scheme and increasing export subsidies the Union could do a lot to help solve the problems .
The Commission must also be very careful to ensure that the support measures introduced by the various Member States do not contravene European rules .
An especially hard line must be taken with Member States which have unilateral support systems , such as interest-free loans and help in maintaining surplus production .
That is just counterproductive .
The ARE Group has not signed this so-called ' joint ' resolution , tabled by the PSE , PPE , UPE and GUE / NGL Groups .
This resolution has surprised us by its lack of bite .
In fact , the text seems to us to accurately take stock of the present crisis in the pigmeat sector , but it is nonetheless hollow . Above all , this resolution refrains from drawing lessons from the crisis and is devoid of any concrete proposals , which are , however , necessary and urgent for the farmers directly affected by this crisis .
This crisis could have been predicted : it resulted from the combination of an uncontrollable industrialisation of pigmeat production , attractive , artificial prices that were maintained for four years , thereby encouraging overproduction , and the absence of a genuine European policy to control production .
The sudden drop in pigmeat prices coupled with the loss of export markets , particularly following the Russian crisis , are only symptoms of the structural weakness of the sector , which has been created by the absence of political will and a certain amount of vote-catching .
Each crisis in the pigmeat sector forces out the smallest farmers to the advantage of the factory farmers , who themselves are primarily responsible for the present situation .
It is not with the modest and timid proposals in this resolution - which merely calls for the blind perpetuation of the present system without even calling into question the foundations of the policy implemented until now - that the Community will be able to respond adequately to the concerns of farmers .
The ARE Group had proposed taking clear measures with a view to controlling production effectively and on a long-term basis .
The decentralisation of production , which would allow quality to prevail over quantity , is also amongst our priorities .
With this in mind , the group is in favour of the Commission maintaining the ban on subsidies designed to increase production capacity in areas with a structural surplus .
The Commission should be encouraged to favour aid to the producer aimed at promoting extensive farming methods that respect the connection with the ground and that use feedingstuffs originating in the Community .
Finally , the ARE Group considers that any specific measure concerning aid to the sector must be dependent , in accordance with each region 's particular needs , on measures relating to marketing , processing , the protection of the environment , the decentralisation of production and the conversion of companies . It must also form part of a global strategy to control production and achieve quality .
We will , however , be voting in favour of this resolution as a sign of our concern for the scale of this crisis and our solidarity with the farmers affected .
The Danish Social Democrats voted for the joint motion for a resolution on pigmeat today .
We did so taking the view that the resolution is acceptable overall .
Certain products which are exported to the Far East , for example , do not qualify for export refunds .
This amounts to discrimination against the producers concerned .
We therefore favour support for the private storage of products that do not qualify for export support .
In the longer term of course , we think that the best way of bringing about balance on the market is to give the animals reasonable conditions and to care for the environment .
We favour a reform involving the alignment of prices to world market prices and a reduction in export refunds .
The pigmeat market is characterised by over-supply .
In fact , EU exports to the Asian and Russian markets account for almost 40 % of the total volume of exports to third countries .
Both markets are experiencing particularly worrying economic situations and are no longer in a position to stock up with the same quantity of supplies as before .
On an internal level , an epizootic disease ( swine fever ) was certainly rife during the past two years in two Member States : the Netherlands and Spain .
However , through the near eradication of this disease , production in both these Member States has returned to the level of previous years .
While the emergence of a surplus could have been predicted , the Commission , rather than analysing the inadequacies of the COM for pigmeat , instead quoted us the case of pigmeat production as an example to justify its proposal to reform the COM for beef and veal ( private storage , abolition of public intervention , reduction of production prices , etcetera ) .
Here or elsewhere , it is good form to systematically condemn the increase in agricultural production and particularly that of off-land units , as has occurred notably in the area of pigmeat production .
However - and I think it important to point this out - , it is not the farmers who are responsible for this situation .
For many years , the Commission has implemented a policy that favours this increase in regions close to the provision of feedingstuffs .
We know that to produce pigmeat at competitive prices on the world market , the cost of feedingstuffs must be reduced as far as possible .
By favouring the imports of proteins of crop origin , such as soya cakes , manioc , etcetera ( the European Union only provides 15 % of the proteins of crop origin it requires ) , and the imports of cereal substitutes ( corn gluten feed ) without any import duties , the European Union has a direct responsibility for the concentration of farms around supply ports along its western coasts .
The competitive advantage of these coastal production regions has been such that production in Europe has been completely relocated and concentrated in limited areas - the Netherlands , Belgium , Brittany , Denmark - , leading to the consequences we are now aware of in terms of the environment and risks of epizootic disease .
However , this increase in production has also had a perverse effect on the farmers themselves .
In fact , they have had to make large investments in high-technology animal housing .
When analysing the situation of agriculture in France , for example , we see that pigmeat producers are among those farmers most in debt .
During the market depression that we are experiencing , they are obliged to produce , even at a loss , and to sell at very low prices .
What is the situation like for the consumer ?
Now , after several weeks during which the price per kilo has remained lower than FRF 6 per kilo of live weight , consumer prices are still the same .
In actual fact , the middlemen are profiting from this situation and are not passing on the decrease in the price of the raw material to the advantage of the consumers .
I do not want to finish without emphasising the serious repercussions for farmers of certain insufficiencies on the part of the Commission .
Our colleague Jim Nicholson , a Member from Northern Ireland , has told us about the dramatic situation experienced by his region this summer , as a result of the Commission 's incompetence .
In Northern Ireland , one of the two slaughterhouses for pigs was burnt down during the summer and was no longer able to slaughter of pigs .
The one remaining slaughterhouse , although running at full capacity , was unable to compensate for this problem and the farmers could not have their animals slaughtered .
It was therefore necessary for the Commission to authorise the slaughter of pigs from Northern Ireland in the Republic of Ireland .
But the Commission was on holiday .
There was no-one in charge in Brussels .
No-one was able to take a decision .
Everything was blocked .
And during this time , the animals exceeded their optimum weight .
This tragic situation shows us once more the negative effects of a technocratic type of decision-making system , which is very far from the real world .
Finally , I should like to point out here the significance of a proposal put forward by our colleague Edouard des Places .
In the opinion he delivered last year on the Agenda 2000 communication , he pointed out that it was necessary to introduce the principle of income insurance .
This system has the advantage of being authorised under the GATT-WTO agreements .
Yet , as the Commission regulations on Agenda 2000 are gradually being put forward , we note that this proposal is still not present .
However , if pig farmers had previously been able to take out this type of insurance - cofinanced by the European Union - when prices were higher , it would have been easier for them to deal with the market situation we are experiencing now .
Instead of a reform of the CAP and main COMs based on a reduction of prices and its partial compensation through allowances , we call on the Commission to seriously and quickly consider creating new tools that enable farmers to have stable incomes .
Is the Commission capable of imagining anything other than the progressive dismantling of the CAP that it is currently implementing ?
Is it capable of presenting European farmers with any other prospects besides that of merely enduring the fluctuations in the dollar and the changes in world prices for agricultural raw materials ?
If the answer is no , then the transfer of powers from which it has benefited is no longer justified .
The euro and the CAP
The next item is the report ( A4-0320 / 98 ) by Mrs Schierhuber , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on :
I.the proposal for a Council Regulation establishing agrimonetary arrangements for the euro ( COM ( 98 ) 0367 - C4-0406 / 98-98 / 0214 ( CNS ) ) ; II.the proposal for a Council Regulation on transitional measures to be applied under the common agricultural policy with a view to the introduction of the euro ( COM ( 98 ) 0367 - C4-0407 / 98-98 / 0215 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the introduction of the euro in the European Union brings many changes , adaptations and adjustments with it , which also affect agriculture and the existing agrimonetary system .
The system we have had hitherto served to absorb currency fluctuations , which could affect farm incomes .
It tried to keep incomes relatively stable by an extremely complex and expensive method , the fictive conversion rate known as the ' green rate ' .
With the single currency , this compensation mechanism will no longer be needed in the euro zone in future .
On 1 January 1999 , once exchange rates have been fixed , this cumbersome system will disappear .
However , an agrimonetary system will have to be retained for those states which do not participate in the single currency .
That is why the Commission is proposing to suspend the existing agrimonetary system regulations and replace them with two new ones .
I believe the Commission has developed a good system which , as I said , is much easier to handle and in the end will also be cheaper .
These new regulations are to regulate , firstly , the transition from the existing system to the new one and , secondly , the system to be applied between the ins and the pre-ins .
Let me emphasise at this point how important the introduction of the euro is for European farmers , since they in particular need a stable currency environment .
Let me also point to the huge depreciation of the lira that occurred in 1995 , which did great damage to Austrian farmers and others .
If incomes are no longer exposed to the risk of currency fluctuations within the euro zone , I believe that will improve security on the internal and third-country markets .
Let me say a few words on the new agrimonetary mechanism for the pre-ins .
The Commission makes a distinction between prices and other subsidies on the one hand , and direct aid .
Since not every minor currency fluctuation can immediately be compensated , a margin was set .
For prices , it was decided that only an appreciable currency revaluation of not less than 2.6 % gives rise to an income loss , which in the end would also be compensated .
In the case of direct aid , this rate is 0.5 % .
On the 2.6 % rate I would add that it already applies in the current system , as recently decided in a Council regulation .
On innovations in the financing system , here too there is a difference between prices and other subsidies on the one hand , and direct aid .
In future too the Union will grant 50 % of direct aid contributions , even if the Member State does not pay its contribution .
It is a different situation with prices : in future they will only be granted if the Member State cofinances an equal share .
The successive payments are on a degressive scale and end after three years .
Broadly speaking , the same system applies when the ' in ' states adjust to the euro , i.e. at the time when the exchange rates are fixed .
Let me just emphasise that in the first year the Union will pay 100 % compensation for direct aid where a currency has appreciated by at least 0.5 % .
The introduction of the single currency is an important and significant step towards further development and integration in Europe .
It brings us a step closer to completing the single market .
Personally , I do not regard the European Union as just an economic community but also as a community of solidarity .
That is why I support the Commission 's proposed aid for farmers in those Member States that are not joining the single currency .
They should not derive any advantages from that , nor disadvantages either , for the farmers must not be the ultimate losers because their governments have decided not to join the euro for the time being .
As I said , in the end the reorganisation of the Community budget will save much money .
But the financing of a rational transition must take account of the farmers ' needs .
Finally , I expect and hope that if any unforeseen difficulties arise on the date of introduction of the euro , the Commission will respond rapidly and efficiently .
Mr President , the single currency - the euro - will , of course , save a great deal of money : most European Union countries will not require agri-compensation payments after 1 January .
The ' green rate ' , as we know it , will go and for the countries not in ' euroland ' , the staged currency fluctuations of the present green pound will end and be replaced by a currency exchange rate based on the declared daily rate .
The European Union countries not in ' euroland ' will have a compensation formula until the year 2002 - for the next three years .
I am concerned about ensuring that farmers requiring compensation will not have that compensation payment delayed .
If our aim is to help when farming income drops , it will not help if the payment is delayed until after the farmers have gone bankrupt .
The proposed direct aid , when there is a revaluation of over half a percent , must be received by the farmers and not too late to help them .
One point we must address : my country , the United Kingdom , is now suffering from the high pound on international currency exchange rates .
Cheap imports are flooding in and we have economic problems .
The same situation in ' euroland ' could happen if we develop free trade with North America .
We really have to think of the cost to the common agricultural policy in our negotiations .
To conclude , I respect the amendments tabled .
I think we will agree .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
Mr President , Commissioner , of course I fully support what Mrs Schierhuber has described to us so excellently .
She also raised a number of points into which I would like to go in more depth .
It is quite plain that agriculture has suffered most from fluctuations in currency values and therefore also had to accept considerable income fluctuations and falls .
But I have been struck by a document published by the German Bundesrat to the effect that the current compensation rules are not fair and cannot adequately protect farmers from the losses to which Mr Wilson has also referred .
This document starts from the assumption that 1 % compensation represents DEM 600 million , and we are working with a fluctuation band of 2.6 % .
So in any country where this 2.6 % fluctuation band is breached , say in Germany , agricultural prices could face losses of 1.5 billion - according to the German Bundesrat .
So , of course , I pricked up my ears and said to myself that I must put that before you here .
I would not like to stand up in front of my people and be asked why nobody said a word .
So I would now ask you and your watchmen : could this happen , and would that not mean that the compensation had to be renegotiated ?
Mr President , Commissioner , congratulations to Mrs Schierhuber on her important report .
According to the Commission 's proposal , the Community will be making , in the form of direct aid , a 100 % compensation payment for lost income in the first year to all Member States outside the euro area .
I see this proposal as establishing some sort of precedent .
When new member states are admitted to the Union , they will hardly be coming straight into the euro area .
I should like to ask whether we will be recompensing these countries too with an automatic 100 % payment in the form of direct aid to make up for loss of income arising out of fluctuations in currency values in the first year ?
The national currency used to be one means of protecting domestic production of food .
Now the euro is laying bare differences in competitiveness and food prices within the EU .
The steady 7 to 8 % fall in the value of currencies like the Swedish krona and the Danish krone , which are the currencies of non-participating countries , compared to , say , the Finnish markka , give these countries a competitive edge in production .
Now , according to the report under discussion , the risk that the agrimonetary scheme will cause distortion of trade is being removed .
However , the countries outside the euro area are gaining a competitive edge stemming from fluctuations in the value of currencies , which to my mind have not been sufficiently explained in preparing for the euro .
I would like to ask if the Commission intends to monitor the changes in the value of currencies outside the euro area and their effects on the competitor counties , i.e. the euro area .
Finally , I would like to say that , apart from Germany , Finland 's main competitor countries - and the ones we export to most - are those very countries remaining outside the euro area , and in that respect this matter is extremely important for us .
Otherwise , I think the euro is a perfectly good thing .
It allows us to protect ourselves from a currency market that is now in turmoil .
Thank you very much , Mrs Anttila .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am going to call Mr Hallam now , but before I do I must inform him that the Chair noted his absence on the Friday of the last part-session .
Mr President , the reason I was absent was because I went to a selection procedure which I subsequently failed and I will probably not be a Member of Parliament in future .
It was quite a poignant fact that I was away on that particular Friday .
Nevertheless there are ways in which politics move sometimes that are quite mysterious .
I would like to endorse my colleague , Mr Wilson , and certainly the comments by Mrs Anttila about some of the concerns that we , in the pre-in countries , have about the way in which the monetary system will work following the single currency .
I also want to place on record some of my concerns about some of the things you may have been hearing about British politics in terms of the way in which the Conservative Party - the main opposition party - has now decided to slam the door on the euro forever .
I still have my reservations .
I have always believed that John Major 's policy of ' wait and see ' was actually a sensible policy .
I am very concerned that by appearing to slam the door forever , the opposition party in our country is talking down jobs in my constituency .
We need foreign investors in places such as Telford , north Shropshire , Hereford , Ross-on-Wye and Wyre Forest .
I know that the news that a major opposition party is slamming the door on the euro forever is going to have a detrimental effect on future foreign investments .
Quite clearly , these people only speak for a tiny minority now .
I want to make it clear to the House that the British people are waiting , looking very carefully and considering .
There is growing pressure , from British businessmen in particular , to join the euro .
Mr President , Commissioner , you put proposals before us for a radical reorganisation of the agrimonetary system in good time , some months ago .
That will indeed be necessary with the introduction of the euro as a single currency and you did not need letters from Members , which were presumably only aimed at the gallery and at currying favour with the farmers , to point this out to you .
Those familiar with the admittedly extremely complex system of agrimonetary compensatory payments knew these payments would no longer be necessary for farmers in the euro zone , as our rapporteur , Mrs Schierhuber , explained very clearly .
However , they may still apply to farmers from what are called the pre-in Member States if their currencies are revalued against the euro .
I think that is crux of the matter .
I want to know why a Member State that deliberately does not join the euro can be eligible for 50 % of any compensatory amounts out of Community funds and why that Member State can even be exempt from contributing its national share of subsidies .
With the introduction of the euro the entire agrimonetary problem could , after all , disappear overnight and we could save far more money .
I would certainly not want farmers in countries that do not want to join the euro to be penalised .
Yet I do not see why those countries ' decision not to join should possibly cost the other Member States hundreds of millions .
I believe we should see whether we cannot find a solution in the EU financing framework , because these countries cannot have it both ways .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur Mrs Schierhuber for this report .
The introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 as the single currency for Europe will add greatly to the integration of the Union .
It will give the in-countries a huge boost and for countries like Ireland , which exports a high percentage of its total agricultural production , the euro will reduce costs as there will no longer be a need for conversion when the euro becomes a means of payment in its own right and not just a unit of account like the ecu .
The CAP will be much simpler to operate and will be a lot better for farmers .
Food exporters , trading on both the EU and third-country markets , will have the distortions of trade caused by agri-monetary and conversion factors eliminated from their contracts , thus reducing their risks and costs .
I welcome the excellent preparation work by the Commission and the real possibility of saving over one billion euros per year to the EU budget .
But as the report shows , different mechanisms are required for the in-countries and for the non-participating Member States .
This fact once again highlights the trade difficulties Ireland will experience in its dealings with the UK , as a result of the UK 's refusal to participate .
Clearly the sooner the United Kingdom decides to join in , as I believe it inevitably will , the better for all of us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first let me offer warm thanks to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and , in particular , to Mrs Schierhuber , the rapporteur , for this excellent report .
I am glad that the rapporteur and the committee have endorsed the Commission 's main reform aims , which are as follows . Firstly , we want to make the existing regulations much simpler .
Secondly , with the introduction of the euro and the new currency situation that will produce , we want to adapt the existing rules .
Thirdly , we want a system that adjusts to any given market situation and , not least , we want to prevent any farm income losses .
As a means of achieving these aims , the Commission has proposed abolishing green exchange rates and replacing them by specific conversion rates for those Member States that have not yet joined the euro and by irrevocably fixed conversion rates for those that have .
Similarly , for the pre-ins , the system of definitive facts is to be continued and that of agrimonetary compensatory amounts retained with minor changes .
I am pleased that the European Parliament welcomes all these proposals , as also emerged in the debate on the Langen report on Tuesday .
Mr Funk expressed some reservations in regard to the margin of fluctuation and the threshold level .
The 2.6 % margin of fluctuation is nothing new ; it already exists within the present system and is already being applied .
This threshold is , in a sense , the counterpart to the flat-rate calculation of income losses resulting from falls in prices or in the non-direct subsidies in the respective national currencies .
The flat-rate approach produces more risk of overcompensation , which is why we have set the margin at 2.6 % .
But that in turn has nothing to do with the 0.5 % payment threshold , which also already exists under the present system .
This threshold is simply designed to prevent compensation having to be paid for very minor income changes , as otherwise we would face the absurd situation of administrative costs being higher than payments to the farmer .
All in all , the Commission 's proposal is an example of how simplifying a proposal can also make it more transparent and intelligible .
I turn now to the amendments , which with one exception concern only the recitals .
I note with satisfaction that the rapporteur endorses all the other articles .
But since the recitals have a close bearing on the articles themselves and were drafted with that in mind , and since moreover they say only what is absolutely necessary , I would prefer to retain them in their existing wording .
I would just like to bring up Amendment No 6 , on the use of the euro by the pre-in states .
That is an important aspect of the proposal .
The amendment seeks a wording which is not at present consistent with the corresponding article .
Yet the Commission is quite prepared to raise the reservations expressed in that amendment during the Council discussions .
On Amendment No 8 to Article 4 , I still maintain that it should be up to the Commission and the agrimonetary committee to change the criteria for adjusting to the market situation when calculating cuts in agrimonetary subsidies .
After all , these are purely technical adjustments , which it is important to undertake very quickly to prevent the situation that was complained of earlier , namely delays in the calculation and payment of the subsidies .
That is our only intention here .
To conclude , let me thank Parliament again for its kind support for this reform , which will ensure that the common agricultural policy can adjust completely and promptly to the great milestone that monetary union represents in the construction of Europe .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Before we move to the vote , I would ask you to take a minute to listen to a speech from Mrs Schierhuber , who has asked for the floor as rapporteur .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have listened very carefully to what you said .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which adopted all the amendments unanimously , had not actually intended to change the text , i.e. the Commission proposal , but simply to give it more depth .
In that sense , I would ask you to reconsider this at a suitable opportunity .
Thank you , Mrs Schierhuber .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the two legislative resolutions )
The I-EDN Group voted for this report because the six amendments that it had proposed in committee were adopted .
These six amendments stress that one of the fundamental principles of the CAP is that of equal treatment of the farmers of the EUROPEAN UNION Member States . They also emphasise the need to ensure that the introduction of the euro does not penalise the farmers of the Member States and particularly those of the Member States that have to integrate the single currency .
It has been said and repeated too often that farmers would benefit from the euro due to the absence of so-called competitive devaluations .
In fact , when we examine the Commission proposals , we see that no study has been carried out on the impact of the euro on farmers ' incomes .
What is even more surprising is that these proposals state that no compensatory aid will be granted when this amount is less than 0.5 % of a revaluation , nor in respect of amounts to which a rate lower than the new rate was applied in the 24 months before the entry into force of this regulation .
Yet what are we seeing at present ?
We are witnessing a global financial crisis that started this summer .
The repercussions of this crisis are already significant as far as the parity of currencies is concerned , that is , those participating in the euro and the dollar .
We know that world prices for agricultural raw materials are fixed in dollars .
A strong euro will therefore penalise European agricultural exports .
What will our farmers do when they see their prices go down in euros , even if the basic prices in dollars remain stable ?
In the Commission proposals on Agenda 2000 , the only issue is that of lowering prices and therefore significantly reducing farmers ' incomes , given that the allowances in compensation will only be slightly revalued before the WTO negotiations .
I therefore fear , like all the members of my group , that European agriculture will suffer a great deal from the introduction of the euro .
Under these conditions , what will the future of the rural areas of Europe be like as a consequence ?
Instead of asking this question , the French National Assembly is currently debating , in a completely surrealistic manner , a basic law on agriculture introducing territorial contracts for farms , which aim only to encourage farmers to become local agricultural civil servants .
But that is another story !
I am in any case very afraid for the future of a profession that is the cement of our European society .
Agricultural products and agri-foodstuffs
The next item is the report ( A4-0280 / 98 ) by Mr Mulder , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on a quality policy for agricultural products and agri-foodstuffs .
Mr President , when we talk about Europe 's agriculture policy these days there are two main strands to the discussion : firstly that the agricultural policy needs to change and , secondly , that the food we produce needs to be safer and more animal-friendly .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is trying in this report to give the discussion a certain orientation .
First of all , the Commission has clearly stated that whatever proposals may be made about income subsidies , the average farmer and grower will always prefer to derive his income from the market rather than by filling in all sorts of forms to obtain a subsidy .
One of the possibilities we see for improving prices is to put the emphasis on food quality rather than quantity .
This is something that the Commission has already acknowledged , and it is hardly a new idea .
The Commission put forward proposals on organic vegetable production in the early 1990s and there will soon , we hope , be proposals on organic animal production .
But how we can actually change market trends is another matter , since organic products currently account for only 2 % of the European agricultural market .
The second Commission proposal is to place greater emphasis on regional products .
We in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development think this is an excellent idea , since we agree that there needs to be a much greater focus on such products , and they need to be marketed more vigorously , allocated promotional funds and so on .
There is certainly room for improvement here , as regional products currently account for only a very small percentage of the market , some 8 % if the Commission 's figures are correct .
This means that 90 % of all Europe 's agricultural products reach the market at various stages of production .
Some producers are heavy polluters , others are not , and the market has a certain influence here .
There is a wide range of quality marks in Europe , some 1500 or so , on which the Commission has just carried out a study , I believe .
The ones that stand out are those relating to integrated production , which is currently starting to develop all over Europe .
The concept here is ' from the stable to the table ' , with every stage of production being monitored .
We in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development feel that this form of production should be encouraged .
The consumer wants to know what he is eating , and farmers like to know what production standards they have to meet .
It will also make the huge range of quality marks slightly more transparent if there is one common European mark .
This is the thrust of the main section of the report .
We are calling for a European quality mark for the top end of the remaining 90 % of the market .
It does not mean that all existing national , regional or other quality marks should be dropped .
Everyone is free to produce what they want , but if certain claims are made they must be checked out .
This should form the basis of the system initially : farmers and growers should be able to join the system voluntarily .
The technical criteria must be completely open and easy to monitor , and checks must be carried out independently , either by a government body or by an officially approved body .
The system must also be paid for by those involved , so that it does not impose any extra costs on the European budget .
The only thing the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development wants from the European budget is a little extra money for promoting these sorts of products .
Why is this quality policy important ?
Firstly , because the market in Europe is becoming increasingly open to the world market , and it seems completely unreasonable to ask European farmers and growers to be more environmentally-friendly and animal-friendly in their production methods while at the same time opening up the market to products from farmers elsewhere in the world who are not subject to the same requirements .
This is unfair competition , which is why we would urge the Commission to put these quality marks on the agenda in the WTO .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Mulder on his excellent report , although we must ensure that it is used as basis for future work and that we do not simply stop here , satisfied with what the Commission has done .
I personally am not satisfied with what the Commission has done , despite the claims of some DG VI officials that with the quality policy the whole CAP is no longer geared to the Ford approach , as it used to be .
I think that is only true to a very small extent : we still have a common agricultural policy excessively geared towards quantity .
If we do not begin to introduce quality concepts into the common organisation of the market , decoupling the aid from production tonnages , the actual scope for quality policies and producer responsibility will remain too small .
This is not to say that some positive signals have not come out of the Commission , for example the logo , this August , for PDO and PGI products .
Then I see that there is a new site dedicated to quality products on the DG VI homepage on the Internet , and I know that promotional measures are also being studied .
I have often had the opportunity to listen to the reports of the European Consumers Organisation in Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture : they are unhappy about quality products , they have not grasped the fact that it is all about standards , seeing it as a protectionist measure to give producers an income and cheat the consumer .
This means we still have a lot of ground to make up , a cultural battle to fight , and I think that here the rapporteur 's proposals for a quality category based on environmental criteria are very interesting .
Of course , we talk about these things and then , in Agenda 2000 , not enough attention is given to quality , taken in the environmental sense .
The Regulation 2078 increments are too small and , above all , this idea of leaving it entirely to the Member States ' discretion to link income support levels to environmental factors is unconvincing .
Then there are the promotional measures , which are not developing fast enough .
We now have 500 typical PDO and PGI products registered at European level , and I think there ought to be special ambassadors to promote the European way of producing and consuming worldwide , and to be the means of supporting new promotional measures at international level .
Finally , I agree with Mr Mulder that the Community needs to be very careful about protecting its quality policy in international forums .
In the WTO they talk about meat with hormones and genetically modified foods as if they were televisions : I do not think that is acceptable .
Mr President , the PPE Group supports Mr Mulder 's report and we are grateful to him for the work he has done in the Committee on Agriculture .
We have decided not to retable our amendments here , because the vote was carried in committee and we reject changes to the voting list because the improvements have already been made in the Committee on Agriculture .
I would just like to underline some very important aspects of the report .
The first concerns the need to establish a comprehensive strategy for quality policy , through a specific set of rules operating throughout the chain and covering every aspect of quality .
When we talk about quality we often only mean that a product must not be harmful to health .
Quality is more complex than that , and we must try to cover the principle in all its aspects .
The second point is about defending our typical products in the World Trade Organisation .
The third important point , in my opinion , is the need to develop a new breed of professionals to protect and enhance quality , and to spend a much greater amount on promoting typical products and quality products .
Too little is being done in this area .
More needs to be done , but we must avoid creating more bureaucracy .
Mr President , Commissioner , firstly my congratulations to Mr Mulder on an important and well-informed report .
Consumers get confused by too many quality marks , trademarks and labels showing origin .
I therefore give my enthusiastic support to the coordinated scheme referred to in Mr Mulder 's report , whereby quality marks and approval systems are regulated at Union level .
This will by no means be an obstacle to national , regional and local policy on quality , which is also very important .
In Finland , we have just established a basis for a policy on the quality of domestic foodstuffs .
It involves cooperation all along the food industry chain , quality control from the field to the consumer 's table .
This quality policy has to embrace an industry which at the moment , at least in Finland , competes solely through food prices and totally ignores the meaning of high quality .
Quality means a higher price , because it costs more to produce it .
I support the proposal in Mr Mulder 's report for an environmentally-based European quality category , because the European Union will never survive in global competition except through a policy of high quality and legitimate higher prices .
Mr President , I thought the quality of my speech was worth two minutes , but it seems I have already been cut to the European mark .
Anyway , I want to say that we agreed with Mr Mulder 's position , we continue to defend the view that one of the quality standards must be product flavour , and we maintain that , as well as standing up for flavour , we must also defend the ethical context in which the product is manufactured .
The Commission cannot solve this problem alone : it is a cultural problem and consumers need to be involved as well .
The consumer associations must be alerted so that they themselves monitor the products they consume .
It does not seem to me that this is an acute problem , given that life expectancy in the west has been increasing strongly and now even presents a political problem .
So we are not taking poison on a daily basis , and I am not obsessed with the hysterical notion that what we are consuming is poisonous .
But just as I do indeed defend quality , just as I believe quality should be respected and the ' MacDonaldisation ' of the world should be prevented , so , at the same time , I insist that this process must not become too bureaucratic .
I also think that product flavour must be defended at the World Trade Organisation and defended against all those people who are accustomed to eating any old thing .
I defend European quality as the true quality of the things I like to eat , and that is what I call quality .
Thank you , Mr Rosado Fernandes , and I want you to know that the Chair had no intention of cutting your eloquence by 30 seconds .
That is why - in spite of what the clock said - I did not use the gavel to stop you .
I hoped you would speak for the full two minutes because it is always a great pleasure to listen to you .
Mr President , Commissioner , I bring greetings from the northern regions of the European Union .
It is a paradox that we have adverse natural conditions , but we produce better quality food than they do in countries with favourable natural conditions .
That is because we have family farms and not industrial production methods .
It is an ecological method of production that we have .
We have a winter , with cold conditions , which sees to it that there is less residual pesticide about than in the countries of the south .
We oversee the ban on hormones and antibiotics differently from the way they do in countries with favourable natural conditions .
Free trade within the EU has worsened the quality of our food and , for that reason , we give our support to labels , signs and codes that speak for quality , the environment , and which give information on content , all of which increase consumer protection and consumer choice .
Mr President , Mr Fischler , you said earlier that we could not sell everything on the regional markets .
But what we are discussing now is precisely the opposite of what we discussed before .
Before , we were concerned not with selling quality goods on the world market but surpluses , which we can only get rid of by dumping them at low prices and for little money .
I have nothing against putting quality goods on the world market when it is a matter of competition .
Austrian wine , French wine , Parma ham : the same logic has to be applied on the world market as on the regional market .
What I want to say is that we must aim at quality and not at getting rid of surpluses from what is one of the largest food import areas in the world .
We do not have any surpluses .
But surpluses do exist in all areas where intervention attracts them .
That is why this report is so important . We must aim at production geared to quality , and then let us certainly produce for the world market , but I beg you , not with state aids but by finding customers and areas on the world markets that actually want to buy these products .
One last thought .
Mr Fischler , of course we also depend on the rest of the market in regard to our quality products .
If the pig market collapses now , it will of course become far more difficult to keep the regional quality market at a certain price level than if the price is generally stable .
That is why the two aspects are not entirely separate and it is in our interests to promote the overall quality of the market .
Mr President , our quality policy for agricultural products and foodstuffs , although new , is incomplete .
It is based on three regulations that have dealt with organic vegetable produce since 1991 - and this regulation is currently being extended to include animal products - , and protected geographical indications and certificates of specific character since 1992 .
The report by Mr Mulder , whom I congratulate on this reliable work , puts forward two interesting lines of thought for extending this policy .
Firstly , it proposes the adoption of a regulation improving the transparency and authenticity of quality marks .
It states that checks must be performed by bodies accredited by the Member States and truly independent of producers and traders .
It then proposes the creation of a European quality mark based on respect for the environmental criteria for production .
Mr Mulder , I think it should be pointed out that quality is a global concept that cannot be reduced to just a single element , be it hygiene , aesthetic quality , taste or absence of residues .
For agricultural products , quality is linked to variety , production methods , the environment and methods of conservation .
For processed products , it is linked to the initial quality and processing methods .
To complement this concept , my group proposes introducing the concepts of nutritional value and optimum health in Amendment No 8 .
As regards monitoring , experience in the area of organic farming shows that checks must be rigorous so as to avoid distorting competition at the level of imports from third countries , but also between the Member States .
This is the basis of Amendment No 8 , which recommends that checks should be the same for imported products and harmonised for Community products .
To conclude , I should like to say that between the two extremes of organic farming and factory farming , there is in fact room for an intermediate , but heterogeneous approach , which must be regulated in the interest of the consumer and of the producers who practise integrated agriculture .
A comprehensive regulation should define its procedures for production as well as its procedures for granting a European quality mark , which should be authenticated by a single logo likely to give rise to and merit consumer confidence .
Mr President , everybody is talking about the concept of quality , but in actual fact it covers very diverse dimensions .
Some people talk about the health quality of a product , and in this respect the BSE crisis shows us that the consumer is increasingly sensitive to this issue .
Others talk about the organoleptic quality of a product and others , finally , talk about the quality linked to the tradition of local products .
Our rapporteur , whom I should like to thank very sincerely for his report , has successfully analysed the first two dimensions , to which the consumers in the northern Member States of the Union are particularly sensitive .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations has , for its part , tabled three amendments to our colleague 's report , which aim to strengthen the third dimension of the concept of quality .
In fact , due to the globalisation of trade , the market in agricultural raw materials is becoming increasingly dominated by the concept of price .
I think , Mr President , that the ' tradition ' concept of quality represents a considerable opportunity for the rural areas of Europe .
The market in agricultural products is therefore no longer linked exclusively to price , but to the region .
In France , we have a long tradition of products with a registered designation of origin .
The ' Institut national des appellations d 'origine ' has enabled high-quality wine-growing to develop and the quality of certain cheeses and meat products to be established and protected . We see that where agricultural production is linked to a product with a registered designation of origin , the enhanced value of agriculture in the area of production is protected .
Maintaining this enhanced value in the designated areas both protects agricultural jobs and prevents a shift towards production methods that are harmful to the environment , by protecting the biological diversity .
Some cheeses of designated origin require the use of milk from specific dairy breeds , and in winegrowing , only traditional vine varieties may be used .
These examples just go to show that this dimension of high-quality products , local products and traditional products represents an opportunity for certain production areas in the rural areas of Europe .
As mentioned in the report , it is time that we had a real policy on the quality of agricultural products and foodstuffs in the European Union .
This policy must cover all aspects of the concept of quality .
These three dimensions must be combined to enable us to respond both to the consumer 's demands and those of the processing industry , but also to the need for a greater balance in rural society .
Employment , Mr President , will only develop in rural areas if agriculture shows that it is capable of adapting its production to the demands of consumers and the various operators involved in the sector , and capable of protecting , as far as possible , the added value close to the place of production .
Mr President , Commissioner , cultural identity is , to a great extent , not only expressed in the way we feed ourselves , but also , and more particularly , in what we eat and drink .
Products of designated origin must be based on very precise qualitative criteria , whether they relate to the product 's origin or the way in which it is produced .
In this way , we will guarantee the survival of cultural characteristics , but we will also maintain a significant economic potential in the rural areas that do not have other products or other alternatives .
For two years , since the conference in Cork , we have been stressing the need to protect jobs in rural areas and looking for consistent ways to achieve this .
Products of designated origin with specific qualities are a concrete response to this problem .
We talked about the pigmeat crisis this morning .
It could certainly have been predicted .
It is cyclical .
What is the alternative ?
For example , to produce Ardennes ham , the pig must be raised and fattened up in the Ardennes , with cereals produced in that same region , and the meat must be processed in accordance with precise specifications for each stage of production , from the farm to the consumer 's plate .
Of course , that does not mean that we can do whatever we like with mass-produced products with no designated origin .
The safety and the quality of foodstuffs must not suffer due to laxity .
Human health is above all protected by the way in which we feed ourselves and , in particular , by the quality of the products made available to the consumer .
I am not going to point out to you the reprehensible laxity of the relevant British authorities in the criminal problem of mad cow disease .
I hope that all those responsible in Europe have understood that the concern for the profitability of a minority must never prevail over the health requirements for the majority .
Under no circumstances , and on no account , must specific characteristics of high-quality products that enhance the value of regional traditions be renounced in order to mass-produce these products , which become commonplace and are shaped by the constraints of the global market .
Making products commonplace will never create as many jobs and will not give as much satisfaction to the consumer as maintaining regional characteristics .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Mulder has drafted a very good report on quality policy for agricultural products and agri-foodstuffs .
The consumer still finds it very difficult to identify many of the regional quality marks in the single market , which is why we should really all welcome the proposed supplementary European rules .
The European consumer is attaching increasing importance to the protection of the environment and animal life .
As representative of a large women 's association , I still seriously question whether double labelling - i.e. a regional and a European quality mark - really will persuade people to pay higher prices for foods produced under more stringent rules .
In my experience , the public is prepared to pay higher prices for clothes , housing , cars and travel than for actual food .
But the double label does not necessarily have to raise prices .
As many previous speakers have said , we need a European code of good agricultural practice in integrated farming to put before the Americans at the WTO negotiations as a European agricultural model .
But we still have to explain to our citizens that if we want better environmental protection , better animal protection , then logically we must also be prepared to pay a reasonable price for goods produced under these more stringent conditions .
By establishing a European quality mark we now want to help consumers in the single market to recognise other Member States ' national and regional quality marks too , since they say something about the special quality of this food .
In that way , a Spanish housewife looking at German products with a quality mark she does not recognise can be quite sure that this food complies with strict and transparent requirements .
Recognised European quality marks should satisfy very specific basic requirements , and I think that thanks to Mr Mulder 's report we will be able to open up an even larger market for these products .
At present we have two European quality categories for agricultural produce : organic farming and the Community protection of traditional specialities .
We in Parliament would like to add a third category covering organic products that also comply with environmental and animal protection criteria .
That would satisfy the consumers ' demand for environment-friendly products and give added importance to integrated production , something that has been widely discussed but in my view not yet clearly defined .
Mr President , I too believe that size , shape and appearance of food are not the only criteria by which quality should be judged .
I do not very often agree with Mr Rosado Fernandes in this House but I agree with him wholeheartedly that taste , flavour and nutritional value are the real benchmarks of food quality .
I was recently in Poland for the Joint Parliamentary Committee .
At the end of three very intensive days ' work I felt amazingly well and healthy .
When I thought about it , I put it down to the excellent quality of food I had enjoyed during those three days : fresh fruit , vegetables , fresh fish and meat and the most delicious bread I have ever tasted .
And yet we in the EU tend to regard Poland as having inefficient agriculture .
We have to look at our methods of agriculture within the Europe of the 15 and the way in which we define quality .
Intensively produced , bland-tasting produce that looks nice is not real quality as even the big supermarkets are beginning to acknowledge .
Naturally-produced foods untainted by excessive use of pesticides etc . , food with real favour and nutritional value are increasingly what European consumers are quite rightly demanding .
Europe 's farmers , food manufacturers and supermarkets should be adapting to meet that demand .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , congratulations to Mr Mulder on his report .
Quality policy is vital to European agriculture , although we note that the definition of quality still keeps provoking differences of opinion .
Quality production must also be reflected in the price and in farmers ' incomes .
Let me point out that in Austria during the BSE crisis the sales of products with recognised quality marks and designations of origin did not fall .
Although we cannot yet have a uniform European quality mark , our aim should be , as stated in paragraph 8 of our resolution , to pursue this road steadily .
The vast majority of European farmers do not live in advantaged areas .
That is why they cannot significantly increase their incomes by increasing their production .
So quality production must be the number one criterion for European agriculture and its distinctive character ; it is essential to obtain guarantees to that effect at the next round of WTO negotiations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too have read Mr Mulder 's report on a quality policy for agricultural products and agri-foodstuffs with great interest .
From my point of view , I can only welcome the ideas put forward as a matter of principle .
I am sure the Commission should also look at all the points made in your motion for a resolution with great interest and attention , but I would prefer to concentrate here on the two main headings of your report .
First , on introducing a European quality mark to coordinate the existing quality marks , I would draw your attention to one particular point .
In principle , in all new legislation we must first consider whether the questions concerned can or cannot be regulated effectively within the existing legislative framework .
Here I would remind you of the Commission 's basic concept of legislation , as set out in 1985 in the White Paper on the completion of the single market .
Since the adoption of that concept , harmonised common rules have been proposed in regard only to health and consumer protection , environmental protection and sound commercial practice .
Any questions that do not fall within the scope of these harmonised rules must be regulated by mutual recognition of national rules , laws or technical requirements .
The obligation to notify the Commission of norms and technical specifications makes it possible to evaluate whether the objective has been achieved , i.e. the removal of technical obstacles to trade in the Union .
If the content of the quality marks differs widely from one Member State to another , that could represent a quite substantial obstacle to trade within the EU .
This has become clear from the activities of the Commission services and various Court of Justice judgments .
In the early 1990s , the European legislative authority therefore laid down a legal framework for protected designations of origin , protected geographical indications , specialities guaranteed as traditional and organically farmed products .
This was justified because common measures have proved more effective than individual national measures - if you like because of the European value added .
Proposals on quality indications or certificates of special qualities of products with the exception of traditional specialities were , however , rejected .
At this time the Commission cannot see that anything has changed significantly with regard to the basis for that decision .
The unsatisfactory experience we gained with the European eco-label is further evidence , which is not to say that we will not continue to monitor developments closely .
Let me now turn briefly to the second main proposal , for a new European quality category based on environmental criteria .
As you know , in the case of integrated production we already have a number of Community measures , studies and research programmes , special support under the common organisation of the market , such as that for fruit and vegetables , and the financing of agricultural environmental measures under Regulation 2078 .
All these aspects are in fact to be given further support under Agenda 2000 .
So we should continue thinking at that level and , for example , work out guidelines that take account of the variety of our products , the different farming methods , local conditions and the use of technology .
I am firmly convinced that the further development of integrated agriculture really will benefit the environment and contribute to sustainable land use .
But that is precisely why we first need a clear strategy .
If a comprehensive strategy shows that it would be useful to introduce a European quality mark and we can take joint measures to make it sufficiently consistent , then it might well be appropriate to do so .
At this stage , it still seems a little too soon to take a final position on this question .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Congratulations to Mr Mulder on the adoption of his important report .
Mr President , I have one more question for Mr Fischler before he leaves .
By adopting paragraph 5 , we have now voted that animal products should be included in Regulation 2092 / 91 on organic production methods and that this should now go ahead .
You know that a joint Commission and Parliament proposal on this subject has long been on the table , yet the Council has still not put it on the agenda .
This gives me another opportunity to call on you and Parliament to exert pressure to at least put it on the agenda of the Austrian Presidency , because I know that organic farming plays a very important role in your country , on which I would like to congratulate you .
Mr President , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , ladies and gentlemen , I am quite prepared to put Parliament 's request to the current presidency .
But I can also tell you that the presidency has already said that it intends to consider this question during its current term of office .
Most of the land area of my constituency and many of the people I represent here in Parliament are engaged in the production , processing and marketing of food .
Food for domestic consumption and also for export .
All my constituents are food consumers .
So food safety , quality and hygiene are matters of the utmost importance to us all .
It is very clear that the BSE crisis and findings of the Committee of Inquiry have focused the attention of both producers and consumers .
Producers realise as never before that respect for consumers ' interests and meeting their needs is an absolute prerequisite for success in the marketing of food .
Consumers for their part , rightly demand transparency and openness - good production methods , high standards in animal husbandry and animal welfare .
They also demand more environmentally friendly farming systems which will ensure a sustainable agriculture .
I am fully supportive of the principle of quality marks .
I have , as a producer , participated for many years in the development of such a national quality market .
However , I have some doubt whether an overall EU development mark could be superimposed on existing quality marks without damage to one or the other .
Manufacturers and retailers are using quality markets to reassure their customers - not alone to give them information on production methods and origins , but also as a very important sales and promotion tool .
The concept of an overall EU quality mark would require a tightly controlled monitoring system to ensure that very high standards are maintained across the EU .
It is also important that existing quality markets be identified separately and continue to show a benefit for their huge development costs .
An overall EU quality mark could also be used in the context of WTO to force compliance with EU health standards for imported food products .
The Danish Social Democrats voted for the Mulder report on agricultural products and agri-foodstuffs today .
We did so taking the view that the report is acceptable overall .
We support the introduction of a European quality mark , which takes account of animal welfare and the environment .
However , we think it important to specify what is meant by animal welfare and the environment .
Concrete rules must be laid down , and those countries which do not observe the rules should forfeit the right to use the mark .
Many Member States still view quality as something linked to taste .
We also think that quality is animal welfare and concern for the environment .
It is important to establish transparency for consumers where such a mark is concerned .
Various Member States have developed quality marks for integrated farming products .
To provide the consumer with greater transparency , Mr Mulder is calling for a study to be carried out into whether such marks could be brought under one European quality mark .
We in the Dutch sub-group support this idea and we voted for the Mulder report .
However , there are a few comments we should like to make .
A European logo should not be used to replace existing national , regional and local quality marks , but at most to supplement them .
Every region has its own rural and cultural values and environmental problems , which is why regulations on integrated farming and its quality marks can only partly be harmonised at European level .
A further factor here is that quality marks stand or fall by the confidence that consumers have in them , and existing marks have now developed a reliable image .
It remains to be seen whether consumers will have the same confidence in a European mark .
On the other hand , we can only agree with the idea of a European quality mark if it really does mean something .
The products concerned must have a clear added value compared with other accepted products , not just in terms of intrinsic quality , but also from an ecological point of view .
Otherwise the European quality mark will be nothing more than a cheap marketing ploy .
In short , we support a study into the viability of a European quality mark , but we will reserve final judgement until we see it in practice .
There are two important points here .
Enough scope must still be left for national and regional marks , and the products concerned must have a clear advantage over other accepted products in terms of environmental protection .
Objective 2 : job-creation
The next item is the report ( A4-0213 / 98 ) by Mr Vallvé , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the Commission communication to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions entitled ' New regional programmes 1997-1999 under Objective 2 of the Community structural policies - priority to job-creation ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0524 - C4-0641 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are about to debate this particular aspect of the Objective 2 programme for the years 1997-1999 .
I do wonder whether there is much point in debating this communication , which was presented by the Commission nearly a year ago - on 14 November 1997 , to be precise .
It contains an analysis of the period 1997-1999 , but the document reached us when almost a third of the relevant period had already elapsed .
We are also debating this document at a time when the Committee on Regional Policy has already drafted its five reports on Agenda 2000 which are to be discussed in committee next week .
But I think it is positive that we are taking advantage of this debate to talk about regional policy , as that does not often happen in Parliament , and we should not forget that the European Union devotes 34 % of its budget to regional policy .
I particularly want to thank the Commissioner for being here for this report .
I am not surprised , because her dedication to the work of the Committee on Regional Policy has been constant .
I am not going to use this report on the years 1997-1999 as an opportunity to talk about what could and should be the regional policy of the European Union in the future , in other words , to analyse Agenda 2000 .
I am not going to do that .
That will be the subject of future debates in this House , possibly in the November part-session .
I want to highlight the changes that were made to Objective 2 for the years 1997-1999 , which primarily affect abstract elements , the development of firms - especially SMEs - innovation and product development , training and professional qualifications , and also the measures which need to be adopted for the protection of the environment .
Commissioner , I believe these changes mark a departure from the use of the Structural Funds - and specifically Objective 2 funds - for infrastructure development , operating as a substitute for Objective 1 , in a sense .
Objective 2 relates to the conversion of industrial areas , and the word ' conversion ' is maintained in Agenda 2000 .
This is conversion with a wider scope : the reference to industrial areas will also include rural areas , urban areas and fisheries areas .
Conversion is a fundamental instrument for the promotion and improvement of economic and social cohesion in the European Union .
Clearly the top priority for 1997-1999 is job creation .
It is a fundamental goal in a Europe where - we should never forget - there are 18 million people who cannot find a job .
It is regrettable that there was no coordinated assessment of the measures certain Member States were already taking with social groups likely to be at risk of long-term unemployment in the future .
There are four priority factors : competitiveness , development of research , training and equal opportunities , and environment protection .
These are very important in relation to conversion and the development of competitive regional economic structures .
However , I very much regret that the increase in expenditure has applied basically to research and development , with virtually no increase for the other elements .
The 1997-1999 programmes obviously maintain continuity with those of 1994-1996 .
I must also stress that the new Objective 2 guidelines for the year 1997 - this is one of the advantages of analysing reports retrospectively - have led to full take-up of the available resources .
The principle of additionality and proving its application when programmes are being approved continues to present problems at times .
The conditions need to be defined more clearly .
The cooperation principle needs to be strengthened as well , and the role of the regional authorities and social partners is fundamental here .
I understand the Commissioner has already made plans for the future in this respect .
It is also important to stress that due account must be taken of the nearness of Objective 2 areas to Objective 1 areas .
Finally , I am grateful for the amendments that have been tabled , although I do not want to incorporate those which refer to the Agenda 2000 project .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has drafted a joint opinion on the Vallvé report and the Howitt report , which was discussed last week and refers to the adjustment of the Structural Fund programmes up to the end of 1999 and the new Objective 2 regional programmes for 1997-1999 .
What these reports have in common is a proposal for a medium-term review of the European Union 's structural interventions and , as Mr Vallvé said , we are already halfway through that period .
We share Mr Vallvé 's concern because jobs are actually the main priority in this proposal .
We believe it is necessary to harness the potential of the four sectors he mentioned : SMEs ( over 80 % of jobs in the European Union are in small and medium-sized firms ) ; the environment ( sitting on the Committee on the Environment , I am very well aware of the new sources of employment in very important sectors drawing on the potential of the environment , and it is very important to take that into account ) ; research and development ; and , of course , equal opportunities - once and for all , women must have the same opportunities as men .
We endorse the criticisms about the failure to evaluate the previous period , because that would have improved the conditions for making proposals for the future .
We saw how difficult it was for the environmental authorities and the social partners to participate in each of the previous programming periods , and there has been no real evaluation of the role the new sources of employment have played in spending the Structural Funds to create jobs , especially in regions in industrial decline like my region - I am Asturian .
So we think it is very important that we should take account , in the ongoing reforms which we will continue to debate next week , of the need for across-the-board implementation of the principles of transparency , participation , equal opportunities and sustainable development - only 5.2 % is devoted to sustainable development - and for a balance between policies to preserve and create jobs and economic policies which do not destroy jobs , because sometimes economic policies do harm employment .
We also think the budget for infrastructure should be reduced , because the employment it creates is short term , and there should be more money for new sources of employment , because they create longer term jobs .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group I wish to express our very strong support for this current programme of measures to combat unemployment in Europe 's areas of industrial decline .
Support , because job creation and an end to the scourge of unemployment must be the first priority of our Structural Fund programmes ; support , because people living in our coal-mining , textile , steel and defence regions did not ask for the economic shock waves that have taken the heart out of their communities and no one can ask them to rebuild their economies without public support ; and support , because this ECU 9bn of expenditure - more than £ 7m - represents the people 's priorities on how European money should be spent .
In congratulating Mr Vallvé on his report , I note there are many areas of agreement with my own parallel report on guidelines for Objective 1 and 5b areas over the same period .
We agree on the need to ensure stricter adherence to equal opportunities and environmental objectives in all of the programmes .
Five per cent for the environment : that means that 95 % of the money could be harming our natural resources , and that is not good enough .
We agree on the need to support the guidelines process to ensure common themes underlie the programmes in each of our countries , and the need for a full consultation on those guidelines by the European Commission .
I hope the Commissioner will take the opportunity this morning to guarantee to us that the new sets of guidelines will be ready by 31 December .
We agree that the delayed agreement of the programmes in the first period - 12 % of the money being carried over - causes unacceptable damage in the regions and localities which wait too long and then are forced to spend too quickly .
On behalf of my own country , we appreciate that the United Kingdom is the biggest beneficiary of this programme : some ECU 2.7bn - over £ 2bn .
More than 150 000 small and medium-sized companies in Britain are being helped today thanks to that money .
With some 14 % of all public investment in metropolitan France represented in this programme , it demonstrates , beyond doubt , the value of the safety net , which we argued for in the next programming period , to avoid a sudden disappearance of this very significant level of support .
I thank the Commission for accepting what we had to say .
The Socialists will support the vast majority of amendments before the House today .
In particular , we support the conclusions of our colleagues from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs that more money must be allocated to new sources of employment , including the cooperative sector , environmental projects and local development initiatives .
We agree with them that the complete lack of evaluation of the number of disabled beneficiaries is a marked failure to achieve the mainstreaming , which the Commission so often talks about .
Let me explain where we must disagree .
Firstly , we cannot support specific amendments which single out maritime fisheries or urban areas for special priority , whatever our personal sympathies , because this represents a balanced package in which no one special interest can be advocated above any other .
Secondly , we cannot support proposals for the split in funding or criteria in relation to the new Structural Fund regulation .
That debate is being held in committee , and it would be premature to resolve those issues today .
Thirdly , we will not single out the Commission for specific criticism over underspending or for its failure to address the horizontal objectives sufficiently .
We share the concerns , but we prefer to work together with the Commissioner to constructively tackle the causes of these problems in the future .
Finally , in our resolution of 14 February 1996 we stated our demands for this programme to the Commissioner .
I am delighted that those were largely agreed .
14 February is Valentine 's Day - a day for sharing messages between lovers .
With the greatest respect to Mrs Wulf-Mathies , even if we cannot guarantee such a close relationship today between Parliament and the Commission , we thank her and congratulate her on the very important work being achieved in this programme .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , like Mr Vallvé , the rapporteur , I welcome in principle the definition of guidelines to establish the Commission 's priorities .
They are designed to ensure a balance between economic policy , creating and preserving jobs and the other specific Union policies .
These have already been mentioned : competitiveness , support of SMEs , environment and sustainable development , together with innovation and equal opportunities .
The Objective 2 measures remain extremely important to creating and preserving jobs .
I welcome the emerging evidence of the broader continuity of the various new programmes with the previous programming period .
But one point of criticism I must make is that the quality of the programmes still does not always meet expectations , and the findings of the mid-term reviews are not turned to account early enough for planning future assistance .
The principle of additionality and its evaluation still cause problems because the necessary documents are not always forwarded .
We welcome the introduction of conditional clauses for the second payment .
However , the new provisions on assessments need to be made much simpler .
We support the Commission 's intention to give the Member States more room for manoeuvre in future by combining national and Community criteria .
We do not really think the rapporteur is justified in his fear that the Member States might abuse this room for manoeuvre .
In my view , the Commission 's subsidiarity-based approach is a step in the right direction .
Mr President , Commissioner , the four areas , small and medium-sized enterprises , the environment and sustainable development , equal opportunities for women and men and promotion of research and development , are good priorities for the creation of new jobs .
I wish to draw special attention to the environment , with new environmental products and new environmental systems , as an area for development . Good technical solutions and environmental technology will be needed throughout the world in the future .
We must of course exploit that and make sure that we are well ahead in this area .
There is a downside , however .
Appropriations must be used more effectively .
There must not be empty chairs and money for projects remaining unused for several months or for half a year .
Evaluation must be improved through correct environmental impact assessments and equality assessments in all programmes , so that the main rules that have been laid down on equal opportunities , the environment and sustainable development are actually adhered to .
I especially welcome the inclusion of coastal , island and archipelago regions in the new Objective 2 areas , i.e. the old Objective 5b areas .
I for my part will support Amendment No 4 , which covers increased national influence .
Mr President , the European Union has almost 20 million unemployed , and this is an extremely worrying situation .
That being the case , the issue of employment represents a major challenge .
The results of the fourth phase of the Objective 2 programme , whose priority is job creation , are relatively pleasing .
But there is still a great deal to be done .
We can make a certain number of conclusions from the report .
However , let us go beyond this partial assessment and examine the Commission proposals under the future Objective 2 .
There is a risk , in our opinion , that the performance reserve might damage the effects of extending the programmes to ensure their necessary continuation .
We are also sceptical as regards the fixing of indicative percentage figures relating to the allocation of the volume of the programmes ' interventions between the different priorities , and as regards the extreme diversity of this objective , which might damage its coherence and effectiveness .
Finally , it is absolutely necessary to continue to grant a substantial amount of aid to regions in industrial decline in order to allow them to continue to develop , as the majority of them have already started to do . This development could be strongly compromised by a reduction in aid .
In conclusion , we must be able to put the lessons drawn from the current Objective 2 to good effect in order to obtain the best possible results from the interventions of the future new objective for employment .
Thank you , Mr Donnay .
Ladies and gentlemen , I will now ask Mr Manuel Escolá Hernando to speak on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance .
Mr Escolá Hernando is speaking for the first time in this House .
I would like to welcome him , and I speak from my personal knowledge of him and his career when I say that I believe he will make a very positive contribution to our work together in Parliament and to the progress of the European Union .
Mr President , as you said , this is my first speech before Parliament , and on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance I would like to express our support for this report .
We would especially like to underline the point made in paragraph 18 of the report , which we entirely agree with , about the Commission 's proposals for the new Objective 2 .
The point is concerned about the very significant increase in Member States ' discretionary power which might be introduced if the proposal goes ahead to have a combination of Community and national criteria for selecting regions theoretically eligible to receive aid under the new Objective 2 .
Ladies and gentlemen , some might interpret this formula as an abdication of responsibility by the Commission to the internal political interests of each Member State .
It might even suggest a certain renationalisation of the structural policies , and that could not only distort the results the Commission is looking for with the creation of the new Objective 2 , but could even undermine its fundamental aim , which is to support declining regions with structural difficulties .
It could mean that areas suitable for Objective 2 selection are excluded , while others which are not so suitable are included to serve the internal political interests of Member States .
In view of this , we think it is vital for the future of Objective 2 for the Commission to make the selection criteria more objective .
Mr President , the Objective 2 Structural Funds deserve very special consideration . They are extremely important , but very difficult to apply correctly .
As industrial areas in decline are involved , extreme care must be taken to ensure that the industries concerned have prospects and , more specifically , to ensure that each individual company is viable .
If so , they must be given the direct support they need , correctly applying the ' ageing industries ' argument .
If this is not the case , or if the industries or companies are not competitive in the medium or long term , it is in the interests of all , and of course in the interests of the workers , to find valid alternatives in a competitive world where a return to closed borders is neither likely nor desirable .
As Objective 2 now also covers urban renewal , this needs to be kept very much in mind , although it is not something which can be attained unless there are clear and balanced national promotion policies .
If , as happens in my own country , we persist with policies of polarisation or , at best , bi-polarisation , concentrating all our efforts to improve quality and introduce dynamism on only one or two towns , there will still be population movements and there will still be sensitive social problems of exclusion and insecurity .
It will be like trying to hold back the waves , and all the national and European Union funding directed at it will be inadequate .
Comparative experience in Europe is very clear : countries with a balanced urban network do not have problems like this ; they are able to keep people in their region of origin , thus achieving a better use of resources .
We cannot simply go on forever dealing with the social problems suffered by people who are not to blame for misguided policies . We must keep making progress towards fundamental solutions which will benefit all of us .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , structural policy always implies labour market policy too .
There is a cycle to life in the regions .
People simply tend to live where the jobs are .
But they prefer to work in regions that offer not just jobs but also an intact environment , which means a well-kept and healthy natural environment , a good infrastructure and rapid transport connections between work and home .
The ideal job also requires a good cultural environment .
There must be schools and educational and further training facilities , together with a range of cultural activities to be pursued in leisure time .
If one of these cogs in the life cycle disappears , imbalances will appear and whole regions bleed to death .
People do not live in places where there is no work and , conversely , there is no work in places where no people live .
This is the situation that structural policy must address ; we must look at all the surrounding factors and not just at jobs in isolation .
When we look at roadworks , we tend to see large machinery with very few workers actually in evidence , but that road may be a lifeline for the region .
The evaluation of the individual programmes has shown that where EU funding goes , additional cofinancing also goes , but in particular private sector money .
For every million ECU of EU cofinancing , the Member States contribute another two million and 20 % of total resources come from the private sector .
So this creates quite a strong centrifugal force .
We must take a long-term approach , and I agree with the rapporteur , Mr Vallvé , that three years is too short a period .
We must take a broad view of the whole question , so that the people of Europe can lead a life worth living .
Mr President , Commissioner , while there is almost a year before the period of the programme we are referring to lapses , in essence we cannot do anything other than to draw conclusions and lessons for the new programme period .
It is therefore important - and this is my first comment - that according to the Commission 's estimates , for the period we are talking about 880 000 jobs are being created in the Objective 2 areas .
The number could have been even larger , but clearly it could also have been smaller .
And consequently I express myself well content with the fact that we have concentrated on four priorities , namely competitiveness , environmental protection , equality of the sexes and innovation , which I regard as very important .
At the same time , however , there are problems , which other speakers have mentioned , relating to the quality of the programmes and to the forecasting of job creation , and it would be desirable to deal with them .
Now , as for the new programme period , we as the European People 's Party , I must tell you - although you know it already - have many doubts about the Commission 's effort to deal with the new Objective 2 and at the same time with the difficulties of industrial and rural areas which are facing problems of conversion .
Beyond that , however , we think it necessary , if nothing else , for there to be some guarantee that we will have a coverage of 10 % - I mean in population terms - at European level for industrial areas and 5 % for rural areas within the regulation .
We are also in favour of the Commission 's proposal to have both national and at the same time Community criteria for the selection of those areas .
This is made necessary by the principle of subsidiarity .
And we also favour the Commission 's proposal for a safety net , in other words a maximum reduction of the order of 33 % for regions covered at present by Objectives 2 and 5B .
Thank you , Mrs Wulf-Mathies .
The debate is closed .
Before we proceed to the vote , Mr Kellett-Bowman has a point of order .
Mr President , on a point of order , I notice that the Europe des Nations Group has asked for six roll-call votes in this vote with all the implications of time and resources .
They have just left one Member behind to make sure we do .
Mr Kellett-Bowman , the request for a roll-call vote was properly made .
The Chair can only apply the Rules .
I do not have the power to do anything else , but your comments will be noted in the Minutes .
Mr President , I should merely like to answer Mr Kellett-Bowman in one sentence .
When we see the debate and the votes , we are happy that we requested roll-call votes .
One of the amendments has been accepted , others have been rejected by just a few votes , and we think that we were right to put forward this request .
Thank you very much , Mr Berthu .
The Chair has already stated that the proposal was made in accordance with the Rules , so there are no grounds for changing anything .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
I voted in favour of Amendment No 4 , because I wish to see greater flexibility , especially in the matter of state aid .
Mr Vallvé 's report is presented as a diptych .
Its first section attempts to evaluate Objective 2 in the 60 eligible regions for the 1989-1993 period .
The rapporteur is fair in noting that we are totally in the dark here : the data is ' rarely available ' and the performance indicators ' are not standardised ' .
Simple rigour should therefore have led the rapporteur to distance himself from the fanciful overall assessments that the Commission has produced with regard to the number of jobs created or preserved due to the existence of the Objective 2 programmes .
Mr Vallvé does indeed recognise that ' these figures are to be taken with caution due to missing or incomparable data , their estimative character and the missing link to targets ...
Targeting was still exceptional in these programmes , an assessment of the degree to which the programmes were successful ' , the rapporteur adds , ' thus proved difficult ' .
However , he finally accepts an overall figure - obviously carefully worked out for propaganda purposes since the statistics have no relevant meaning - , of 450 000 to 500 000 net jobs attributable to the Objective 2 programmes .
The reality is that no-one is in a position to assess the real impact of these Structural Funds , which are very significant in terms of employment .
We had tabled an amendment taking up exactly the same reservations as the rapporteur himself expressed in his explanatory statement , which strangely were not then followed up on by their author .
The second section of Mr Vallvé 's report relates to the future prospects of the new Objective 2 .
The rapporteur examines the heterogeneous nature of the new objective and seems to make a euphemism when he questions ' the Commission 's optimism on being able to assure coherence in such a diverse objective ' .
He also fears that the population ceiling established by the Commission will lead to inappropriate criteria for defining theoretically eligible regions .
I am sorry that the rapporteur totally ignores the importance of the maritime coastal areas of the EUROPEAN UNION Member States , which are , however , one of the major characteristics of the countries in the west of our continent .
The risk of a population drain is , in fact , real in a large number of areas , particularly those whose peripheral disadvantage is going to continue to deteriorate .
Summer tourism would not alone be able to permanently maintain life along our coastlines .
A purely regional logic , introducing significant differences in the system from one coastal sector to another , could be extremely disruptive .
Therefore , the Member States must be allowed , in general , the necessary flexibility to enable them to promote balanced planning of their territory and to face the risk of a progressive population drain in certain regions .
With this end in view , the distribution put forward in terms of geographical coverage of 10 % , 5 % , 2 % and 1 % respectively could not be interpreted strictly .
Our group has tabled several amendments in this direction .
This flexibility is particularly important in the areas dependent on fisheries , where it is essential to be able to continue to compensate for the various constraints imposed on fishermen through a carefully targeted intervention of structural aid . This is a necessary condition for the effectiveness and continuity of a fair common fisheries policy .
If not , it is no longer even worth the trouble of still talking about a CFP : it will represent nothing more than an empty shell .
It is interesting , finally , to note the oh so careful reservations of the liberal rapporteur that Mr Vallvé represents in relation to the link between employment and public subsidies .
It is a paradox that he has not thought to point out that the best way of safeguarding or creating jobs was , for the Member States , to reduce their taxation and alleviate the administrative constraints they impose on companies and , for the European Union , to better promote fair trade .
For all these reasons , our group has not been able to give its support to this report .
ARIANE - KALEIDOSCOPE
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :

A4-0355 / 98 by Mr Pex , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision amending Decision No 2085 / 97 / EC establishing a support programme , including translation , in the field of books and reading ( ARIANE Programme ) ( COM ( 98 ) 0539 - C4-0544 / 98-98 / 0282 ( COD ) ) ; -A4-0356 / 98 by Mr Pex , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision amending Decision No 719 / 96 / EC establishing a programme to support artistic and cultural activities having a European dimension ( KALEIDOSCOPE Programme ) ( COM ( 98 ) 0539 - C4-0545 / 98-98 / 0283 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I am pleased to have the opportunity today to talk about the Ariane and Kaleidoscope cultural programmes in 1999 .
Ariane is a programme of Community support , including translation , in the field of books and reading and was introduced for the period 1 January 1997 to 31 December 1998 .
Over those two budget years , the European Union has provided support for the translation of some 300 literary works , the dissemination of literature by around 80 minority language authors translated into Europe 's main languages , the realisation of 60 cooperation projects involving libraries , cultural associations and so on , and training for around 900 literary translators .
In short , Ariane has worked very well and deserves to continue .
The second cultural programme , Kaleidoscope , provides Community support for artistic and cultural activities with a European dimension and was set up for the period 1 January 1996 to 31 December 1998 .
Over this period , Kaleidoscope provided support for 420 cultural projects whose development and execution involved some 1500 cultural institutions from the 15 Member States , the European Free Trade Association and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
The programme has also contributed to the activities of 50 000 creative or performing artists and other specialists in the cultural sector .
It helped 20 000 young people to have access to artistic and cultural activities , it sent 10 000 plays and exhibitions on tour , it paid for 600 traineeships and many other activities .
In short , it made a significant contribution to the development and maintenance of artistic and cultural activities in the Union .
It would therefore be a great pity if Ariane and Kaleidoscope were to finish on 1 January 1999 , only for another programme to begin a year later on 1 January 2000 .
The Commission 's answer here , having caused the problem in the first place , was to launch pilot projects for 1999 to bridge the gap , but it came to nothing because the European Court of Justice ruled that there was no legal basis for such pilot projects .

However , a miracle occurred on the weekend of 12 and 13 September in Linz , when Commissioner Oreja and Austria 's Secretary of State for Culture , Mr Wittman , succeeded in persuading the Culture Ministers that it was essential to continue the current programmes .
The budget for 1999 was adapted in record time with the help of all the members of Parliament 's Committees on Culture and Budgets , and a proposal to create a legal basis was considered .
The decisions were adopted unanimously .
However , for technical reasons which I very much regret , the Commission proposal contains smaller budgets than those agreed in the interinstitutional agreement .
The decision was to continue on the basis of the 1998 budgets , and this is why today 's proposals contain an amendment to increase the budgets to 1998 levels .
Parliament is having to do the Commission 's homework for it , and we are glad to do so .
For the sake of form , I will give you the figures : ECU 4.1 million for Ariane and ECU 10.2 million for Kaleidoscope .
The decision will , I hope , be taken shortly to extend these two cultural programmes next year .
In the year 2000 we hope to start a new combination of the programmes , perhaps with a new structure : the first framework programme for culture 2000-2004 .
It is now up to the Council .
The unanimous decision taken by the Culture Ministers will have to be reconfirmed , and unfortunately the Council must decide unanimously .
At the last Coreper meeting , people clearly did not know about the Culture Ministers ' decision , because there were some Member States that were still raising objections .
I would therefore urge the Council and all the Member States to adopt this decision before the first budget reading in Parliament , so that the actual amounts , currently listed as ' pm ' entries , can be included .
Mr President , I just wanted to add a few words to what Mr Pex said .
It is of the utmost importance that we finally convince the governments that after completing the preparations for the euro we are entering a new phase of European development , in which real priority will be given not just to the economy but also to culture .
This does not seem to be fully understood yet in the higher echelons , hence all these delays , these difficulties that continue to hamper the cultural programmes .
I thank Mr Pex very much for insisting that at least after the millennium we must at last have cultural programmes that preserve the great diversity of European culture .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you know that with its proposals to extend Kaleidoscope and Ariane the Commission is seeking to ensure the continuity of Community cultural activities for the year 1999 .
The aim is to bridge the gap in time until the first European Community cultural framework programme for 2000 to 2004 is adopted .
Initially , the Commission had planned preparatory measures in the coming year as a transition between the first generation of Kaleidoscope and Ariane and the new framework programme scheduled for the year 2000 . These measures were to be geared even then to the main points of the new framework programme .
But after the Court of Justice decided in its judgment of 12 May that all Community expenditure requires a legal basis , the Commission preferred to abandon the planned measures , extend the duration of the two programmes and thereby at least ensure continuity .
One major concern here was not to jeopardise the success of the cultural cooperation to date , which has taken the form of the partnerships and networks on cultural matters to which , I am pleased to note , the rapporteur also referred .
At the informal trilogue on 21 September , the three institutions agreed to extend the duration of Kaleidoscope and Ariane for 1999 , under the same conditions and with the same allocations of funds as in 1998 .
Since the Commission proposals are based on a lower amount , to ensure consistency with the 1999 preliminary draft budget , the proposals now need to be amended in the framework of the legislative and budgetary procedure ; you will be taking your decision on that shortly .
I can only endorse the request by Mr Pex and Mr von Habsbur