Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 24 October 2002 .
On 31 October 2002 , a violent earthquake hit the region of Molise in Italy which resulted in the destruction of some villages and claimed the lives of a number of people .
In particular the small town of San Giuliano di Puglia was destroyed and a school collapsed killing 29 people , 26 of whom were children .
The entire primary class of children born in 1996 was killed under the rubble of that disaster .
Many of the families are now left homeless with winter approaching .
All natural disasters and tragic events provoke in us a response of sympathy and kindred feeling for those who have suffered .
On this occasion , however , throughout Europe and further afield , people were deeply touched at the tragic loss of the lives of so many young children .
On behalf of the European Parliament I have expressed our sympathy and condolences to the Mayor of San Giuliano di Puglia , to the President of the region of Molise and to the families of the victims .
I invite you now to observe a minute 's silence in their memory .
( The House rose and observed one minute 's silence )
I also regret to inform the House that this morning a Luxair plane flying from Berlin to Luxembourg crashed in Niederanven on its approach to Luxembourg Airport , carrying 19 passengers and three crew .
The initial reports suggest that as many as 17 people have died in this tragic accident .
Earlier this morning in France , a train en route from Paris to Vienna caught fire near Nancy . Twelve people lost their lives in this tragic accident .
I would like to inform you that on my own behalf and in the name of the European Parliament , I have expressed to the Luxembourg and French authorities our solidarity with and deepest sympathy for the families of all those involved in these tragic accidents .
I would also like to inform the House that I have written a letter to the President of the Duma expressing our condemnation of the act of terrorism in the Doubrovka Theatre in Moscow where over 700 people were held hostage .
I expressed our deep regret at the subsequent loss of life .
Pursuant to Rule 111a I have received a request from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance for the inclusion on the agenda of an extraordinary debate on the seizure of hostages in Moscow and its tragic ending , and on the war in Chechnya .
Mr Solana will be making a contribution and will include a report on the EU-Russia Summit .
This matter could be dealt with under this heading .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I should like to say that we agree with Mr Cohn-Bendit that this topic is of key importance .
However , our group does see the need for a thorough and somewhat more systematically-prepared debate to be held during the second November part-session , when we will be discussing relations between Europe and Russia .
There is obviously , though , no objection at all to the dreadful events in Moscow being specifically mentioned in items 22 and 23 of the resolution on the results of the European Council and to the topic also being raised during the debate with Mr Solana .
However , we consider it necessary for this topic to be discussed in a more structured way during the second November part-session , but as I said before , we have no objections at all to this point also being discussed in the debate on the results of the European Council and in this afternoon 's debate with Mr Solana .

Mr President , on a point of order : I was somewhat astonished , at 1 p.m. this lunchtime , to learn of the existence of this application by the Greens .
We are a democratic group , in which decisions are never taken by the chairman acting alone .
I immediately sent an e-mail to the bureau and to the two co-ordinators , Philippe Morillon and Arie Oostlander , to the effect that we would support this application by the Greens subject to no objection being expressed to me .
My dear Mr Cohn-Bendit , I would , however , ask you to ensure that , in future , our groups have the time to discuss such an issue in a democratic manner .
In the absence of any objection from the bureau and the co-ordinators , our group is in favour of taking this topic and Mr Solana 's statement together .
We are agreed therefore that we do not need a vote .
The matter is simply going to be taken as part of the general debate on Mr Solana 's report on foreign policy .
I certainly agree that it was a horrific attack and I will forward your request to the President .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at its meeting today the Commission adopted a series of measures which , within the framework of the Euratom Treaty , are aimed at achieving a Community approach to the management of nuclear waste and nuclear safety .
This package consists of a communication , a proposal for a directive defining the general principles and obligations in relation to the safety of nuclear installations in the European Union and a proposal for a directive on the management of radioactive waste .
The package is supplemented by a draft Council decision authorising the Commission to negotiate an agreement between Euratom and the Russian Federation on the trade in nuclear material .
I will comment on the reasons for , and the timeliness of , the proposal .
Ladies and gentlemen , the broad debate on the Green Paper on the security of the energy supply has highlighted the problem of the security of supply in Europe and the role played by nuclear energy in relation to it and our environmental commitments with regard to greenhouse emissions within the framework of the Kyoto agreements and Protocol .
Furthermore , nuclear energy is currently faced with two challenges , two problems mentioned during this debate : the safety of installations and the treatment of nuclear waste .
Despite the fact that the Euratom Treaty provides for important measures guaranteeing a high level of safety , above all with regard to non-proliferation , that is , the appropriate use of fissile material and radioactive material , the current situation is not as ideal as we would like .
Firstly , I must point out that in the various States of the Union there is no equivalent application of nuclear safety standards .
Secondly , it must be said that , in the negotiations with the candidate countries , we are demanding that the candidate countries comply with certain obligations and behave in a certain way , in the field of nuclear safety , which cannot be compared with anything in the current countries of the Union .
We are therefore faced with a situation in which there are significant disparities within Europe .
To a certain extent we are faced with a surprising situation .
We may , as I have pointed out on other occasions , have complete and detailed legislation on the quality of bathing water in the European Union but , nevertheless , we do not regulate the levels of security required of nuclear installations within the Union .
But furthermore , as I pointed out , in view of enlargement and the concerns of the European citizens , we must act quickly and decisively .
We are creating - and there is no other way of putting it - a situation of asymmetry between the candidate countries and the Member States of the Union .
What is our intention through these proposals ?
Simply , a new Community vision of nuclear security and the treatment of radioactive waste .
The first relates to increasing safety in nuclear power stations and the issue of their dismantling .
We are talking about a proposal for a directive that is not yet approved since its legal basis is Article 31 of the Euratom Treaty and that obliges us to submit this text to a committee of experts , consisting of experts from the different countries of the Union ; it is still awaiting this procedure , and then the proposal will be approved definitively so that it can be communicated to Parliament and the Council .
Now , the proposal we are presenting today has three fundamental axes .
Firstly , it proposes common rules for nuclear safety ; secondly , a Community system for controlling the application of these common rules and thirdly , it guarantees the existence and availability of the funds necessary for the dismantling of nuclear installations .
The common rules are based simply on the rules of the International Atomic Energy Agency , the headquarters of which is in Vienna , but our proposal provides for something completely innovative . That is that these rules , which within the framework of the Atomic Energy Agency are simply recommendations , thanks to the proposal for a directive , when they come to be adopted - as I hope they will - will become Community rules , and will therefore be binding on all the countries of the Union , with the legal force that Community law always has .
But furthermore , they are able to evolve and take up the results of the negotiations held over recent years with the candidate countries , negotiations which have allowed these common rules to be developed , which must be complied with , not only by the candidate countries , but also , in the Commission 's opinion , by all the countries of the European Union without exception .
The second fundamental axis consists of how , once we have these common rules , we will control their effective application .
How can we guarantee to all the citizens that the required standards will be complied with in all the nuclear installations of the European Union ?
Well that is very simple , ladies and gentlemen , there will be two systems .
Firstly , control is required of all countries .
Independent control authorities already exist .
The control of installations will still be a task for the national competent authorities of each and every Member State of the Union .
The innovation is that we are establishing a system of auditing crosschecks , promoted and coordinated by the Commission , which will guarantee the appropriate application of the Community rules within the different Member States of the Union .
But , furthermore , the third element of this proposal for a directive is the definition of Community rules for the creation , management and use of funds for dismantling nuclear power stations , with the aim of guaranteeing that the funds are sufficient and available .
I would insist that we believe it is essential that these funds are available when they become necessary .
We therefore propose a series of elements , but essentially the externalisation of these funds or an equivalent means of guaranteeing their availability to prevent them from , for example , in the event of bankruptcy , being included in the bankrupt assets and therefore not being available for their objective of dismantling the installations when the time comes .
The second directive , ladies and gentlemen , will contribute to the creation of new habits in the management of irradiated fuel and radioactive waste in the Member States of the Union .
We are not just talking about highly radioactive waste , about waste from reactors , from nuclear power stations or from reactors used in research , but also about radioactive waste from other types of application such as medical or industrial applications , low intensity waste .
Firstly , we propose a timetable with limit dates so that all the countries of the Union will have appropriate installations prepared and available for the underground storage of high activity waste , because that is currently the safest technology for the storage of that waste .
In the case of waste of a lesser intensity , there are other types of storage , but in those cases we also propose the availability and establishment of appropriate locations .
In this regard I would like to congratulate , for example , Finland on having already taken decisions with specific and very immediate dates and timetables , which seems to me to be extremely important .
I congratulate Finland on the speed of its action .
But unfortunately other countries are not in such an advanced situation and we therefore propose a limit date .
We are establishing the possibility that the underground storage of this radioactive waste can be carried out in a manner which involves cooperation between different Member States of the Union .
We are therefore confronting this thorny problem once and for all .
Secondly , we believe that this solution , while it is the most suitable today , cannot be considered sufficiently satisfactory and , in this regard , we propose that it is necessary to continue research into the treatment of radioactive waste in order to reduce or possibly even eliminate the existence of this waste .
The final proposal , Mr President , is a draft Council decision allowing the Commission to negotiate an agreement with Russia relating to the trade in nuclear material .
This trade has created friction with Russia for some time , for various reasons .
Enlargement will mean the incorporation of five new States , with twenty-two reactors , in some cases with early closure scheduled ; but , in any event , for some time , these reactors will present us with a problem because the current restrictions , in accordance with the Corfu Agreement , will prevent the supply of fuel for these reactors .
In order to deal with this problem we therefore have to negotiate with Russia .
All of this must take account of the protection of the European Union companies that carry out enrichment , the protection of consumers , but also the new difficulties the situation may present from the Russian point of view .
Furthermore , this may open up the possibility for us - and let us hope this is the case - to be able to demand and promote the speedy closure of the oldest nuclear reactors in Russia , some of which may clearly at some point cause problems and which are very close to us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in conclusion , this package of proposals as a whole is aimed at increasing levels of safety in nuclear power stations and installations within the European Union , which now has fifteen Members , but which will later have twenty-five .
Increasing the availability of funds in order to guarantee that when the time comes the dismantling necessary to return sites to their original state can be carried out , in other words , so that those places where there are currently nuclear installations may be totally decontaminated , free of all risk .
We must increase transparency so that the citizens know that , within the European Union , there are a series of rules and levels of security that are guaranteed .
And we must confront a thorny problem , the problem of waste , above all high activity waste , but also other waste originating from medical or industrial applications .
We must also try to make progress on resolving the issues , difficulties and differences we have with Russia , but which also affect the future Member States of the Union .
Thank you Commissioner .
We have many requests from the floor .
May I remind colleagues that short , sharp questions are better .
Mr President , the Commissioner is to be warmly congratulated on the courage with which she has tackled this very difficult problem .
I would like to make two points .
First of all , for some of the accession countries , the question of financial provision is a very difficult one .
Lithuania and Slovakia were specifically mentioned by the Council last week .
Could the Commissioner tell us how that issue is going to be tackled ?
Secondly , about a year ago I took the initiative to invite Mr Lacoste , the chairman of the Nuclear Regulators ' Association , to come to the Industry Committee .
I have kept in touch with him since and we have discussed the possibility of him coming to the Parliament to give an annual report on what is happening .
Could you foresee the inclusion of such a provision in your proposals ?
Thank you , Mr President .
For decommissioning of the plant , the Swedish model could perhaps be adopted , in which at the moment the money - SEK 0.02 per kilowatt-hour sold , roughly 0.3 of a euro cent - is sent to the Swedish national bank , where it is kept safe no matter what may happen to the enterprises and is ready to be used for decommissioning .
With regard to radioactive waste , I would like to mention a specifically Danish problem .
We have no nuclear reactors of our own , but we do have waste - 200-300 kg of highly radioactive waste - from the time when we thought we were going to make fuel elements .
If we must dump it in Denmark , as the current rules state , it will cost a very , very great deal . If , on the other hand , Denmark were allowed - under new rules , as indicated by the Commissioner , particularly on cooperation between different countries - to add its 200 kg or so of radioactive waste to the many tonnes of highly radioactive waste from the big countries , I doubt that anyone would object to its doing so .
This would be advantageous overall to the economy of the EU , although naturally it would be subject to the recipient country in question being happy to receive it .
That is not an option available to us at present , since each country is obliged to take back its own highly radioactive waste . This makes no sense in the case of small countries , which have only a small amount of medical and other waste .
Mr President , it is good to speak about these energy issues and go into them in some detail , and good too that we should now include everyone in the same framework for safety standards .
We must , however , keep a cool head .
When legislation is being drafted everything must be based on scientific and technical facts , and not political passions .
The International Atomic Energy Agency is an expert organisation whose level of competence is trusted globally , and it is important that its expert opinion is heard in these connections as well .
I hope that the Commission will not now create another super-regulator to function alongside the IAEA in the monitoring of these matters , because the IAEA is very important worldwide .
It is , however , important that standards of safety attained at Union level are so high that we can also demand the same from the applicant countries .
I should nevertheless like to ask the Commission how it intends to take account of national regulators in preparing this package of directives .
Energy issues are decided nationally - and that is the way it should be - and the role of national regulators will also be vitally important in the future .
Mr President , there are already some doubts about the viability of the nuclear industry in a liberalised energy market , as witnessed by the problems of British Energy in the United Kingdom .
I would like to seek assurances from you today , Commissioner , that in no shape or form can this package be used as a bail-out for the nuclear industry in a way which would prejudice other energy sources and give unfair preference to the nuclear industry in the European energy single market .
The coverage of the very considerable costs of waste disposal , for instance , should not simply be lifted from the accounting books of companies producing nuclear energy .
In your statement you said you would now make sure that under no circumstances could decommissioning funds be redirected as cross-subsidies for the commercial operations of nuclear companies .
Could you confirm that there will be no exceptions whatsoever to that and that under no circumstances can decommissioning funds be used for commercial purposes ?
Mr President , the Commissioner is working under the constraints of the undemocratic and anachronistic Euratom Treaty .
Despite this , would you , Commissioner , accept the need for the European Parliament to give an opinion on the two directives and communication which you are presenting to us , particularly on whether or not the case for deep-level storage of highly radioactive waste has been proved ?
This is contrary to the views of the British Royal Society , which finds that the scientific case has not been made .
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the outcome of the European Council of 24 and 25 October 2002 in Brussels .
I should like to place on the record my personal gratitude to Prime Minister Rasmussen for the level of engagement which he has shown with the European Parliament .
He set a headline which I hope future presidencies will follow by meeting with the Conference of Presidents prior to the launch of the Danish Presidency .
Before the summit meeting in Copenhagen he will again meet with the Conference of Presidents .
Exceptionally , at our part-session in Strasbourg on 19 November 2002 he will contribute to our debate on enlargement in the presence of observer MPs from accession states .
This is of course in addition to the normal kind of dialogue for which the Prime Minister is here .
I wish to express my personal gratitude to him on behalf of the European Parliament .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to start by associating myself with the expressions of gratitude to the Presidency and to Parliament .
The pressure exerted by the three institutions together has made the breakthrough in negotiations possible and enabled us to have a solid expectation that this project , the greatest in our time within the European Union , can , as planned , be brought to completion in Copenhagen in December .
The post-Brussels political momentum has become even stronger than it was already , and if this Council made anything really visible , it was the shared desire to make a success of this project of uniting Europe , which is becoming ever stronger .
I would now like , briefly , to give you some information on how things have progressed .
The President of the Council has already observed that we wasted no time , and that it was as early as Monday last week that we communicated the results to the candidate countries , starting the very next day on a further round of negotiations , which has , in the meantime , been concluded .
The object of this round of negotiations was to establish which positions on the part of the candidate countries remain unresolved .
We now have a complete overview of everything and of every single item remaining to be sorted out in the negotiations , and here I have both bad news and good news .
Let me start with the bad news , which is that there is a great deal more left on the table than we could or should have expected .
The good news is that none of it is incapable of being sorted out in the timeframe envisaged , so that it seems realistic in terms of the timetable to conclude a second round of negotiations by the time of the General Affairs Council on 18 November , thus getting a very large number of the still unresolved issues out of the way .
This is then to be rounded off by a final round , leading to the accession conferences immediately prior to the General Affairs Council in Copenhagen .
Let me conclude with one political observation - one that is of great importance to me .
In the few weeks remaining to us , it will be of the utmost necessity that negotiations be conducted in an extraordinarily political way .
No longer can we negotiate as we used to - in a very technical way , often with a very large number of questions going backwards and forwards , but now the setting of clear political priorities and the taking of political decisions really are the order of the day .
I have to say with some emphasis , that , in past negotiations , we expected a great deal of the candidate countries , and the European Union 's positions were not always founded on in-depth understanding of the candidates ' problems ; rather , they were very often motivated by our own needs .
I would simply like to remind you that it is not only public opinion in the Member States that has to be taken into account in wrapping up the package for the final negotiations ; we also have to bear in mind the fact that the governments and parliaments in the candidate countries have to convince public opinion on their side that joining the European Union is a good thing .
Let me also point out that the results of the process of transformation that we have already seen in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe have varied to a wide degree .
In the countries in transition , people enjoy freedoms that were hitherto unknown to them ; they enjoy democracy and human rights .
We should not , though , overlook the fact that it is , as a whole , we who have benefited from the economic advantages and the advantages of stability that these transformations have brought into being .
It is we who , to date , have benefited most from the transformation of these countries into market economies , a transformation that involved , and continues to involve , serious social hardship for these people .
Now is the time to send out a clear and unmistakeable signal that we honour the enormous achievements that have come about over the last ten years in societies over there , and to do this by forcing ourselves to adopt a certain generosity as the negotiations move into their final stage .
This is not about interfering with this or that fundamental principle of Community policy or of the Community method .
Nothing in what the future Member States seek is fundamental from our point of view , but it can be fundamental to them and to their ability to win the support they need , and so I very much hope that we will all - by which I mean the Council , the Commission , and Parliament - summon up the flexibility that will be needed if the project is to be a success , not only for politicians like us , but most especially for those who really matter - the people in the present and future Member States .

Mr President , we acknowledge - and thank - Prime Minister Ramussen for his endeavours to inject some ideology into the Brussels European Council , to make its scope wider than the dry , tedious debate on the funds we will need between now and 2006 , but , as we know , the discussions held and decisions taken at Brussels revolved around the financial winners and losers , and this , along with the matter of how to avoid penalising countries without losing face , was the focus of the work in Brussels rather than the question of how to establish solidarity within a robust , stable institutional framework .

In this fairly uninspiring context , we do , in any case , welcome the fact that the decisions taken at Brussels will allow the Union to present its negotiating position to the candidate countries on time .
However , we cannot hide the fact that the agreements on the common agricultural policy are essentially yet another way of putting off difficult decisions until a later date .
We can only criticise the Council for not linking the decision on direct payments to a further reform of the CAP and not seeking agreement on the principle of making these payments conditional upon environmental and social requirements , running the risk of perpetuating all those dysfunctional elements and imbalances which make the CAP the most absurd , costly European policy in existence today , harming precisely those small producers of quality produce that we want to reward .
Moreover , we cannot hide the fact that the candidate countries are not wholly satisfied with the agreements reached in Brussels .
Indeed , although it is true that , on paper , the Union has undertaken to offset the new countries ' obligation to contribute 100 % to the Community budget as of day one with compensatory payments and Structural Funds appropriations , it is also true that there is no guarantee that these countries will be able to absorb these resources for high-quality projects quickly , or at least not as quickly and directly as they will have to pay out the money to the Union 's budget .
We would have preferred gradual phasing-in of these countries ' contributions to the Community budget , as was the case for Spain and Portugal .
Quite frankly , the impression is that the new countries will have to fund the United Kingdom 's common agricultural policy abatement and that it was only decided at the last moment not to make them contribute to Spain 's Structural Funds too .
As regards the Copenhagen Summit , the Union still has to prove itself .
As Prime Minister Rasmussen rightly said , enlargement is not yet completely in the bag .
One further comment , Mr President , on the question of Chechnya .
We wanted the European Council , in addition to making a few general , salient points on terrorism , to come down clearly in favour of a negotiated end to the Chechen conflict , which is marked by the ongoing violence of the Russian troops , and to condemn the contempt for the hostages ' lives and the KGB methods used by the Russian Government to respond to the attack on the Moscow theatre .
We are extremely concerned at the arrest of Akhmed Zakayev in Copenhagen and the laws restricting the freedom of speech recently adopted by the Duma .
We hope that the forthcoming EU-Russia Summit on 11 November will focus on these issues .
Mr President , over the last month , serious momentum has been building up with regard to the process of EU enlargement and the fulfilment of our political vision in this respect .
In fact , a trinity of events has taken place which has guaranteed that the pace of EU enlargement has accelerated and is now an unstoppable process .
Firstly , on 9 October 2002 , the Commission concluded that 10 candidate countries were in a position to accede to the European Union .
Secondly , on 19 October 2002 , the Irish people approved the provisions of the Treaty of Nice , which ensure that EU enlargement can take place within an agreed timeframe .
Thirdly , the EU leaders in Brussels on 24 October 2002 endorsed the findings of the European Commission that 10 countries fulfil the necessary political and economic criteria to assume membership of the EU by 2004 .
I welcome the Brussels Summit decision to allow the European Union to present negotiating positions to the candidate countries on all outstanding issues by early November .
This will ensure that enlargement negotiations can be concluded by the Copenhagen Summit of EU leaders in December 2002 .
A target date of April 2003 has also been set for accession treaties to be signed in Athens under the presidency of the Greek Government .
There are now elements of both legal and political certainty with regard to the enlargement negotiations .
We are shortly going to cross the final hurdles so as to bring about the accession of 10 new Member States to the Union .
The momentum towards EU enlargement is bringing real challenges to the EU institutions in terms of implementing the internal changes as laid down in the Treaty of Nice .
This includes a range of issues including the extension of qualified majority voting at Council level , the re-weighting of votes in the Council , the extension of codecision measures to the European Parliament and the reform of the European Commission .
The future financing of EU enlargement was a centre-stage issue at the Brussels Summit .
It is clear from the Presidency Conclusions that the financial perspective , as laid down in Berlin in 1999 , is going to be respected in its entirety .
The cost of the EU enlargement will be borne from within the budgetary parameters of the Berlin Agreement .
It is also clear that programmes such as the present CAP arrangements for the period 2000-2006 are not going to be affected by the decision of the EU leaders in Brussels .
This is only right and proper because our farmers , their families and rural communities were all given legitimate expectations by the CAP deal of spring 1999 .
They were told how the common agricultural policy was going to operate for a seven year period until 2006 and they were basing their commercial decisions on this framework as laid down in the Berlin Agreement .
As the corollary decision to this decision taken by the EU leaders , the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy will be just that - a review of the CAP rather than a reform .
This may not be music to the ears of the proponents of sweeping CAP reform but that is the reality of the conclusions of the Brussels Summit .
In conclusion , when it comes to addressing the challenges of EU enlargement , certainty , determination and commitment are all words that can be used to sum up the opinions of the vast majority of the people living in Europe as well as those of legislators working on these important issues within the different EU institutions .
Mr President , the Brussels Summit was above all about enlargement of the European Union .
The British Conservative Party has argued strongly and consistently in favour of the enlargement eastwards of the EU since the Berlin Wall fell some 13 years ago .
Indeed , the manifesto on which I and my colleagues were elected in 1999 states quite clearly the reasons why we support this process so enthusiastically .
It stated that enlargement is an historic opportunity to advance the principles for which Europe should stand : free trade , free markets , deregulation and cooperation .
It would also mean more trade , more stability and more prosperity for the existing Member States of the European Union .
Furthermore , the European Union simply cannot ignore the moral duty that it owes to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
At Brussels , significant progress was made towards achieving agreement on the entry of 10 applicant states at the Copenhagen Council in December .
My party warmly welcomes this .
Europe will be a better place as a result of enlargement and I congratulate the Danish Presidency on the skill and the commitment it has displayed in reaching this point .
However , given the fact that we have waited 13 years for this historic moment , I want to reiterate that there must be no foot-dragging , no more delays and no more last-minute vested interests should be allowed to stand in the way .
On no account should we allow budgetary discussions to be derailed by reopening issues that have been long settled , in particular , the continuation of the British budgetary abatement , which was agreed unanimously by heads of government at Berlin in 1999 .
This budgetary abatement is both fair and justified and any attempt to use it as a smokescreen to disguise unwillingness to reform the CAP must be dismissed as political opportunism .
I regret the fact that those Member States which most actively promote CAP reform , including the British Prime Minister , were so comprehensively out-manoeuvred at Brussels .
I hope they recover their negotiating skills by the time we get to Copenhagen .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the Danish Presidency for being able to keep hold of the big picture and not allowing the summit to be side-tracked by arcane details and what are relatively small amounts of money .
We must never lose sight of the fact that the benefits of enlargement far outweigh the costs .
The costs of not enlarging are far greater than the costs of enlarging .
You may recall that at a previous debate I took inspiration from the late , great Elvis Presley when he said ' it 's now or never ' .
I would like to take inspiration today from a rather lesser personage , Mr Iain Duncan Smith , who yesterday said to the Conservative Party ' unite or die ' .
The same principle of course applies to the European Union .
I am glad to see the Brussels Summit demonstrate that Europe is more capable of learning that lesson than the British Conservative Party .
I recognise the Danish Presidency 's enthusiasm for wishing to carve out a road from Copenhagen to Copenhagen , but I want to be clear that Copenhagen is not the end of the process - hopefully it is the beginning of the end of the process .
There is still a lot of work to be done by the candidate countries , we still have a ratification process , and this Parliament will take its assent powers very seriously indeed .
We will only vote ' yes ' if we are clear that a proper deal has been done .
So we must not allow the candidate countries to think the process is over .
I would like to remind everyone that the Commission will be producing a further progress report six months before the date of accession .
I would also like to congratulate the Danish Presidency for establishing an indicative framework for further agricultural spending which in no way prejudices future reform of the CAP , nor future discussions on financing the European Union , nor our international trade commitments in the Doha round .
It allows us to move forward but still leaves this discussion open for us to reach a sensible conclusion to that debate .
I am also pleased with the wording of the resolution on Bulgaria and Romania .
I recently represented the Socialist Group in Romania , and was singularly impressed by the progress that is being made under the current government , which has finally got to grips with some of the issues .
I welcome the decision of the Council to increase the safeguard clauses from two years to three years , although I am concerned by the wording which says that these could apply from day one of accession .
I assume that relates to the Commission 's report six months before the date of accession , but I must say it would not give a good impression to the voters , either in the accession countries or in the European Union , if we start to apply safeguard clauses from day one .
Quite frankly , if those are necessary , those countries should probably not be coming into the European Union at that point .
Finally , as a former chairman of the Lithuanian JPC , I would remind the Council that Russia is not a Member State of the European Union , it is not a candidate country , it does not have a veto over European Union affairs .
Therefore , our number one priority on Kaliningrad is to guarantee the sovereignty of the Lithuanian State and its ability to enter Schengen .
I would also like to congratulate the Council on resolving the issues relating to the financing of the closure of Ignalina power station .
This shows a remarkable sign of solidarity from the existing Member States towards a small candidate country .
Mr President , it is truly wonderful to know that enlargement is so well on track and that common agricultural policy reform will not hold up the entry of the fast track ten .
The European Commission 's regular report marks a critically important step for Romania , and , I would guess , for Bulgaria as well .
Yet Romania has concerns that her own entry date may somehow be held up by the energy and commitment that we are putting into the first ten .
From Parliament , we can send a clear signal of our intent by endorsing Romania 's chosen target date of 1 January 2007 .
Yesterday , in the Foreign Affairs Committee , we agreed to do just that .
I hope that this will be passed by Plenary too .
After all , we in Parliament thought of the date of 2004 in the beginning , and the same date is appropriate for Bulgaria .
Turning to Turkey , the EU is a secular group of institutions and therefore religion is no barrier to membership .
I believe it would be a right and proper endorsement if we were able to send a signal to the new Turkish Government that if it fulfils the Copenhagen criteria of democratic values deeply entrenched and implemented in law , then perhaps the date of June 2004 would be appropriate for negotiations .
My congratulations go to all of those concerned in the work to date .
Mr President , at the Brussels European Council , the Chairman of the Convention presented the preparation of what he called a ' constitutional treaty ' .
Three days later , however , before the Convention , he presented a preliminary draft entitled the ' Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe ' .
There is a very considerable shift between the two meetings and it is a shame that this was not discussed at the Council meeting .
The shift is even more marked when compared to the Laeken mandate , which simply raised the question as to whether the simplification of the treaties that it called for might not - and I quote - ' lead in the long run to the adoption of a constitutional text ' .
I stress the words ' in the long run ' .
And what is more , the Laeken mandate was itself developing in line with the Nice mandate , which did not even mention any possible constitutional element .
These successive shifts can be easily explained by the backstage manoeuvring of the federalists and by the lack of any opposition within the Convention , based on the defence of national sovereignty , that is proportionate to its influence on the general public .
A lack of realism can thrive when there is no one to question it .
Mr President , the process of the accession of ten new Member States is now nearing completion .
We are excited about it and would like to congratulate the Commission and the Council on this .
It fulfils the fondest wish of the vast majority of European citizens , as it was , in the past , far from self-evident that this wish would be fulfilled .
Unfortunately , many have already forgotten this .
Enlargement became to them a question of money and some politicians speculated on fear , self-interest and other negative traits which they believed to be widely present at grassroots level .
They knew very well that it is our security and prosperity that will benefit from enlargement .
To my chagrin , the Dutch parliament , in particular , has been guilty of this type of behaviour , even as recently as this week .
Since the Dutch Government was sensible enough to take the right decisions , a majority in the Chamber suddenly extended an invitation to the government right at the end to examine the options of a referendum on accession after all , although the formula is such that the government has still been given time to respond negatively .
Domestic opportunism has prevailed over clarity and responsible policy in this case .
Could the Council and the Commission , for their part , comment on the options and advisability of referendums on enlargement in the current Member States ?
Also , could you indicate the principal difference between referendums in the current Member States and those in the states that are candidates for membership ?
What would be the effect of a negative outcome of a referendum in a Member State or in one or more candidate countries , respectively ?
I should like to receive a response to this from the Council and , if possible , from the Commission , because this is , of course , of major importance for the purpose of publicity and information provided to the Dutch people .
Finally , a word on Chechnya .
The group chairman has already commented on this , and rightly so .
This is a fight against terrorism , but we could employ diplomatic means to find a solution .
I would also ask the Council whether the EU has a policy on Chechnya .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , the undoubted success of the Brussels Summit was primarily brought about , of course , by the compromise that was reached on agricultural funding .
This is a compromise with which it is possible to live , but many speakers have already alluded to the fact that it is no substitute for reform of European agricultural policy .
I wish to call upon you , Mr President of the Council , to do something that is made urgent by the decision we are to take tomorrow , namely , to maintain dialogue with Parliament on agricultural policy reform , without leaving out the Commission or , when he comes up with sensible proposals , Commissioner Fischler , who is responsible for these matters .
Secondly , the safeguard clause , to which reference has already been made , is an important factor in building our countries ' confidence that reforms and the reform process in the candidate countries will be continued with .
I would ask you , Mr President of the Council , to see to it that this safeguard clause also includes consultation with the countries concerned , so that the procedure may be one on which there is general agreement .
In third place comes the issue of Turkey .
Both of you have let it be known that we can look forward to decisions specifically relating to Turkey being taken in Copenhagen .
It is my opinion that any response to the new government has to be a cautious one .
There is no need for it to be met with mistrust , greeted with premature praise , or declared to be whiter than white .
This government must first demonstrate its ability to implement the decisions taken by the previous parliament , to recognise human rights and the rights of minorities , and Turkey has to show its ability to handle a change of government without military intervention .
Any promises we make to Turkey must be ones that we are prepared to keep over the next few years .
Our actions in this area will be judicious if we bear that in mind .
There is no doubt that it is tactically astute not to discuss further steps towards enlargement right now , but I would like to emphatically underline what was said by the President of the Commission .
Particularly as regards the Balkans , it is important to indicate by word and deed - as Brussels has done - that when these countries are prepared to implement economic reforms , when they are ready to give recognition to human and minority rights , when they are ready to take the road that leads to full democracy , then the Balkan countries can join the EU - not today , not tomorrow , but the day after tomorrow .
This is a clear signal that they should take the road to democracy and the acknowledgement of human rights , and an incentive for them to do so .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Danish Presidency for the conclusions of the Brussels Summit in preparing the way for these ten countries to begin to assume obligations of membership by the beginning of 2004 .
But I have questions on budgets , on Cyprus and on further enlargement on which I would like further clarification .
Firstly the budgets : we welcome the overall approach agreed between the institutions on budgetary and financial issues but , as a parliament , we would like to be fully informed by the Commission on the stage of negotiations and set up a process of dialogue with the Council so we can come to conclusions at the end of the year .
In so doing , firstly , we would like some clarity about potential new obligations on foreign policy which could arise as a result of enlargement .
We have asked for a report from the Commission regarding this which we are awaiting .
Secondly , agricultural reform : in the House of Commons , upon his return from the European Council , Mr Blair said that he was fully supportive of the first point of the agreement on additional limits on expenditure ; he was not in support of the price for it - no CAP reform .
That was defeated at the summit .
The question to the President of the Commission is whether this reform is still on course and what has now happened to the mid-term review .
Looking to the future , I would like to pick up Mr Barón Crespo 's point .
It is not usual for us to be in agreement , but certainly when it comes to financial perspective of 1999 , I was against it for precisely the same reasons that he mentioned - how can you plan so far into the future ?
And , at least until 2013 , the Parliament itself must be involved in the negotiation of this financial perspective once the negotiations are under way .
In terms of Cyprus , I would like a clear statement that neither the Commission nor the Council intends to set a date for the opening of negotiations .
We must have the full and fair implementation of the Copenhagen criteria in political and economic matters .
Perhaps , above all , it is a decision for the Member States and not for other countries to take a decision as to when a date should be set for Turkey to start negotiations .
Lastly , on the point raised by Mr Swoboda , it is critically important that we set out a strategy for a ' new neighbours ' initiative and that Copenhagen should provide a mechanism whereby we can really come to terms with those countries which could be potential candidates .
We need a strategy on how to handle the demands which we will face in the months and years ahead .
It is not sufficient that we should simply say everybody is welcome , because I believe there is a limit to the matters of EU enlargement and this should be thought about now .
Mr President , I also congratulate our Danish colleagues on the way in which they have handled enlargement .
But , obviously , I have completely misunderstood the fact that we have resolved overnight the issue of the common agricultural policy .
The President of the Commission said that the common agricultural policy has been solved .
I feel that what has actually happened is that the agreement between President Chirac and Chancellor Schröder went in some way to undermine the way in which Commissioner Fischler was proposing his reforms .
The other day when he spoke to the Agriculture Committee I felt very much that he will be a strong leader in his mid-term review and will carry the reforms through .
I also noted that one of the proposals is that we reform the Agriculture Committee and go for codecision .
I hope the Council and the Commission will support this because it will help to reform the common agricultural policy .
We would have a totally different agricultural policy if the Agriculture Committee had codecision .
We have also heard many vague ideas about how we are going to reform it and I put to you one or two ideas that I believe to be important .
I ask the Commissioner , how will modulation work ?
How are we going to cope if we do not really reform the common agricultural policy in Commissioner Fischler 's mind when we come to discuss the WTO negotiations ?
There has been talk about capping the common agricultural policy and yet there has been no mention of how we are going to use the funding from Pillar One to Pillar Two .
How are we going to fund the new proposals in Pillar Two ?
Finally , I wish to speak particularly for my constituents in East Anglia , many of whom have not drawn on the common agricultural policy because they grow crops which have never been subsidised by this Union .
They are going to be disadvantaged because , under the new proposals , there will be a payment on historical claims .
I urge the Commission to rethink that and look at the old IACS forms .
You have the measurements , make sure you look at those before you take a final decision .
Let us make sure we have an agricultural policy which helps our farmers , helps the budget and helps the new democracies .
Mr President , it was a remarkable Summit with a remarkable result , because the ten candidate member states nominated by the Commission have passed this stage , so that the negotiations can now be completed and we can remain on schedule for 2004 .
I am also pleased that the Dutch Government did not put a spanner in the works .
This is mainly thanks to the opposition in the Dutch parliament , who were aware of their enormous responsibility .
Further to what Mr Oostlander said , I am secretly hoping that the Netherlands will not raise any more unnecessary obstacles on the path to completing the enlargement process .
Slovakia , the country for which I am responsible , has reacted with great relief to the events of the past few weeks , including , of course , the referendum in Ireland .
After a tumultuous start in the 90s , Slovakia has managed to catch up with those in the lead in the negotiating process , for which it deserves a huge compliment .
However , as for the other candidate member states , it is too early for them to rest on their laurels .
A great deal of work needs to be done before 2004 .
In my view , the Heads of Government were right to adopt the Commission 's recommendations about creating guarantees with regard to the implementation of EU rules , including the recommendation to shorten the duration of the safeguard rules .
We would also draw your attention specifically to the fight against the corruption that is still too widespread in many candidate member states .
Thanks to enlargement , we will be getting new neighbours , countries that are also knocking on the doors of the EU .
We cannot deal with their questions now as we are now focusing on the forthcoming enlargement .
However , we do expect the Commission and the Council , at the end of the negotiations and after the Copenhagen Summit , to table specific proposals to strengthen relations with those countries .
In this connection , we will also need to address the question as to what prospects we can offer countries such as the Ukraine .
As President Prodi rightly stated a moment ago , enlargement should not lead to exclusion .
Mr President , the Danish Presidency is indeed to be congratulated on its skilful handling of the negotiations which resulted in a successful outcome to the two-day summit in Brussels .
Agreement on the financial aspects of enlargement has removed the last major obstacle which stood in the way of concluding the accession negotiations with ten countries at the December Copenhagen Council .
I welcome the fact that in relation to the sensitive area of the future financing of the common agricultural policy that EU leaders agreed that direct payments to farmers in current EU Member States would remain stable until 2006 .
This will guarantee the continuing goodwill of current EU farmers towards enlargement .
If this is to be maintained , it is important that degressivity is not introduced after 2006 .
On a related issue , it is important to note that some concerns had been expressed that the applicant countries would have been able to export food products which were not up to current EU food safety standards .
I should add that these concerns were not necessarily motivated by opposition to enlargement .
They were rather more influenced by a wish to prevent any repetition of the BSE and foot and mouth disasters .
I am therefore pleased that one of the important declarations at the Summit confirmed that there would be a safeguard clause on food safety included in each of the accession treaties .
Under it , if a candidate country does not meet EU safety standards , it will not be allowed to sell food products in the internal market .
As well as reassuring consumers , it will also remove another weapon from the armoury of those who have reservations about enlargement going ahead as quickly as possible .
I would like to conclude by not only congratulating the Danish Presidency once again and welcoming the fact that its confidence proved to be right , but also by wishing it a similar success at the Copenhagen Council .
Mr President , the enlargement of the European Union in terms of numbers is now a fact of life .
It is also a fact of life that geographically - apart from a few missing enclaves - Europe is turning into a huge entity with massive economic and political clout , the future of which is beginning to look interesting .
The single currency , enlargement , efforts to bring about a common defence and security policy and the work being carried out by the convention clearly show that Europe is moving and is moving dynamically .
Enlargement is without doubt a positive development on the road to European unification .
However , it still has problems to resolve and questions to answer .
There are matters which need clearing up in the agricultural sector , for example .
And it is the agricultural sector , the CAP , with its massive fund of experience and coherence , that has been the common reference point for European as opposed to national policy from the birth of the EEC through to the present day .
Enlargement must help strengthen this common policy , not upset the balanced compromise achieved , be it between the 15 or the 25 Member States of the Union .
Numerous candidate countries are behind economically and do not have the administrative wherewithal to apply the acquis communautaire efficiently and these too are problems we need to address .
Do these or other problems detract from the huge , positive contribution of enlargement to the future of Europe ?
No , they do not .
Enlargement makes a most positive contribution to the future of Europe , the importance of which will become more and more apparent with each passing day .
I must stress how important it is that Cyprus has been included as a new Member State .
By integrating Cyprus into the European Union , the outermost point of Europe and its Mediterranean dimension have now been covered .
I am positive that at some point - be it before or after integration - this development will help resolve the political problem that has beset Cyprus for years .
Mr President , the European Council has taken an historic and welcome decision on enlargement of the European Union , but what a pity that it did not seize the opportunity to take another historic decision in radically reforming the common agricultural policy .
The EUR 40 billion a year that the European Union spends on the CAP is an expensive way to distort our farming industry .
British citizens , who already contribute disproportionately to the EU budget , pay twice for the CAP : once through their taxes , and again in the supermarket .
An opportunity for early reform has been lost .
The question of European defence policy was also addressed by the European Council .
The United Kingdom has a special interest and responsibility in this area .
After all , it was the British Prime Minister who gave the green light to this misguided policy in 1998 and now he has promised significant elements of Britain 's already over-stretched armed forces to fill any capability gaps given the complete lack of willingness on the part of most other European countries to upgrade their defence capabilities in any meaningful way .
At the very moment when we should be concentrating on meeting the terrorist threat and on possible conflict with Iraq , the defence annexes to the Presidency Conclusions are Ruritanian in their complexity and in their irrelevance .
To add to the confusion and waste , European allies are now toying with two separate sets of military capability improvements : those for NATO and those for the European Union .
Resources are scarce and the last thing we need is two different sets of capability goals .
For over a year now , diplomatic and military staff energy has been wastefully expended on negotiating EU access to NATO resources .
This is an entirely self-generated problem which , furthermore , raises unnecessary difficulties for key allies such as Turkey .
We now have the very dangerous involvement of the European Convention in defence matters .
One of its working groups is examining ways in which even collective defence , a core task of NATO , might become a European Union responsibility .
What signal does this send to our American allies ?
Perhaps more significantly , what signal does this send to potential enemies ?
What a pity it is that the Council and the Commission do not focus their efforts on putting the European Union house in order before enlargement instead of grandiose political schemes .
Mr President , I will be very brief , for the Danish Prime Minister has given an exhaustive illustration of the key points of today 's debate and I fully agree with what he has said .
I would just like to make a general comment regarding some of the points raised .
It is interesting to see that the entire House - like the Council - is in agreement on enlargement .
The debates and questions have focused on minor issues and on the progress we need to make on these issues in the future .
This kind of consensus really is extremely rare .
I would like to mention a number of points which have not been addressed in the other replies .
The first is the point raised by Mr Swoboda concerning the Balkans .
I fully agree : we did not spend a great deal of time talking about the Balkans , but our policy of association and stabilisation processes and ongoing relations and assistance is part of a strategy for achieving a long-term goal precisely of making the Balkans part of the Union too .
It will take time and , above all , the process will differ from country to country - close monitoring of these countries has shown that some move faster than others - but the Balkans are becoming increasingly our responsibility , and we are aware of this and taking appropriate action .
As regards Turkey , I have nothing to add , apart from a consideration which I feel I must point out to the House . We based our report on practical criteria .
In this respect , the change in government does not introduce any new factors because we will have to see what practical measures it takes to implement the Copenhagen criteria .
The Commission report is very specific and very clear on this point and the position we take must therefore be consistent with it .
I have no comment to make on the subject of Kaliningrad , other than to say that we will respect the position of Lithuania and its rights as a new Member of the Union .
All our work , including the difficult negotiations , has taken such a long time precisely because of the need to respect these principles .
Chechnya has been mentioned by a large number of speakers today .
Although Chechnya is not part of the subject of this debate , I do feel that the question is closely related to the issues we are discussing .
The Commission vehemently and unequivocally condemns all terrorist acts , starting with the tragic incident of the hostages in the Moscow theatre .
It affirms equally explicitly that the fight against terrorism cannot be pursued at the expense of human rights .
This applies to Chechnya , where our human rights agencies working in situ are constantly reporting incidents of failure to respect human rights and violation of human rights by both Russian military operators and Chechen rebels .
In my view , the best way to prevent further violation of human rights is to pursue the investigations currently being performed by the Russian military and civil prosecutors who have undertaken to carry out these inquiries .
There is also a Russian undertaking to take certain steps to improve human rights in Chechnya , which include reducing the number of troops present , putting an end to what are known as round-ups and , as I said before , allowing prosecutors to observe military operations .
There have been countless statements made to this effect and we must ensure that this , at least , does happen .
Then there is a further matter in which the Commission is directly involved and that is the provision of humanitarian aid to the people of that country , who have to endure the suffering and problems caused by the difficult living conditions .
Furthermore , two NGO workers - one European and one local - who were taken prisoner some weeks ago , have still not been released .
We are pushing for urgent resolution of this matter .
Lastly , we must constantly and insistently make it clear that a political solution is the only way to resolve the Chechen question .
This is our message , the stance we will adopt at the bilateral meeting with the Russian authorities in Brussels .
As I said before , political dialogue is the only way forward .
Otherwise , there will be no end to this conflict .
My final point concerns the CAP , which has been mentioned a number of times with comments being made which are not consistent with what was decided at Brussels .
After Brussels , the reform of the CAP is still on the table .
Moreover , Commissioner Fischler is going to take part in a debate on the matter in this very Chamber .
I am not going to go into details but I can assure you that the Commission is working long and hard on pursuing its recent proposal .
Mr President , I asked a very specific question on the subject of this referendum that was still hanging over us in the Netherlands and what the effects of a possible negative outcome will be , compared to those in the candidate member states .
Given that the Treaty has to be ratified by all the Member States , a referendum means that the Netherlands are not ratifying it and are therefore holding up the whole process .
That is clear . The case is very similar to that of Ireland .
In any case , under the current procedure , all the countries have to subscribe .
That is what appears to emerge from any legal analysis of the situation .
I received five motions for resolution pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The next item is the statement by Mr Solana on the situation in the Middle East and Iraq .
I understand that Mr Solana will mention Chechnya in his opening remarks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission and standing in for Commissioner Patten , who sends his apologies , I would like to make a statement on the current situation in the Middle East and on what the Commission is doing about it .
Mr Solana has already spoken at length concerning the progress of the discussion on the road map being planned by the international community , represented here by the international quartet .
The work you have done , Mr Solana , has been done under the most adverse conditions imaginable and no doubt also against the clock ; I wish to congratulate you on it and promise you the Commission 's continued support .
The road map towards which we are working must incorporate a specific timetable and have as its objective the outcome outlined in the Seville Council Declaration , that is , the creation of a viable Palestinian state .
I am confident in the future success of the efforts of the Presidency and of Mr Solana to this end , which involve agreement with the other international partners in the quartet on a workable solution .
Yet before the road map is laid down , which it is expected to be in December , there are aspects that could even now help to reduce the tension in the situation .
These are the unreserved confirmation of the two-state solution that we seek , and even more so the ending of all use of force and provocation by both sides .
This would include vigorous action against terrorist organisations alongside the immediate halting of settlements and the bringing under control of settlers ' incursions into land owned by Palestinian civilians .
It is equally important that the Palestinians should persevere with their efforts at reform , and the Israelis with the implementation of symbolic responses to them , such as the resumption of regular transfer payments , which they have already announced .
The relaxation of restrictions on movement and easier access for humanitarian aid organisations could accentuate this positive trend .
The most recent Israeli Government reshuffle has resulted in a marked shift to the right .
It remains to be seen , however , whether the effect on the peace process will actually be as is feared .
In any case , the road map remains an international initiative with the prospect of long-term success in the form of a two-state solution .
It is to be hoped that the new Palestinian cabinet will continue with the reform work it has started and will , with the help of the international community , not only intensify it , but also use it to bring about marked improvements in the people 's conditions .
It is precisely here that there are difficulties .
It has been primarily in the area of financial management that the reform process has met with its first successes .
The conditions attached to the use of EU funds to support the budget have brought about consolidation and resulted in Palestinian financial arrangements becoming better controlled and more transparent .
The Commission will continue to work closely with Salam Fayad , the new Palestinian Finance Minister , and will use further conditions to exert a positive influence on the reform process .
In other fields , regrettably , the reform process has come to something of a halt .
This is true , specifically , of reform of the administration and of the justice system , both of which play an important part in establishing a democratic state , and preparations for the elections announced for mid-January have not got very far either .
Although a chairman of the electoral commission has been appointed , many Palestinians , and also representatives of the international donor community , believe that postponement of the elections can no longer be ruled out .
One of the tasks of the international Task Force will be to bring obstacles to the election preparations to the quartet 's attention and suggest ways of dealing with them .
Together with Member States , the Commission continues to be fully involved in preparations for the elections , and is endeavouring to ensure that all necessary support is given when they are actually held .
Neither international efforts at laying down a promising road map , nor the Palestinian Authority 's efforts at reform have , however , been able as yet to bring about any improvement in the situation on the spot .
On both sides , innocent people are still dying .
Daily life is lived in fear of the terrible suicide bombers and of reprisals and against a backdrop of frustration and despair .
So far , it has not been possible to meet the Israeli people 's need for security , or to satisfy the Palestinian people 's demand for a more normal everyday life , to put an end to the restrictions on freedom of movement , or to improve the atrocious living conditions .
It is the human needs involved that give great cause for concern .
International observers on the spot are all agreed that the restrictions on freedom of movement and the lack of access for aid organisations have helped to bring about the present humanitarian crisis .
It is quite simply not acceptable for aid missions financed by the EU to be turned back or prevented from doing their work .
Twenty-three instances of this have occurred in the last couple of weeks alone .
To give just one example , on 17 October , two Commission officials were stopped on their way out of Israel , and the documents and laptops they were carrying were taken off them , being returned to them only after some considerable time .
You will no doubt be well aware that the Commission has sought to have EUR 50 million released from the emergency reserve in order to be able to make additional aid available to towns and villages cut off from the outside world .
Additional financial resources are also required for the preparation of elections , and , in this regard , I hope that the Commission can count on Parliament 's support .
This is of great importance in terms of the ad hoc liaison meeting that is to take place in December , at which the international donor states will be discussing the humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories and the state of the reform process , as well as the need for measures of support and financial aid .
Mr President , the events of the last few days served to justify , perhaps more than ever , the presence of Mr Solana here this evening , and on behalf of the European People 's Party , I would like to thank the High Representative for attending this session .
These ten days , which began with the shocking hostage siege in Moscow , came to a tragic end on 26 October and were also marked by increasing concern regarding the growing political instability in the Middle East and by the possibility of war with Iraq which is still being discussed in New York .
As far as Chechnya and our relations with Russia are concerned , we have just heard Mr Prodi express his commitment , and we are asking you , Mr Solana , to speak on our behalf and , I am sure , on behalf of the entire House , and condemn in the strongest possible terms the cowardly and criminal act of terrorism which took place in Moscow . At the same time , however , you must warn against the response in Russia by the public and by some of those responsible for combating terrorism who could confuse the ordinary Chechen population with the extremists who are guilty of preparing and carrying out this crime .
This is precisely the trap that the terrorists wanted the Russian people and government to fall into .
And if they do , there is a danger that they will prove the terrorists ' action right .
At the same time , in the Middle East , we have seen political chaos increasing over recent days and almost with each passing hour and this obviously cannot serve the cause of peace .
In this respect , Mr Solana , I do not share your optimism .
This is because , first of all , on 29 October , the new government of the Palestinian Authority , approved by the Palestinian Legislative Council , was presented with , as you said , a broad majority . President Arafat was still , however , the target of severe criticism even within this House , due to the ineffective reshuffle which kept most of the ministers axed by the same Council in their posts .
And the fact that , on this occasion , the Minister of Finance was able to keep his job - you welcomed this - but that the former Interior Minister , who had the courage to call for the end to the violence perpetrated by both sides , was able to be axed , seems , in our view , a very worrying sign that , in this new Cabinet , the hawks may have prevailed over the artisans of peace .
Next , a crisis ensued within the government in Israel which led to the Knesset being dissolved and early elections being called . These could take place even before the date of 28 January that is currently predicted .
We welcome the fact that , when this crisis broke out , the Prime Minister , Ariel Sharon did not give in to a far-right majority which intended to condemn the Oslo Accords , expel Arafat and reject the creation of a Palestinian State .
We must fear , however , that this majority will continue to rage throughout the upcoming election campaign , but we also hope that the Israeli people , most of whom are still passionate about peace , will not allow themselves to be carried away by the far-right action .
In this respect as well , we are counting on you and on your representative , Ambassador Moratinos , to try , against the backdrop of increasingly uncontrolled violent outbreaks , to make the conciliatory voice of Europe heard .
Lastly , we hope that the same conciliatory voice will also be heard within the United Nations Security Council , by those who have been involved in tough negotiations , as you said , for six weeks , to redraft a resolution which places Iraq squarely before its responsibilities , but which still offers the prospect of a solution that does not inevitably involve the use of weapons .
( Applause )
As a former President , Mr Barón Crespo , I am sure you know the conventions of this House .
Mr Solana and the Commissioner have as much time to speak to the House as they wish .
Both of them , however , held very closely to the time that they were allocated .
I do not think there is any cause for complaint .
Mr President , my group unconditionally condemns all violence in the Middle East .
Victims among the civilian population are always unacceptable , whether they are at the hands of suicide attacks or the army .
For years , Europe has tried to play a significant role in the conflict , but we are mainly fighting the symptoms rather than the root causes of the disease .
What needs to happen is for people to start believing in the future again .
People who have hope in the future have something to lose and are therefore prepared to fight for peace instead of plodding along in the status quo or , even worse , thinking that violence is the answer .
In order to guarantee a promising future , we demand serious efforts from both sides .
The Palestinian Authority must , in the first instance , adopt a much tougher stance with regard to suicide attacks .
Terrorists are not heroes , but killers , and must be approached accordingly .
In addition , the Palestinian Authority must reform , and stamp out corruption , so that the Palestinian population can have confidence in their leaders .
Secondly , we ask Israel to call an end to the policy of using closures as a means of economic strangulation and humiliation .
Payments to the Palestinians must also be resumed so that European money can once again be used for development projects in education and care rather than payment support .
In addition , it remains unacceptable that settlements are still allowed to expand .
The occupation and the settlements remain the biggest obstacle to real peace and security for everyone .
I am ashamed of the lack of European resolve in the area of the Middle East .
Every day , innocent people die , and all we do is settle for declarations and meetings .
As Palestine 's largest donor and Israel 's biggest trading partner , we should surely be able to do something more to accomplish our own European goals .
I should like to conclude with a comment about the forthcoming elections .
Unfortunately , neither of the parties has put a sound peace plan on the table .
It is really time that this was done , so that in January , Israelis and Palestinians will be able to vote for peace for themselves and for their neighbours .
Mr President , Mr Solana , I believe that we can establish a link , not only a philosophical link but also a political one between the problem in the Middle East , Iraq and Chechnya and the role of Europe .
I think that our role is to be clear-headed and to state the truth .
Mr Wurtz is right in saying that twenty years ago we condemned , twenty years ago we ? We say this to the Israelis .
That is right and it is true .
And to the Palestinians we must say : twenty years ago , we said you must acknowledge not only the State of Israel but also that there would be no mass return of Palestinians to that State of Israel .
Both these things are true .
If we want to give some hope to the Israeli population , we must eradicate the fear .
They fear the attacks , the fatal , suicide attacks , which above all mean that those who carry out these attacks do not recognise the State of Israel .
The Palestinians fear occupation by the Israeli army .
The two things are very closely related .
And then in Iraq , the truth is straightforward .
We say that Iraq must recognise the UN resolutions , in other words , all weapons , if they exist that is - and I know nothing about that , I had never been an inspector , nor have you , nor have any of us , no one here in fact - must be destroyed after they have been inspected .
The way in which Saddam Hussein conducts politics and has conducted politics in the past is a danger to other nations .
Therefore , we must also call for weapons inspectors and for non-governmental organisations to be allowed in to inspect the democratic situation and the relationship between the Iraqi people and Saddam Hussein .
The same applies to Russia and Chechnya .
It is quite incredible that Russian women and children were indeed taken hostage , and we condemn this .
It is even more incredible that Mr Putin then took the hostages hostage , failing to say how they were , which gases were to be used , and failed to communicate the information at his disposal to the families .
It is equally incredible that the entire Chechen population can be taken hostage by a former KGB man who is acting as if the Bolsheviks and Communists were still in power , as a KGB agent , in other words .
Europe must condemn the attacks , Europe must take part in anti-terrorist actions and Europe must say no to all totalitarian impulses , even if a power such as Russia is involved .
The Duma voted in favour of restricting the right to information which is tantamount to restricting democracy .
If Europe remains silent in the face of Putin 's actions , then Europe will not have had the insight or the strength to safeguard democracy .
Mr President , Mr Solana , I will be very brief for I believe we are going to have the opportunity to hold an in-depth debate on the issue of Russia and therefore on Chechnya too in Strasbourg .
It is clear that we are creating a new Afghanistan with the Taliban , but I would like to focus on a very specific point .
A few days ago , Mr Akhmed Zakayev , the deputy prime minister of the Chechen Government , was arrested in Copenhagen , where he is still being detained , and all attempts to make it possible for Ilias Akhmadov , the Chechen Minister for Foreign Affairs , to return to the European Union from the United States are being blocked .
Therefore , in addition to turning a blind eye to the events in Chechnya , we are preventing the few democratic interlocutors who are in a position to discuss and propose democratic solutions for the country from getting on with their job .
My question , Mr Solana , is the following : you took the initiative of drawing up black lists of those implicated in the conflict in the former Yugoslavia .
Could you not now take the initiative of drawing up a positive list of people whom we consider to be essential for dialogue , so that these people can obtain visas without hindrance and without injury to a small country which is then subjected , as is the case of Denmark and Belgium , to intolerable pressure from the Russian Federation ?
Mr President , Mr Solana , Commissioner , as has already been said , the next couple of hours will see the Security Council coming to a decision on the Iraq resolution .
Let there be no doubt about the fact that Iraq must unconditionally comply with all the requirements made of it .
Such is the EU 's position , and it is one with whose substance I agree wholeheartedly .
There is now justifiable concern about the way Iraq deploys weapons of mass destruction and makes them widely available .
Saddam Hussein has already , on several occasions , demonstrated his readiness to deploy such weapons of mass destruction against his own people .
The memories of all of us are still scarred by the Kurds of Halabja , who were killed by poison gas .
The brutal persecution of the Shiites in the south of the country is no secret either .
Weapons of mass destruction are in the hands of the most diverse regimes and countries , whether one thinks of India or Pakistan or , lastly , of North Korea , which has , indeed , admitted diverting fissile material for nuclear weapons , a breach of international undertakings that amounts to an offensive aimed at getting the pressure off Iraq !
In any case , weapons of mass destruction will only become an incalculable menace to the international community if the rulers with control of them are themselves unpredictable and menacing , as is without doubt true of Saddam Hussein .
That is why the Security Council resolution must spell out the necessity of the UN inspectors being able to perform their duties unhindered , of the monitoring teams ' powers being extended and of there being no repeat of the cat and mouse game we have seen before .
If anyone is to make political visits to Iraq at this time , then it should be international weapons inspectors and nobody else - and I say this with reference to the visit to Iraq of the provincial governor of Carinthia , Jörg Haider , which is his third , and is superfluous and contrary to Austrian interests .
Iraq is far too hazardous a minefield and also deserves better than to be used to satisfy neurotic political egos .
Rather than solo acts , what is needed here is concerted action at EU level , which should be undertaken in partnership with the USA .
The risk should also be calculable .
We must avoid any escalation or any security vacuum affecting the whole of the Middle East .
Looking further ahead , there is a need to work at removing the causes of crises , whether they are in Chechnya or in the Middle East , and you have my full support in doing that .

Mr President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists heartily supports Mr Solana and Mr Patten in their attempts to restrict the permanent state of war in the Middle East and to bring the parties concerned back to the negotiating table via the ' quartet approach ' .
Mr Joshi Belin , one of the well-known brains behind the Oslo Conventions , assured me only the other day that , despite the fact that the conventions had been seriously undermined by the Sharon regime on the one hand and by Palestinian suicide bombers on the other , what the citizens of both sides need more than ever at this very moment are structural political proposals which offer the prospect of peace .
He emphasised once again that European action is essential to this process .
I would like to remind you that this Parliament once adopted a resolution which said that the trade clauses in the association treaty must be applied , if necessary , to ensure that settlement policy is brought to an end , which will otherwise continue to form a structural barrier to peace .
As far as Iraq is concerned , the Group of the Party of European Socialists would like to emphasise once again that neither the US , nor China , nor any other country has , therefore , the unilateral right to begin a large-scale war , wherever in the world .
Our approach is by way of the Security Council , a route which , fortunately , we have managed to make binding on a multilateral basis .
However , that also means that we may not have any pronouncements that might lead automatically to war .
I am really pleased with Mrs Morillon 's statement , which has emphasised that once more on behalf of the PPE-DE .
What we need is not war as a reflex response but to bring massive pressure to bear on Saddam Hussein via weapons inspections .
The weapons inspections must be effective and , if anything is going on , action can be taken .
What we do not need , however , is to go down the road leading to unilateral war .
Our first task is to strengthen the coalition against terrorism .
This coalition must be our top priority , both from the US side and the European side .
Our joint effort must be tied up with this .
In my opinion , the role of the European Union in the Middle East peace process is still too limited .
The United States calls the tune and we are merely supporting players .
Given our position , this is wrong .
We are , after all , Israel 's largest trading partner .
Our contribution of EUR 14 billion also makes us the biggest provider of humanitarian aid .
The European Union also makes by far the biggest contribution towards technical and financial assistance to the Palestinian Authority , estimated at EUR 10 million per month .
It is therefore high time that Europe stopped being just a payer and became a genuine player in the peace process .
We have a duty to Israel and Palestine to do so , but also to ourselves for reasons of a historic , cultural , geographic , economic and political nature .
From our European tradition , we must stress that violence is not a solution and that peace must not come directly from the top but rather must start at grass roots level .
Terrorists follow no political agenda .
We must therefore ensure that every example of senseless violence is condemned by public opinion , so that terrorist acts will no longer thwart peace negotiations .
Europe can and must play an executive role in this .
We must persevere with the democratisation and economic development of the region .
We must add a more political dimension to our extensive humanitarian aid by making the Palestinians and Israelis realise that they cannot be at enmity with each other for evermore .
A greater and more regular political presence in the region is therefore required more than ever .
Mr President , Mr Solana , Commissioner , I do not believe these reassuring words on the situation in Palestine because , on the one hand , the new appointments in the Palestinian Government do not appear to increase the influence of those working sincerely for peace and , on the other , there is a risk that it is imperative that Europe avoids .
I hear talk of very large sums of money that the European Union is about to appropriate in further aid .
There needs to be the greatest possible transparency in the distribution of this aid and its management , for the experience of previous situations teaches us that such aid is very often appropriated for specific objectives - and if they are humanitarian objectives I endorse them , we all endorse them - but then it goes off track .
The situation of these countries , particularly the ongoing situation in Palestine - a political and social situation in which there are opposing groups and feuds - is such as to suggest that such aid might be used for the activities of groups such as Hamas , for example , with the result that funds donated as humanitarian aid end up being aid to terrorism .
As regards Europe 's policy on Iraq , however , I feel that we must not confine ourselves to purely diplomatic measures but , mindful of the commitments made after September 11 , exploit all the possibilities offered by intelligence in order to get to the heart of the matter and tackle the roots of terrorism , which are in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf States .
That is where we need to attack the ideological roots of Wahhabi fundamentalism .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am glad to have the opportunity today to present to you my assessment of the decisions on agricultural policy taken at the Brussels Summit .
As long ago as July , the Commission , by opening the mid-term review , prompted a wide-ranging debate on the future of the agricultural policy .
Now , in addition , the European Council has answered a number of budget questions relating to the common agricultural policy .
The summit decisions are , in the first place , significant in that the way ahead is opened up for the Member States to conclude the enlargement negotiations , and in that the fifteen Heads of State and Government have accepted the Commission proposal for the phasing-in of direct payments in the agricultural sector for the new Member States .
If the candidate countries demonstrate the same realism , then it should be possible to conclude the enlargement negotiations at the Copenhagen Summit , but the Brussels decisions will also have substantial effects on the agricultural policy of the future .
The primary consideration here of course is that we should have , for the period from 2007 to 2013 , a Budget framework predetermined by the EU Fifteen for the costs of market regulation and the direct payments .
This framework consists of the EU Fifteen 's planned expenditure for 2006 on the one hand , and the ten new members ' financial proposals for 2006 in nominal values on the other .
These will be increased only by 1 % each year .
Initially , this will mean that , in 2007 and 2008 , two thirds of the implementation of the Agenda 2000 reforms in the milk sector will have to be funded below the new upper limit , as must 70 % of the phasing-in of the direct payments and all the reforms that the Council has already heralded , by which I mean such things as sugar or olive oil , tobacco , wine or cotton .
This , then , at last means that the old agricultural guideline - which had already ceased to have any effect - is no longer in existence .
What now matters is that this new financial framework should serve as a basis for giving the common agricultural policy for the next ten years a clear perspective for planning and development .
What does that mean for the mid-term review in the first instance ?
The Presidency 's Final Conclusions establish that the Brussels decisions should no more prejudice the mid-term review decided on at Berlin than the international commitments we made at Doha and elsewhere , any more than any other future decisions on the common agricultural policy .
These committed us to continue to take account of the decisions taken by the Heads of State and Government in Berlin and Gothenburg .
It is , in this context , noteworthy that the Brussels Summit set no limit to the funds for rural development .
Quite on the contrary , it reminded us of the importance of the less favoured regions and of the multifunctionality of agriculture , in effect , then , of the development of the second pillar , for which Parliament has called on many occasions already .
I am therefore working on the assumption that Parliament will be firm in stating its intentions when setting down the new Financial Perspective for the post-2006 period , on which , in contrast to the common agricultural policy , it has full power of codecision .
The fact that the Final Conclusions expressly refer to the European Union 's undertakings resulting from the start of the Doha Development Round is taken by some to mean that the proposal to decouple the direct payments is dead and buried .
I warn against adopting any such interpretation , as , if the international negotiations produce any commitment to make blue-box reductions - something that the European Union , like all the WTO members represented at Doha , has declared itself prepared , in principle , to do and to which the Council re-committed itself at the sustainability summit in Johannesburg - then that would mean at least partial abandonment of direct payments , as the option of decoupling would then no longer be available .
This issue will be discussed in March at the latest , when arrangements for the agricultural sector are put on the WTO table .
What will be the effects of the mid-term review on the agricultural sector ?
This question is often asked , and , in its communication entitled ' Auf dem Weg zu nachhaltiger Landwirtschaft - Eine Zwischenübersicht über die gemeinsame Agrarpolitik ' ( ' Towards sustainable agriculture - a mid-term review of the common agricultural policy ' ) , the Commission has subjected it to an initial qualitative evaluation founded on internal analyses , which concentrate on the ways in which farmers , consumers , taxpayers , the public , the food industry and governmental authorities will benefit , and on the contribution the proposals would make to the enlargement process and to the EU 's position on the international stage .
This analysis was also supplemented in the communication on the mid-term review by medium-term prognoses for agricultural markets and reports on the rice , nut and milk sectors , which were published by the Agriculture Directorate-General in June .
An internal investigation into EU enlargement 's effects on agricultural markets and incomes in the candidate countries was published in March .
Work is currently in progress , under the aegis of the Agriculture Directorate-General , on comprehensive analyses of the potential effects of the actual policy proposals , the results of which will be presented at the end of the year along with the draft legislation .
In this , we will of course be taking full account of the Brussels decisions .
Let me add something on the subject of Parliament 's draft resolution .
I share your view that our policy objectives require us to satisfy ourselves that our policy instruments are balanced and uniform .
I welcome your offer of cooperation with the aim of guaranteeing that , in an enlarged Europe , the European agricultural model will be not only further developed and enhanced , but also safeguarded .
You and I are at one in the belief that matters other than trade have to be better integrated into multilateral agreements , but , as negotiators for the European Union , we can achieve this only if we have enough bargaining counters to negotiate with .
We acknowledge , secondly , that greater quality , certifications , audits and so on will entail additional costs for our farmers , particularly the smaller ones .
These considerations make our proposals for decoupling and strengthening the second pillar crucially important in terms of the maintenance of the European agricultural model .
I am also very receptive to Parliament 's proposals for giving women a greater role in agriculture .
I see clearly defined conditions for farm management , in the form of cross-compliance , as an essential factor in getting the common agricultural policy back in line with what the public wants , and I also absolutely share Parliament 's desire to provide for straightforward and efficient procedures for these audits .
Simplification in general will remain a key objective , but quality must be capable of being demonstrated and attested if it is to remain credible .
As I said earlier , I expect Parliament to be emphatic in specifying how it wants the second pillar to be equipped .
Conversely , I support Parliament 's concern that it should be accorded rights of codecision in agricultural policy as well , which would significantly enhance the common agricultural policy 's standing in the public eye .
We must now seize the opportunity to build up a sustainable agricultural policy , to bring it into line with society 's expectations , and to give farmers a long-term political perspective .
I am counting on your support in this !
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to give an account to the European Parliament of the Council 's work on the mid-term review .
As agreed in Agenda 2000 , on 10 July this year the Commission submitted the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy .
One of the main priorities for the Danish Presidency has been to ensure as much progress as possible in the discussions concerning the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy .
Commissioner Fischler presented his discussion paper on the future development of the common agricultural policy at a Council meeting on 15 July .
On this occasion , there was an open debate in the Council , in which the Member States had opportunity to make known their immediate opinions on the Commission 's thoughts .
The Danish Presidency has had discussion of the mid-term review on the agenda of all the Council sessions in July , September and October , and the Council has thus had a thorough debate on the main topics in the Commission 's discussion paper .
The paper has also been discussed within the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and in a number of relevant working groups .
The conclusions of the Brussels Summit emphasised , as the Commissioner mentioned in his contribution , that this was without prejudice to future decisions on the common agricultural policy and the funding of the EU after 2006 , nor to any result following the implementation of paragraph 22 of the conclusions of the Berlin agenda , that is , Agenda 2000 , nor to the international commitments entered into by the EU , inter alia in the launching of the Doha Development Round .
In other words , the mid-term review continues directly as part of Agenda 2000 .
I would like to emphasise that , like the European Parliament and other institutions , we knew from the start that our discussions on the discussion paper were to form a basis for the Commission 's submission of legal proposals at a later point in time .
The Presidency has therefore organised general discussions at which ministers were given opportunity to express their various attitudes to all aspects of the Commission 's communication .
Before I start my review I would like to thank the European Parliament for its discussion of the matter .
We look forward to Parliament 's final decision tomorrow , and it is obvious that the decision will be extremely important and an important contribution to the debate .
There is no reason to hide the fact that the ministers ' reactions to the mid-term review have been divergent from the start , with regard to both the timing and the framework , and of course also as regards the content .
In general , however , as Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Fisheries I have been able to establish that there is broad agreement on the fact that rural policy should be strengthened and that greater emphasis should be placed on food safety , on protection of the environment and on animal welfare .
Ladies and Gentlemen , I will now contribute some comments on the main elements of the Commission 's communication in the light of the discussions that we have had in the Council .
The mid-term review contains two entirely fundamental horizontal aspects , namely the decoupling of direct subsidies and dynamic modulation .
The Commission 's ideas in this area have been more wide-ranging than has been seen previously .
The Council held its first overall discussion of these aspects in July and has yet to hold more technical discussions regarding the individual elements .
As far as decoupling is concerned , I can say that the delegations have expressed a great need for further information from the Commission in the form of impact assessments of the financial , social and regional effects of the proposal before a final position can be taken .
On the other hand , some delegations support the fundamental principle of decoupling .
They believe that it will allow farmers to focus on products that give them the best return on sales without having to keep an eye on the size of the subsidies given to the various products .
At the same time , it is regarded as being an effective signal to send , both to consumers and to tax-payers .
Finally , the countries also point out the negotiating advantages in a WTO context of the transition to a decoupled system .
It could also be an important step towards obtaining understanding of the EU 's other negotiating aims .
As far as dynamic modulation is concerned , a number of ministers have welcomed the proposal in principle .
They consider it to be a good way of securing the necessary funding to strengthen the priority objectives of food safety , quality , the environment and animal welfare and other important areas .
Other ministers have criticised dynamic modulation on the grounds that in reality it means a progressive reduction in subsidies in real terms and because the model - apart from franchising and capping - does not take sufficient account of existing regional differences .
Similarly , opinion varies between the delegations regarding the reduction of the first pillar subsidies and regarding how the modulated resources should then be distributed and the criteria according to which this should take place .
I would like to comment on the more specific market sectors .
We had a full debate on the main crops at the Council session in September and , although the Commission 's overall direction was able to be supported to a certain extent , there were very clear specific proposals which met with substantial opposition .
Various groups of delegations thus expressed strong arguments against a reduction in the intervention price for grain , removal of the monthly grain supplement , abolition of the intervention scheme as far as rye is concerned , the proposed changes to the arrangements for durum wheat and the proposed environmentally-friendly agricultural set-aside , as well as the Commission 's proposed adjustment of subsidies for energy crops .
The Commission 's communication was also accompanied by detailed reports on rice , nuts and milk .
The Council again had a full debate on these areas at its October meeting .
With regard to rice and nuts , opinions were clearly divided along the obvious lines of whether or not one was a producer of the products discussed .
As far as rice is concerned , however , there was initially broad agreement on the need for change in the sector - the adoption of the ' Everything But Arms ' initiative makes this inevitable .
However , a number of ministers from producer countries expressed dissatisfaction with the specific measures proposed by the Commission , while the non-producer countries regarded the Commission 's proposal as a step in the right direction .
With regard to milk , the Commission presented four options for the dairy sector for the period 2008-2015 .
The options were discussed with the result that it is unlikely that any of them - apart from option 3 , i.e. that concerning a and c quotas - can be considered due to the uncertainty regarding compatibility with the WTO rules .
In view of this it was deemed appropriate to consider the situation further .
Where nuts are concerned , the producer countries clearly expressed a need for special subsidies in this sector .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's initiative to strengthen rural policy is welcomed by the Member States .
As I have mentioned previously , however , there is no agreement on the choice of tools for achieving this objective and the debate in the Council revealed divergent attitudes on matters such as the choice of instruments and distribution of the resources .
Nonetheless , the debate was extremely positive in the sense that there is broad agreement that something must be done in this area , including the fact that there is a great need for simplification of the arrangements , and the delegations have a number of ideas for improvements and for new measures in the slightly longer term .
With regard to the farm audit , many delegations have generally expressed great interest in the Commission 's ideas , again in principle .
The majority of the delegations however feel that in the first instance it should be a voluntary system that is attractive to farmers , so that we can get as many as possible to use the scheme .
We in the Council have thoroughly examined the Commission 's communication on the mid-term review .
The delegations have been given opportunity to ask questions , make comments , contribute new ideas , support or criticise all aspects of the Commission 's communication and the reports accompanying the communication .
In the light of this the Commission now has a solid basis for considering the Member States ' wishes as regards future development of the common agricultural policy and also for drawing the necessary conclusions .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , in view of all the decisions being made during this key phase of the enlargement process , I would like to support you in your call for us to continue with the reform of the common agricultural policy .
However , and this is an important distinction , we are now talking about reforming the common agricultural policy as from 2007 , which means that we will continue with the present policy up to 2006 and that Europe 's agricultural sector will move forward on the basis of a reformed policy as from 2007 .
Commissioner Fischler , I think you need to assume that neither the timing nor the content of your proposals will be viable if we have correctly interpreted the compromise on direct agricultural payments negotiated in Brussels by the Heads of State and Government .
In other words , it is now clear that the agreements reached at the Berlin Summit will remain in force until 2006 , and that the most recent decisions provide a firm basis for planning by the EU 's farmers up to 2013 .
This means that the candidate countries can certainly rely on increases in direct payments as from 2004 .
That , incidentally , formed part of the proposals presented by the Commission back in December 2001 on the financing of direct agricultural payments for the enlargement countries .
The only difference , and this was already clear to us back then , is that the 100 % compensation payments for all EU Member States in 2013 will no longer be matched by 100 % financing capacity as in 2006 .
I think it must be clear to everyone that this will be lower by then .
Every farmer in the enlarged European Union must be aware of that .
In order to prevent mistakes , we in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats are , in a motion for a resolution tabled by all the groups in the European Parliament , requesting , for this reason among others , that unlimited budget rights and full codecision should be transferred to this House for agricultural matters .
Mr President , I wish to table a point of order to ensure that note is taken of my indignation at the undemocratic method that the Presidency has pursued in this debate .
We have been waiting here since 5 p.m. to start this debate , but the time management of the various presidencies has been thoroughly incompetent .
And now you announce , Mr President , that the coordinators are to have the floor , followed by Commissioner Fischler and then the debate will be suspended , which means that the other Members who are scheduled to speak will have to do so after dinner .
This , Mr President , is highly undemocratic and unworthy of this House .
I wish my views to be recorded .
Mr President , I would like to know whether I have understood you properly .
The Group Chairmen will speak , then we will have the Commissioner 's and the Minister 's replies , and then the debate will be resumed at 9 p.m. without the Commissioner and without the Minister .
Is that right ?
Mr President , this is in no way a criticism of you personally .
I would like to thank the Minister for his availability but I am going to withdraw my speech , for two reasons .
Firstly , this Chamber has a certain dignity , and that dignity is manifested in the way we work .
Secondly , agriculture is going through an extremely delicate period .
We are a political assembly and , with my farming background , I find it absolutely unacceptable that we should deal with agricultural issues in this way .
We will decide as a group how best to bring tonight 's situation to the attention of President Cox .
Mr President , I am sure there is not much we can do about tight schedules and fixed commitments , but if you had explained to the House from the Chair that Commissioner Fischler would have to be on board a plane by a certain time and for certain reasons , I am sure we could have avoided this conflict , because everyone would have seen sense .
However , if you simply inform us that is how things are , you are bound to provoke some resistance from Members of this House , and quite rightly so , because it is an offence to our dignity !
We are not content for our views to be put to one side - we want to be involved in this decision , and we want to know what is going on .
If you can take that on board , then I think we can have a reasonable dialogue with each other .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , whom I thank for her willingness to attend this sitting , I must say that I am one of those who believe that the Brussels Summit had the undeniable merit of unblocking enlargement 's financial procedure and of setting the rules for agricultural funding for the next ten years .
It would be a mistake , however , to confuse this funding stability with the status quo of the CAP .
There are four reasons for this :
the first is that the CAP in its current form runs counter to the multifunctional approach to farming , which requires a substantial strengthening of its second pillar .
And , unless this is achieved by means of transferring funds from the first pillar , I fail to see where we will find the resources to pay for this in the context of enlargement to 25 , 27 and later perhaps even to 28 States ;
the second reason is that defending the status quo of the blue box in WTO negotiations will cost us very dear .
The price we might have to pay could be to make concessions on issues as important as access to the market , the protection of denominations of origin and even our own aid from the blue box ;
the third reason is that we have , under the CAP , a system of aid that is truly schizophrenic .
In other words , it provides aid for some farmers but denies it to others .
This is unsustainable in the long term and must be changed for a system of aid that does not discriminate between products and producers and which remedies this imbalance ;
the fourth reason for taking action is that the current system of aid is too complicated to be applied in a Union of 25 or 27 members .
I believe that it would be preferable to undertake a balanced reform now , before 2004 , which guarantees that the markets and their regulatory instruments will be managed , which guarantees Community preference and which guarantees aid for farmers , rather than to do so after enlargement , with the inherent risks of uncertainty about the negotiating and decision-making procedures in the first few years of the enlarged Union .
Mr President , the common agricultural policy is out of date .
It is urgently in need of reform if we are going to make a success of enlargement and of our commitment to open our markets to under-developed countries .
Given the recent attitudes of the Council , the European Parliament has a heavy responsibility to give strong support to the Commission 's proposals for a mid-term review .
These , though not perfect , point in the right direction .
Further market reform , with the decoupling of direct payments from production and the reinforcement of rural development , is most welcome .
The proposals will put us in a stronger position in the World Trade Organisation negotiations .
However , our Agriculture Committee is dominated by farmers and farmers ' interests and it is blinded by two obsessions .
The first is for protection against imported food and the second is for a guaranteed annual subsidy to be available to the farming industry as a whole .
The concept of a really competitive European agriculture in the world market without subsidy is far from the Committee 's thinking .
The resolution pays lip service to reform but attaches so many conditions that I doubt whether the needs of enlargement , nor our obligations under the WTO , could be met .
The agricultural policies should be redirected so that they encourage farmers to be more enterprising .
Whatever financial assistance is given should not be seen as a right .
It must be earned and in a manner that the public can accept .
I would have liked to have seen the Commission proposals go further .
We need to move towards world market prices by progressively reducing direct payments , we need to end quotas and make sure that the annual budget actually starts to reduce .
It is ridiculous that 50 % of our Community budget should be spent on a declining contribution to our GDP .
Thank you , Mr President .
President-in-Office of the Council , the Commission 's draft mid-term review of agricultural policy is a sound basis for embarking upon the discussions of a future reform of the EU 's agricultural policy .
The decision on long-term funding , taken at the Brussels Summit , creates the background for enlargement .
That is good and is something on which the Presidency should be commended .
Any reform should be centred on farmers and consumers .
It should be dynamic , and it should be a continuation of the liberalisation begun at the Berlin Summit in 1999 .
It should cover adjustments in response to the market economy and to world market prices and also , therefore , a curtailment of , and change to , the familiar policy of subsidy .
The period up until 2006 should therefore be used for preparing a reform of the EU 's agricultural policy that makes European farmers competitive in the future world market .
Mr President , the reform process set in motion by the 1992 agricultural reform and continued by Agenda 2000 is to be carried forward and adjusted to reflect changing circumstances .
The Commission 's proposals are a basis for discussions after 2007 , as a whole raft of issues and problems correctly identified in the paper remain to be resolved .
Nevertheless , the common agricultural policy was successful , and those elements that made it successful still need to be defended .
I am quite convinced that there will be major debates on the decisions reached by the Heads of State and Government in Brussels as regards how to deal with future expenditure under EU agricultural policy within the predetermined financial framework and including the ten candidate countries .
Looked at in that light , the motion for a resolution is just a snapshot and not a reform paper .
Freezing the agriculture budget at its 2006 level as from 2007 means an annual cut in agricultural support for farmers in the existing Member States , which will be hard or even impossible to achieve in 2003 , the year before the elections .
It will not be possible to reach a consensus to the effect that farmers should meet the cost of enlargement , yet it looks suspiciously as if that is what is intended .
In her speech , the President-in-Office mentioned that there are proposals on the table for the milk sector .
I would like to ask you , Madam President-in-Office , when you think these proposals will be implemented .
Before 2008 or not ?
Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate our committee chairman , Mr Daul , on what he has presented to us .
However , this is not just Mr Daul 's resolution , it has the support of the entire Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and I hope that tomorrow it will have the support of the entire European Parliament .
Your personal achievement has been to bring together the various different tendencies in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and to document the European Parliament 's desire to have a voice in the reform process .
I would ask you , President-in-Office , to convey this to the Council , please .
The European Parliament wants codecision here .
It wants codecision as regards debates about content and form , and it wants codecision as regards financial resources .
We do not want to end up with the sort of strange decisions made at intergovernmental conference level , with us being informed how much money is to be devoted to the agricultural policy , without anyone ever seeking to establish a link between the substantive reforms needed and their financial impact .
We want codecision for both agricultural policy and finance .
You were wise enough not to cap pillar two , because we would not have found that acceptable , but we need to achieve a situation in which the European Parliament also has sovereignty over finances in pillar one , and can also decide what the basic features of the agricultural policy are .
I am pleased that we have support within the Commission and that in Commissioner Fischler we have someone who will advance the reforms in the direction this House has in mind .
Mr President , I too acknowledge the presence of the President-in-Office and I want to thank the Commissioner for his openness and willingness to engage in continuing debate on the future of European agriculture .
His proposals for reform were complemented by an equally thoughtful response from Parliament 's Agriculture Committee and I join the previous speaker in complimenting the Chairman of our committee .
To some extent this debate has now been superseded by the decision of the Heads of State to adhere to the decisions taken in Berlin .
I have made the point on the number of occasions in this House that one of the greatest difficulties experienced by farmers is uncertainty - not being able to plan , even in the short term , for the development of their farms .
Berlin was interpreted by farmers as setting the agricultural agenda , without adjustment , to 2006 , and for this reason I believe the recent decision by the Heads of State was correct and restores to some degree of normality what was becoming a contentious issue for farmers .
I welcome , in particular , the more long-term budgetary assurances to 2013 but feel that the 1 % inflation provision should at least be index-linked .
I am satisfied that the EU is committed to safeguarding the interests of its farmers and in this regard I believe that Commissioner Fischler has shown credible leadership .
I would like to ask the Minister to clarify , in the light of recent decisions , the position with regard to decoupling and compulsory modulation .
Mr President , President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy has given rise to enormous debate in Europe 's farms .
I welcome the fact that the Commission has presented this review on schedule , and I would specifically like to express my thanks for its forward-looking nature .
However , I would like to stress and reiterate what the Commissioner told us - we should view this paper as a basis for a debate , a debate which we are all called upon to participate in .
The Commission has proposed a broadly based approach to reform .
There is still a substantial need for clarification and debate in many areas .
The Brussels Summit on 24 and 25 October set the financial framework up to 2013 .
We now need to establish in good time what shape the agricultural policy of the enlarged Community should take .
Mr Daul 's motion for a resolution was voted on in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development after lengthy discussions between all the groups and many amendments .
I would like to thank Mr Daul for his outstanding work and for his willingness to compromise .
That is why I ask my fellow Members to vote for this motion for a resolution .
We do not need to go into all that much detail today .
I hope we will have sufficient opportunities to do that at a later stage .
However , there are a few important points I would like to touch upon briefly .
The idea of decoupling aids and cutting red tape sounds appealing .
However , I cannot imagine either working in practice .
We are talking about money for farming families and that means that there must be fair and measurable criteria for distribution .
It seems to me that basing the future of our agricultural policy on historical values , as the Commission is proposing , is not very forward-looking .
As regards rules , commitments and audits the Commission should be proposing a simple and efficient procedure for such audits .
The idea of burdening farms with new and unnecessary formalities and costs is not acceptable .
I hope that in December we will have an opportunity to discuss concrete proposals from the Commission on market organisations .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , I too should like first of all to offer my heartfelt thanks to the Chairman of the Committee , as he was able , in very special circumstances , to create a unanimously agreed and comprehensive basis on which to work such as this .
My sincere thanks to you , then , Mr Daul .
The EU 's agricultural policy is now in a very special and difficult situation , in turmoil , in fact , with the approach of enlargement and in the context of the current WTO negotiations .
For that reason , it is very important for us to be able to establish a very stable agricultural policy , one that trusts in and has faith in the future , especially as enlargement is also now a key issue .
In their future proposals for regulations , the Commission should present criteria that take account of impediments due to difficult natural conditions as well as what is needed for the implementation of environmental programmes .
The basis of environmental action , in particular , must be the reinforcement of existing programmes .
The programmes need flexibility , for example , in determining levels of financing , so that Member States can decide how much funding they need for different actions with reference to their own individual circumstances .
Mr President , farmers in the Member States of the European Union , especially the Mediterranean , are being called on to foot the bill for reform and enlargement , in that present hardships , miserly quotas and exorbitant levies will be compounded by dramatic cuts in what are already depressed prices for basic agricultural produce , with no compensation in return .
This will have a tragic impact on the already severely eroded income of small and medium-sized producers , who will be forced to abandon the sector , causing agricultural production to shrink and eroding standards .
The decision by the Brussels Summit to freeze EU agricultural expenditure at pre-2006 levels until 2013 , enhanced by 1 % per annum in inflation provision , translates directly into a reduction in appropriations .
This is because they will be divided between 25 countries and because the allowance for inflation has deliberately been pitched low .
Inflation is already twice that and is expected to rise once the 10 new countries join .
The way in which the CAP is being applied to the candidate countries is totally discriminatory , with direct subsidies being meted out at a rate of 25 % in the first year , rising to 100 % in 2013 , in other words when subsidies will be worthless .
Finally , as a member of the GUE / NGL ...
( The president cut the speaker off )
Mr President , President-in-Office , I would first like to sincerely thank the rapporteur , Joseph Daul .
Like many of the previous speakers , I fundamentally welcome the fact that the European agricultural model is to be extended to a multifunctional agricultural sector in the enlarged European Union .
This requires qualified external protection , and within the EU we still need markets to be regulated .
However , although I fundamentally view the Franco-German unity that has emerged in the run-up to enlargement as a good thing , it does raise some issues for me .
Although taxpayers and farmers already know how much money is to be spent up to 2013 , they do not know on what .
Germany 's position as a net contributor will worsen simply because Germany 's Federal Chancellor has locked us into the agreed financial framework for the agricultural policy from 2006 to 2013 , with 25 countries .
As we have heard again and again , and as the Commissioner has also told us , the reduction in compensation payments needed after 2006 will mean that less money will go to the agricultural sector than does now , and that applies particularly to Germany .
I simply want to make that criticism clear .
Incidentally , our Chancellor is not renowned for being the German farmers ' friend !
The Commissioner for agriculture has put the net contribution to be made by the EU 's farmers to financing enlargement at EUR 500 million in 2013 .
This amounts to the difference between the additional costs resulting from direct payments for the new Member States and the increase in agricultural expenditure approved by the EU Summit .
This Commission calculation indicates to me that Europe 's farmers will have to pay the lion 's share of the burden of enlargement .
The Commissioner for agriculture has repeatedly presented it as something positive that the Brussels Summit did not cap resources for rural development - that is to say , for the second pillar - but he can also tell us ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , we genuinely greatly appreciate the work of the Commissioner and the Commission in general on enlargement and rural development policy .
It is a courageous undertaking , and the transfer of some of the resources supporting the market precisely to the poorer rural areas is timely and positive .
As always , when one person benefits , many others suffer .
The previous speakers have already mentioned the reasons for regretting decoupling and other technical aspects , which I will not repeat .
I would , instead , like to focus on the positive side of these innovations , this courageous step , to address a point which is , I am sad to say , too often disregarded .
In actual fact , this openness bodes extremely well for all those who are advocates of development in the outermost regions , particularly mountain regions .
This section on rural development is extremely important but its importance is equally greatly overlooked .
The word ' mountain ' does not appear in the Commissioner 's mid-term review , even though , just a couple of weeks ago , he dedicated a two-day seminar to mountain issues .
As always , however , the debate was opened and closed without any progress being made .
The word ' mountain ' does not appear in the document we are discussing either , but mountain issues can quite easily be identified in Mr Daul 's document .
I congratulate Mr Daul heartily .
For example , paragraph 1 of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development 's motion for resolution calls for the development of multifunctional farming .
Mountain farming is a diverse and multifunctional typical form of farming .
Paragraph 3 , which calls for a more precise definition of the objectives of protection of the environment , public health and animal welfare , describes what have always been the parameters of mountain farming , what I would call endemic mountain farming .
Above all , however , mountains are implicit in the section on rural development .
Paragraph 17 calls for a range of measures differing according to the different types of farming regions . Again , paragraph 18 states that it is essential to preserve traditional family farms and support young farmers in less-favoured areas and the outermost regions .
I regret to say that the remote location of mountain areas means that they are always outermost regions and certainly less favoured than the plains .
Lastly , paragraph 20 calls upon the Commission to give priority in the distribution pattern to the less-favoured regions , to the regions which are most vulnerable and in need - I would add - not just of development plans but of an investment of trust .
This is the situation of the European mountain regions , which make up 30 % of Europe 's territory and are home to 5 % of its population .
The mountains do not want to be a problem . They want their great potential to be a major resource for the whole Union .
We must decide to call them by their name . We must have no hesitation in acknowledging their specific situation and , what is more , mention them by name in the new Treaty to give them an anchor and provide a legal basis on which to draw up an ad hoc directive .
We must start work on a document which provides specifically and exclusively for the needs of the mountain regions .
This could be the start of a radical reform which would improve the situation of the mountain regions and all the less-favoured regions , giving them the same opportunities for life and growth as the rest of the Community .
I would like to thank our chairman , Mr Daul , once again , not least for giving me the cue to make these observations on a very important matter .
Mr President , when Mr Fischler , the Commissioner for agriculture , tried to sell his reform proposals to professional associations and politicians in Luxembourg in September , he showed a great deal of understanding for the Grand Duchy 's situation , which he classed as a special case , and stated , amongst other things , that if such special situations were to be reflected in the policy , which he wished to see , then it would be necessary to draw up tailor-made plans for Luxembourg , and his proposals made this perfectly feasible .
Commissioner Fischler also assured Luxembourg on that occasion that he considered we had implemented the concept of rural development in an exemplary fashion , and in this respect he even said that nowhere else had EU resources been better invested .
That is all very well and good .
Of course , once the legislative proposals reflecting these ideas for reform are on the table , we will find out just how much we can rely on those statements .
In Luxembourg , 70 % of farms would be affected by the modulation proposed , that is to say by the progressive reduction in compensation payments by one-fifth , in addition to the expected drop in income because of cuts in producer prices and because of the mandatory 10 % ' environmental set-aside ' .
This is unacceptable and would lead to the socially and environmentally unacceptable demise of family farms .
Proposals that would achieve eastward enlargement by wiping out farmers belong in one place - the rubbish bin .
I am able to vote for the compromise resolution that Joseph Daul has invested so much time and understanding in , even if it is with a heavy heart , Joseph !
The summit on 25 October agreed , thank goodness , that the common agricultural policy agreed in 2000 in Berlin up to 2006 would not be undermined by any radical changes before then .
So we and the Commission have time to reflect .
In any case , less favoured regions should be exempt both from the modulation and also from mandatory environmental set-aside .
In conclusion , I would like to ?
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I should like to thank you very much for this opportunity to take part here today in the debate , which I have found both interesting and very constructive .
I want also again to thank the European Parliament for its reading of the Commission 's communication , and I understand that a decision may be made at the meeting tomorrow .
I do not know if I might be permitted to concur in the praise accorded at the meeting here this evening to the chairman of Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I of course appreciate from the debate that the European Parliament has just as many approaches to European agricultural policy as I encounter in the Council of Ministers , and I therefore fully appreciate the difficulties that Mr Daul has been so extremely good at negotiating , as is apparent from the proposal now due to be voted on .
Many people touched upon the issue of the prospects for reforming agricultural policy following the Brussels Summit .
How will the policy eventually look ? How long will the reforms take ?
There are many outstanding issues but , with the conclusions adopted at the Brussels Summit , the European Council has clarified matters regarding the maximum expenditure on the market-related area and direct payments for the budget period up to 2013 .
In this context , I should like to draw attention to section 12 , generally , of the conclusions , which in actual fact says three different things .
First of all , it anticipates ceilings set for expenditure for market-related expenditure and direct payments , and not future decisions on the common agricultural policy .
Secondly , it does not anticipate possible results following the implementation of paragraph 22 of the Berlin European Council conclusions .
Paragraph 22 of the conclusions is the background to the mid-term review of agricultural policy , which we discussed at the most recent meetings of the Council of Ministers .
Thirdly - and as a response , too , to some of the questions raised this evening - what is stated is without prejudice to the international commitments entered into by the European Union , for example in the launching of the next Doha Round , the ways and means of which are to be in place before the end of March of next year .
As I also said in my first contribution , the negotiations in each of the three areas mentioned are continuing and will not necessarily be influenced by the fact that the European Council has now set a ceiling for the expenditure up until 2013 .
I shall not at this stage weary MEPs with a report on the Council 's view of developments , but how far we get - and that is of course what is exciting and interesting : how far will we get in the individual areas ? - completely depends upon the wishes of the individual Member States and upon what we can agree to in the Council of Ministers .
Exciting tasks still lie ahead , therefore , and we look forward to completing these .
I should like , however , again to say thank you for the sound cooperation we have had with the European Parliament . I hope that this will continue in the further discussions of the development of a European agricultural policy , to the satisfaction and benefit of both producers and consumers .
Thank you very much , President-in-Office of the Council .
Not only did you make an effort to remain in the House , but you also kept well within the speaking time allowed .
That is quite extraordinary for the Council .
You did not even use the full five minutes you were entitled to , which is greatly to your credit .
Pursuant to Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received one motion for a resolution .
It is hardly surprising , given how the new common agricultural policy is taking shape in the run up to enlargement , that the rural population in the EU , and in Greece in particular , is gripped by anxiety , wondering whether they will be able to continue in their chosen profession , a profession which is so necessary and of such capital importance to the European economy and European society .
And why ?
Because overall subsidies in the agricultural sector will increase by 8 % between 2006 and 2013 , in the form of a minimal inflation provision .
I should like to set this disturbing increase against a number of other post-enlargement increases in the EU , so as to give a more in-depth picture of future developments .
Increase in Member States 65 % ( from 15 to 25 )
Increase in Population 25 % ( from 370 to 470 million )
Increase in Rural land 43 % ( from 140 million to 200 million hectares )
Increase in Cultivable land 55 % ( from 77 million to 120 million hectares )
Increase in Farmers 165 % ( from 6 to 16 million )
And in return : I repeat , total agricultural subsidies will increase by a mere 8 % up to 2013 , not counting the integration of Bulgaria and Romania scheduled for 2007 .
What , one may ask , can our farmers expect ...
( Statement submitted in accordance with Rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure )
I think that first of all we must try to understand why North Korea decided to admit that it is producing nuclear weapons .
What lies behind this declaration ?
Is it an act aiming at dialogue as some seem to think ?
Or is it a provocative act , an attempt to blackmail in order to get money in exchange for a behaviour - renouncing nuclear power - that it should adopt in any case ?
Moreover , yesterday , North Korea reinforced its blackmail through another threat : it will re-start missile testing if it feels the negotiations with Japan are unsatisfactory .
This is to say that , if North Korea does not obtain millions of dollars in exchange , it will not respect its promises , as it has already demonstrated on many occasions .
How should we behave towards North Korea now ?
It seems to me that , above all , we should have sent a clear message - things have changed and nothing will be the same .
This is why I was against the decision to send a letter to North Korea to reconfirm the invitation for the Parliamentary delegation to come to Brussels this week .
Maybe we should not have sent it since the invitation was turned down .
The EU has little influence on North Korea .
As we heard from Mrs de Palacio , our monetary contribution to KEDO is minimal in comparison with that of other partners .
I think that the Commissioner was right to say that we must aim to develop cooperation between the actors in the area so as to oblige North Korea to respect international rules , although I doubt this will happen with the current regime still in power .
The resolution which we are presenting today is built on those premises and is a result of a compromise reached by the major political groups in Parliament .
I would have preferred it to be tougher on North Korea , but it still represents an acceptable compromise between the need to maintain an open dialogue and the necessity to press Pyongyang into giving up its nuclear and missile programmes .
I hope that everyone will agree that it would be useful after yesterday 's developments to move an oral amendment strongly condemning the new threat of renewed missile testing .
Mr President , the Socialist Group welcomes the statement from the Commission .
There is no final proof that they have weapons-grade plutonium available and , of course , I support the compromise resolution between a number of groups in this institution .
We fully and firmly agree with the trilateral statement made by President Bush , Prime Minister Koizumi and President Kim Dae-jung at the APEC Summit meeting at the weekend calling on North Korea to dismantle its admitted uranium enrichment programme in a prompt and verifiable manner and to come into full compliance with all international obligations in conformity with North Korea 's recent commitment in the Japan-North Korea Pyongyang Declaration .
Nevertheless , we cannot be entirely blind to the fact that the 1994 framework agreement has not been fulfilled in its entirety by the US either .
The first reactor from KEDO scheduled to be online by the end of next year is currently running seven years late .
Deliveries of heavy fuel oil , the US contribution to KEDO , have , in the past at least , been sporadic .
Most importantly , the US commitment in 1994 to normalise relations , lift the embargo on North Korea - which has been in place for 50 years - and lift the nuclear threat have still not been fulfilled .
We welcome the North Korean offer to engage in dialogue on all outstanding issues , which may mean that this becomes an opportunity rather than a threat .
We need to look at the issue of missile sales and testing , and the linked inevitable missile exports .
We must look at the signing of the Chemical and Biological Weapons Convention by North Korea and outstanding problems around the issue of abductees from Japan .
Also , of course , we must look for a continuation of the human rights dialogue .
In the meantime , I hope that the EU , as the only entity with diplomatic relations with the Republic of Korea , Japan , the US and with the DPRK , will help to initiate such a dialogue , if possible in concert with the other key actor in the region - China .
We must maintain humanitarian aid and continue the training of North Korean technicians in Europe if only to take this opportunity .
Two small corrections : firstly , Mr Gawronski said the North Koreans refused our invitation .
This was not the case .
They only had four days notice and asked for it to be postponed until a later date .
Secondly , the meeting scheduled for 11 November 2002 will not now take place and I hope we can move an oral amendment to make the point more general in terms of wanting EU involvement at all levels in these discussions .
Mr President , North Korea is a brutal , secretive communist dictatorship .
It has a history of political assassination , blowing up the South Korean cabinet in Rangoon a few years back .
It has blown up a South Korean civilian airliner . It has kidnapped innocent Japanese civilians , most of whom have died in mysterious circumstances .
Most recently , it has starved many of its people to death due to its disastrous isolationist economic policies .
It remains a failing and rogue state which means that the West , including the European Union , must tread very carefully in its attempts to engage with North Korea and bring it out of the cold .
The DPRK agreed in 1994 to freeze and dismantle its nuclear programme , and by its recent admission of possession of nuclear weapons it has clearly breached the non-proliferation treaty and the agreed framework of KEDO .
I believe it is right to call this regime part of the axis of evil .
Unlike Iraq , which has yet to acquire nuclear weapons , it is now too late to do anything militarily to prevent its nuclear proliferation .
Every pressure must be brought to bear to allow International Atomic Energy Agency inspectors back in .
Pakistan , our ally in the war on terrorism , should also be challenged on its role in this weapons programme , as it allegedly provided an exchange for North Korean missiles to weaponise its own nuclear bomb .
China 's role needs scrutiny and that country must be reminded that it is officially opposed to the nuclearisation of the Korean peninsula .
If the DPRK does not agree to reverse its policy and disarm in terms of its nuclear weapons then the whole KEDO contribution by the European Union should be terminated .
I support placing the budgetary line as a first step in the reserve to be released according to diplomatic progress .
Nevertheless , humanitarian aid must continue through the World Food Programme and ECHO .
The European Union is one of the few bodies to have formal relations with this country and must use its leverage and access to its government to resolve this situation satisfactorily .
Pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 )
Commissioner , as you and the House are aware , the assembly of the ' Community of Democracies ' will be held in Seoul from 10 to 12 November next , with the participation of government delegations from over 100 countries .
It follows on from the first assembly of this group in Warsaw two years ago .
This initiative seeks to promote political democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights .
The European Union , which dedicates a large section of its budget precisely to democratisation initiatives and initiatives seeking to promote human rights and the rule of law , has or is supposed to have a strategic line of upholding democracy as a guarantee of freedoms and of the best possible prospects of prosperity for entire peoples throughout the world .
As we know , the Seoul assembly is a meeting of governments . The Commission will participate as an observer .
Our question , Commissioner , is as follows : what contribution does the European Union - the Commission and the Member States - intend to make to the success of this assembly ?
The Transnational Radical Party dedicated an entire congress to this issue last weekend , identifying two possible goals which I would like you to make your own .
The first goal is to create a Secretariat for the Community of Democracies which will have the task of preserving and furthering the growth of this Community with a view to it becoming a genuine world democracy organisation .
The second goal is for a Community of Democracies group to be created within every UN body , alongside the regional or other formal and informal groups of countries . This group would work to safeguard and promote democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights .
For example , one subject for debate could be the progress of the Libyan Presidency in democratisation and respect for human rights . The next debate could be a similar debate on the United Nations Commission on Human Rights .
Mr President , the Community of Democracies is a forum which was created in 2000 and , I am pleased to say , relaunched at the last Transnational Radical Party congress .
It is a project in which the Group of the Party of European Socialists is greatly interested too , and we therefore want to emphasise the need for the Commission and the other Union organs to play an active role in the next conference , which , as you are aware , is due to take place in Seoul between 9 and 12 November 2002 .
In a world in which the threat of terrorism is increasingly accompanied by the danger that combating terrorism will lead to new cases of imperial dominance , it would appear essential that the alliance which the USA is attempting to build to fight what has been described as the axis of evil be opposed , although not necessarily antagonistically , by the Community of Democracies , an international body promoting peace and respect for freedoms which condemns all authoritarian tendencies on any side .
The Community of Democracies is not another UN , for the UN has a different sphere of operation and different tasks . Nor is it an imitation of what is known as the coalition against terrorism , which , I am sad to say , includes some States which are not democratic .
We call for the European Union to be more explicitly involved and for this Community , which seeks to promote democracy and freedoms , to become not just a forum for debate but a genuine international institution based on a binding agreement laying down , inter alia , clear criteria for accession .
These criteria must include the respect for human rights by the ' good ' States involved in combating terrorism too and the practical recognition of fundamental freedoms , starting with the equality of citizens before the law and the freedom of the press , which are currently being violated extensively even in the different Member States of the Union - a prime example being Berlusconi 's Italy - and they must , in any case , be in line with the Charter of Fundamental Rights which the European Union approved at the Nice European Council .
Mr President , in light of the horrendous passenger ferry disasters which have taken place recently in the European Community , such as the Estonia and the United Kingdom cross-channel ferry tragedies , these reports are a very constructive and welcome step forward .

I would like to thank my colleagues , Mr Ripoll y Martínez de Bedoya and Mr Poignant for all their hard work on these sister ( or in this case brother ) reports and in drawing up sensible conclusions for improved safety standards for ro-ro passenger ferries servicing European ports and domestic voyages within Member States .
The time is clearly right to bring forward these directives , stability requirements and technical updates for these ships .
Key to these directives is that the requirements we are now laying down are stricter than those laid down by the SOLAS 90 Convention , thereby ensuring that accidents of the magnitude we have experienced in the European Community will be much less likely to happen again .
We must also endeavour to ensure full implementation of the directives .
Alongside the proposed technical improvements , I particularly welcome measures to improve the safety of persons with reduced mobility .
I support Mr Ripoll y Martínez de Bedoya 's proposal for a narrower definition of the term ' reduced mobility ' .
I also welcome the proposed improvement and accessibility of signs aboard ship and the provision of alarm systems which are not only accessible to all passengers but which can be seen and heard by all passengers .
Furthermore , I believe we must ensure that the crew manning these vessels are highly trained and able to brief passengers on safety procedures in more than one language so that unnecessary loss of life is prevented .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0338 / 2002 ) by Mr Lagendijk , on behalf of the Committee of Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the Commission 's report on ' The Stabilisation and Association Process for South East Europe - First Annual Report ' .
. ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me just begin by briefly outlining the most important points of my report again .
I would like to say straight away that these points are nothing new .
Many of these have already been discussed here before , but there are a number of issues that deserve additional emphasis .
In the first place , aid granted to the countries of the Western Balkans needs to be linked to support .
This is not the first time that this has been said , but I believe that it has to be stressed again .
Cooperation with the international war tribunal at The Hague is not something which all countries can simply agree to and subsequently act as if that agreement does not exist .
That is , and that ought to be , a genuine concrete condition which must be in place and continue to be for the granting of support .
The same applies to another subject - the return of refugees - to which everyone agrees , but where practice has shown in this respect too that many countries do not deliver what they have promised or do not do what they ought to be doing .
Finally , let us look at the fight against corruption and crime .
Many fine words have also been uttered in this context , but unfortunately in practice it is shown that corruption continues to occur as far up as at government level , for example the last government in Macedonia .
The European Union cannot continue to inject money into that region while that is going on .
Another point in my report is the need to gain an insight into what will be the future of Kosovo .
We cannot have the situation where Kosovo continues to exist whilst the Kosovans want something else , but we just hang onto the 1999 UN resolution .
I do not have the solution , I do not know whether I am for independence or self-reliance , but I think that it is up to the European Union to start the discussion .
Finally , two more points which Parliament is absolutely right to ask for , time and again , and which need attention .
The first is the necessity to prepare education at all levels for a non-ethnic future .
The school books are nothing to write home about .
They are continuing to repeat the old patterns .
That is not acceptable ; it is the breeding ground for fresh conflict .
Secondly , it is clear again , from all the elections , how important it is for the media to be independent .
In almost all of the countries , the media play a disappointing role in the establishment of democracy and that must be brought to an end .
I am going quickly through the points because I feel they are important issues - that have already been brought to the fore earlier by Parliament but not , unfortunately , looked at in sufficient depth .
I am aware of the dangers to some extent and I would be keen to have an open discussion about these points with other Members and also with the Commission .
We all , including the Commission and Parliament , run the risk of being hidebound by a pattern , a way of thinking and working with the Balkans which arose in the nineties , based on the greatest dangers which existed then .
These were extreme nationalism and ethnic hatred .
Although these problems have not yet disappeared , I believe that the situation has changed so much that the greatest problems now in our considerations and our way of thinking about the Balkans are not getting the attention they deserve .
In my opinion , the relevant problems are economic and social crises , stagnation and a growing disappointment with the effects of democracy .
At this very moment , there is the risk that our interest in the Western Balkans is waning .
I only have to point out that we are sitting here in a Chamber that is almost empty .
When we discuss enlargement , the room is full , when we discuss the Western Balkans , there is just a handful of people , the usual suspects , who are prepared to speak on this issue - and Europe simply carries on .
This cannot continue ; the European Union can no longer afford this .
The budget for the Balkans is falling , from 900 million a few years ago to 500 million in 2005 .
This is why I was so impressed with a report which I have just received , entitled Western Balkans 2004 from the European Stability Initiative .
This sets out in minute detail what the problems are now and what potential solutions the European Union should find to deal with them .
One crucial observation is that the period of reconstruction is over .
This has been reasonably successful and the EU has achieved a certain amount of success with it but now something else is needed .
Industry has been decimated or allowed to decay .
Many small businesses have grown in its place but have not been able to solve the problem of unemployment and there are absolutely no prospects for large sections of the population .
Pursuant to this report , which I broadly support , what should that mean for the European Union , the Commission and Parliament ?
I think that we must learn from the successes of the structural and cohesion funds .
These have been successful in southern Europe and I think that the time has come to apply the methodology and the approach of the structural and cohesion funds also to the countries of the Western Balkans .
For example , this would mean that the agency for reconstruction that we have had up until now ought to be turned into an agency for development .
This will also have to mean that , after the current enlargement by ten countries , the remaining candidate member states and the countries of the Western Balkans will be brought together into one DG , because the problems of Bulgaria and Romania are not essentially any different to those of the Western Balkans .
It will also have to mean that part of the pre-accession monies , which is soon only available for Romania and Bulgaria , can also be spent on the Balkans .
More of the same is no longer enough .
There is no point in having more and more sessions with the same people discussing the same policies .
A genuine change of direction has to take place and this has to happen quickly .
I am strongly in favour of such action and I make an appeal to the Commission and to each of us , the Members of this Parliament , to sit with each other and see what is now necessary for the Balkans .
What we have done up till now has been successful but it is not sufficient for the future .
Mr President , I too would like to express my satisfaction at the fact that this report emphasises , once again , that it is in the European Union 's interests to proceed with all the policies which are useful and necessary to achieve integration of the countries of the Western Balkans into the European structures . I too believe that we must proceed with a policy which has yielded good fruit in recent years in terms of reconstruction and , in addition , consider the next step , which is the issue of democracy and legislation in those places .
These countries lie at the heart of Mediterranean Europe , and it is therefore in the common interest of all the Community institutions , as well as our duty to the peoples living in the area , to provide the aid , decisions and related measures necessary to help these countries address what we feel are the current fundamental problems : problems in the field of education and training , combating organised crime , and , in particular , the endeavours to achieve democracy .
The report highlights these problems clearly .
It underscores them and emphasises the role of the European Union . It also highlights the attempts - hesitant but clearly being made - to establish greater legal protection , particularly where women are concerned - which I welcome - but that is not enough .
This report displays the European Union 's interest : it must be followed by more practical measures than those hitherto provided for .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , whenever we debate the crisis in the Balkans , which of course has now become a gentler , more correctly defined form of crisis , we are all the wiser for it .
In this sense , today 's report by Mr Lagendijk is a good report and we are all the wiser for having debated it .
The situation in the region is indeed complicated , complicated from the political standpoint , from the social standpoint , and from the developmental standpoint .
Our intervention in the Balkans , therefore , is not technocratic intervention , it is political intervention , because new institutions need to be built .
Now that every institution has been destroyed , nations which have been in conflict need to be encouraged to communicate and the entire social , political and developmental environment needs to change .
So our efforts have to be unwavering , they have to take an unwavering approach which avoids controversy and they have to be in keeping with UN resolutions .
Any philosophy of change could give rise to renewed crisis .
Secondly , the nations in the area need to make an effort to communicate with each other again ; this will also foster economic development because these countries all used to support each other 's economies .
Thirdly , it is good that the countries in the area as a whole will soon all be members of the European Union , from Romania to Bulgaria , Austria , Greece and so on ; in other words , there will be a positive impact on developments in these countries from all sides .
And then we shall need to do our utmost , politically , to help these nations , which lived in peaceful coexistence for hundreds of years , to regain their historic foothold , to rediscover their modus vivendi , to rediscover the political union and common way of life which , unfortunately , have been upset over recent years by untimely movements and careless initiatives .
Mr President , I find myself particularly irritated by the sections about Kosovo in Mr Lagendijk 's substantial report .
For instance , Paragraph 4 rightly calls for attention from the Council and the Commission for the political future of ancient Kosovo Polje .
In this connection , the negative contribution from Belgrade is disappointing .
According to Michael Steiner , UN representative for Kosovo , this city is like a hot potato which the Serbian leaders pass quickly on .
I would be pleased to learn from the Council and the Commission of their experiences and of the efforts they have made .
Meanwhile , the local elections of 26 October in Kosovo offered little encouragement as regards the Serbian contribution .
A heavy price was paid for Belgrade 's conflicting appeals for very limited participation on the one hand or , on the other , for everyone to turn up and vote .
In fact , the boycott of the elections by the Serbian population of North Mitrovica meant a complete rejection of the very generous seven point plan proposed by UNMIK chief Steiner - a proposal that , however , actually wants to go a long way towards meeting the interests of the Serbian minority in a predominantly Albanian Kosovo .
In the light of this , I find myself struggling with the highly idealistic composition of the rapporteur 's amendment to Paragraph 40 .
Very sensibly , the original text of this paragraph urges a rapid end to the actual situation whereby the town of Mitrovica does not fall under the authority of UNMIK and the interim government of Kosovo .
In concrete terms , that means the disappearance of parallel Serbian security and administrative structures , financed with Serbian money .
And that is totally along the lines , and in the spirit , of Steiner 's seven-point plan .
In short , with a brief , factual addition - which referred to the seven-point plan - the rapporteur would have lent the paragraph more power of expression , for clarity and decisiveness on the part of the international community is for the benefit of all Kosovan inhabitants for the sake of their collective future .
How do the Council and the Commission feel that they can , within the framework of the Stabilisation and Association Process for South East Europe , lend support to Steiner 's noble efforts to make Mitrovica into ' a normal European town ' ?
Mr President , Joost Lagendijk 's report covers a great many issues , and we cannot comment on all of them here .
However , I would like to start by saying that I totally support it , and that applies equally to my group .
This part of Europe is a multi-speed region .
Some countries , such as Macedonia and Croatia , already have agreements ; theirs are stabilisation and association agreements , although that does not of course necessarily mean that all the conditions are being complied with in detail .
Joost has already listed the deficits .
It is , however , with some satisfaction that we can consider Albania , a country which has managed to make up for the fraudulent elections held in 2001 by electing a consensus president , something very few people expected , including the Commission .
We would now like to see an early start made on the negotiations around this process , although we know that it will not be concluded rapidly , as there is still a lot of homework to be done .
Turning to Bosnia and Herzegovina , it has to be said that this country is struggling to square the circle .
I am referring to the Dayton Agreement .
I simply wish to say , for example , that 67 % of Bosnia and Herzegovina 's entire budget is spent on ministers ' salaries . There are over 120 ministers who only exist because they are virtually stipulated in the Dayton Agreement .
Something has to be done about this and the last elections were a warning signal .
Serbia and Montenegro 's President and Prime Minister are squabbling with each other instead of jointly fighting for their country .
Serbia and Montenegro should now be finding a joint path towards European membership , and the Solana proposal , no matter how limited it may be , is at present the best and the only way forward .
With regard to Kosovo , which I visited again just last week , I can only say that we should be able to make sure that its peoples can coexist , thus making Serbian enclaves unnecessary .
They have many problems in common .
There are ethnic tensions in some countries , there are unsatisfactory refugee return arrangements , there is the battle against trafficking in human beings , which is also unsatisfactory , and there is corruption .
Only one thing is clear , and that is that we must not back off from our commitment .
That is the litmus test for our credibility .
As Joost has already said , we need to have a precise idea of what we wish to achieve in this region in the near future .
Mr President , as always Mr Lagendijk 's report is excellent , comprehensive and prudent .
I genuinely believe that the Stability Pact and the Stabilisation and Association Process have chalked up a lot of successes overall .
Some of these have already been mentioned , such as the elections in Macedonia and developments in Albania , although I have to say that I have heard that the consensus reached between the major political groups in Albania is now at breaking point .
I would , however , like to comment on some of Mr Lagendijk 's fundamental observations , because they seem very important to me .
You mentioned the debates on enlargement and the debates on the Balkans .
I was present at both debates today , and I was also at the enlargement debate , at which President Prodi made a statement that I consider to be very important .
He pointed out that the enlargement process with the ten new countries and also with the subsequent applicant countries has not yet been completed , and that this gives an important signal to the Balkans in particular .
I believe , and I also stated this in my own speech , that our experience with preparations for enlargement must act as a signal - and this applies to the Balkan countries too - that countries that advocate democracy , the rule of law , protection of minorities and human rights have a chance of joining the European Union at a later date .
I believe that we need to consider now how we are to manage the organisational requirements .
As I see it , the Stability Pact - and this is Mr Bussek 's intention in his role as Special Coordinator - needs to become more focused , with a reduced role and tasks being increasingly transferred to the Commission . This should not , however , take place outside the enlargement process , but should come in at the latest with effect from 2004 / 2005 , when the new Commission will meet in accordance with the enlargement process .
I accordingly believe that we in this House need to give the Balkan countries a signal , or rather hope , that they too have a place in Europe , bearing in mind the Zagreb II Summit also .
It will then be up to them to decide if they wish to do all this so as to effectively secure a place in Europe .
Mr President , South Eastern Europe , or if you like the bankrupt estate of the former Yugoslavia , which was torn apart by bloody ethnic conflicts , putting Albania to one side , is essentially the parade ground for the European Union 's Common Foreign and Security Policy .
It is also its most severe test .
Our efforts to provide these countries with economic and political support are much needed .
We certainly should not put them on the back burner because of the enlargement of the European Union .
In fact it is that very prospect of a future in Europe that we need to hold out to them .
That is the purpose of the Stabilisation and Association Process for South East Europe .
I consider the rapporteur 's proposal that priorities should be set an extremely sensible one .
Kosovo 's final status needs to be clarified as a matter of urgency , as does the structure of Serbia and Montenegro in terms of constitutional law .
Until we have done that , it will simply not be possible to enter into negotiations on an association agreement .
The ill-defined status of Kosovo is a latent source of uncertainty .
It means that business has no trust whatsoever in the situation and that there is inadequate investment .
This leads in turn to an increase in corruption and to a growing trend towards emigration , in other words migratory pressure that we in Austria are particularly , but not exclusively , sensitive to .
One of the most important conditions , and this applies to the entire region , is to impose the rule of law , and to fight corruption and organised crime .
One very positive step here has been the creation of the Regional Centre for Combating Transborder Crime in Bucharest , and this centre will be represented at the relevant conference in London on 25 November .
We visited this centre in Bucharest together with Dr Swoboda , and I should perhaps mention that those who work there include Austrian customs and police officials .
It would be good if this centre had more input from Europe and not just from America .
Another point I consider important is that under its Special Coordinator , Erhard Bussek , the Stability Pact has taken a great many political initiatives .
It should be possible for this work to continue , and we need to achieve rapid agreement both in the Council and in the Commission on appropriate budgets for and extension of the Stability Pact .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0354 / 2002 ) by Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the first progress report on economic and social cohesion ( COM ( 2002 ) 46 - C5-0198 / 2002 - 2002 / 2094 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , economic and social cohesion is at the very heart of the European Union .
It offers the prospect of sustainable , harmonious and at the same time policentric development for the EU as a whole .
The current debate is about the European Union of the future , be it a Union of 25 or even 27 Member States .
This Union 's commitment to integration will only continue to be credible if there is a corresponding willingness to jointly accept responsibility for the European social model in a spirit of solidarity .
Our starting point has to be the assumption that the public 's view of Europe does not depend on their regional and social position and is being tackled as a joint political exercise by all the Member States . We further need to assume that all our citizens are being given comparable opportunities and that we are not living our lives at the cost of the next generation .
Nevertheless , it would be an illusion to believe that we have substantially more money available for this task than is currently the case .
That is why it is our job to develop a concept which will function in line with the basic principles I have mentioned and which can at the same time manage with the same financial resources , in relative terms .
While my report was going through its various stages in this House , I found I received different answers to these questions .
One group says we should fight to make sure that everything is acceptable to everyone , and that everything will resolve itself later on .
Others say that everything is acceptable as long as their own constituency does not lose its privileges .
They demand solidarity for their constituency but they are not willing to participate in a wider solidarity .
There are others again who do not accept the European social model anyway , and who welcome this dispute .
And there are those who dare not tell the truth and accept the consequences .
The truth is that we need to start to plan now if we want to make the first payments to the regions on 1 January 2007 .
No one can talk their way out of that one , because we know that two years are tight enough as it is .
Everyone knows what the central issue is : how do we define the poorest regions of the European Union ?
The main principle of economic and social cohesion is that those areas that have the most catching up to do should receive the most support .
However , as I see it , the concept of solidarity becomes meaningless if we repeatedly invent new criteria in order to ensure that our own constituency receives the support that is really intended for the poorest regions .
In any case , that is short-term thinking .
Widening the criterion in force and recognised up to now , according to which any regions with a GDP below 75 % of the Community average are considered the most needy regions , will have a number of consequences . Firstly , it will mean that everyone will receive less money , that the phasing-out process will not continue , and that special regional support for the unemployed or for rural areas will no longer be possible .
Another consequence will be that we will simply have to pump support into genuinely disadvantaged regions like those in Eastern Europe over a longer period .
Another possibility is that constituencies that require intervention at present will suddenly become net contributors .
The study by the German Institute for Economic Research indicates that this would happen in three years .
The worst consequence of this plan and of this short-term thinking would be that it would mean the end of solidarity .
In that case we would have nothing left at all , because we would have no plan and economic and social cohesion would be an empty cliché .
I come from an Objective 1 region that would lose its status for statistical reasons if we strictly observed the 75 % criterion , and yet I am convinced that generous phasing out would make it possible for that region to solve its development problems .
If we in Parliament establish a cornerstone for the Structural Funds of the EU of the future , with clearly defined Objective 1 regions , we will on the one hand oblige the Commission to follow where we lead and on the other hand we will be issuing a challenge to the Council .
I would like a roll-call vote on this tomorrow .
There are two things on which we can agree .
One principle we agreed upon was that of ' one programme - one fund ' .
This is an effective concept for simplifying the management of the Structural Funds .
We have also agreed to support the Commission 's idea of tripartite contracts with the regions and Member States for the implementation of structural policy measures , so as to facilitate the participation of local stakeholders .
I hope that this means we will be supporting an efficient and successful concept and not undermining solidarity within Europe .
Mr President , the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy focuses on the need to examine cohesion policy in terms of its effect on intergovernmental relations and on how countries view the European Union .
Obviously , what is most important is that the economic and social imbalances between the new and the old Member States can be effectively diminished .
Enlargement , however , must not lead to a situation where regional policy in the most disadvantaged regions of the current Member States is wound down .
Other factors besides figures for GDP have also to be taken into account , such as regional climate , remoteness , sparse population and the unemployment rate .
At the same time differences in living standards on the Union 's new external borders must also be reduced .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs would like to remind everyone that every European state that meets the conditions of membership has the right to join the Union and would like to stress how important it is to assist them in preparing for membership .
As the European Parliament 's northernmost Member , I know how important these proposals are in practice .
EU enlargement will do nothing to improve the relative position of Lapland or other peripheral regions of Finland and Sweden .
Actually , it is more likely to weaken it , as the wealthiest regions will reap the benefits of enlargement .
The northern areas of our neighbour , Norway , are now experiencing vigorous economic development as a result of investment in energy and sound regional policy .
In circumstances such as these EU regional policy must not be watered down , but should be strengthened in accordance with the principles underlying the Northern Dimension .
Our other neighbour , Russia , has many problems that threaten our wellbeing and security .
The EU therefore has to become more effective beyond both the current and the future external border , as the Committee on Foreign Affairs suggests .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as shadow rapporteur for the PPE-DE Group on the report on economic and social cohesion , I would like to thank Mrs Schroedter for her work , although there are still a number of points which , by agreement with my group , I am seeking to modify by tabling a series of amendments which I hope the rapporteur will be able to accept .
In particular , I feel that it is premature to ask the Commission to produce a proposal on the future of the Objective 2 regions and the future of Community initiatives even before the third report on economic and social cohesion is published , not least in that the time frames necessary for an in-depth analysis to be carried out by December 2003 - Commissioner Barnier 's deadline for presenting the report - have not been established and we have not been provided with the necessary information .
We would prefer to be able to take the time necessary to work on reforming cohesion policy , in other words to work according to the time frames specified by the Commission , avoiding , above all , hasty conclusions being drawn which will not benefit the regions and will benefit the new Member States still less .
Next , I would like to point out that , in an enlarged Union , some of the Objective 1 regions will automatically statistically exceed the threshold of 75 % of the average Union GDP without this representing any genuine increase in development .
In this respect , in line with what was decided in the second report on economic and social cohesion , for which I was the rapporteur , I feel it is inadequate to take GDP as the only indicator .
Other criteria , including , in particular , the unemployment rate , should be taken into account .
We also believe that the Union 's policies and the sectoral policies of the Member States must focus on the achievement of cohesion objectives and sustainable development plans for the regions .
Lastly , we will vote against paragraphs 16 and 22 , for they are repetitions of paragraphs already included in the rapporteur 's text .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me that this report , for which I would like to thank the rapporteur very sincerely , is a refinement of the Musotto report that we adopted at the beginning of the year .
To be more precise , this report is about the direction Parliament wishes to go in .
I am quite willing to admit that we have not totally achieved that , because there is still too much in this report , but I still think that it is a good one .
All in all , I do not think the picture is as black as the rapporteur has painted it .
In this report we have once again emphasised certain points that have already been identified , such as our rejection of any renationalisation of structural policy .
We have also once again made it clear that regions currently benefiting from support will have to accept cuts ; we do not want to pull the wool over anyone 's eyes about this .
However , we have also managed to clarify some points in this report .
I disagree totally with the previous speaker on this , because I think it is very important for the Commission to make proposals at this stage about how it will move forward with Objective 2 .
People are waiting for a signal in Objective 2 regions too , and we cannot just concentrate on Objective 1 in our discussions .
The same applies to Community initiatives .
This is also an important area where we need to either clarify matters or at least identify a recognisable direction .
How will the Community Action for Border Regions be continued ?
And how will action on cities move forward ?
And rural areas ?
I would like to stress two more points of great concern to me .
One is that the programme must be scheduled to start so that funds are actually available on 1 January 2007 , and , equally important , we need a more coherent approach , and in that regard we need to send a signal to the Commission that it should at long last achieve greater coherence between individual policy areas .
My final point is this : I believe , and my group has also taken a decision to this effect , that for Objective 1 we should neither establish a fixed criterion nor a fixed percentage .
We need to make a decision on the basis of concrete proposals , and the Commission is in the process of drawing something up .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , even if this is just an interim report to be produced every three years , it should be used not just to take stock , but also to give an overview of the next planning period .
It is quite right not to go into detail and not to give precise figures , but the key points need to be identified and central issues need to be resolved in good time .
One of these central issues is the 0.45 % share of the Union 's GDP set aside for cohesion policy , which may not be exceeded even during EU enlargement .
Another central issue is treating the regions as a reference unit for cohesion policy tasks and not nation-state criteria .
Anyone who would like to see anything else is missing the point .
A further central issue is the concentration of support on disadvantaged regions in an enlarged EU with clear , transparent and quantifiable criteria for the concept of ' poor regions ' .
These and these alone can be dependent on the 75 % criterion .
Any other factors taken as a basis for measurement cannot be clearly quantified and open the way to arbitrary decision-making .
This even applies to a criterion such as unemployment , for which there is no EU-wide definition and which is therefore bound to lead to inaccurate estimates .
When it comes to supporting disadvantaged regions , we first need to consider those regions with less than 75 % of EU GDP .
But those regions that will be lifted over the 75 % threshold after enlargement , becoming ' statistically wealthy ' , also need to have a more generous phasing-out arrangement .
We wish to see regions receiving more support the closer they are to the 75 % threshold .
In this respect I agree with the rapporteur , who has tabled an amendment on this point .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that the final version of Mrs Schroedter 's report , as adopted in committee , throws up some interesting views and proposals .
I am thinking in particular of the extended partnership which the report supports in the form of tripartite contracts with the regions and Member States .
I think this proposal is a daring move ; it will make it easier to apply the principle of subsidiarity and cut out a lot of unwanted red tape .
We should also be encouraged by the fact that the most efficient programmes have been those based on maximum participation .
Any innovation , however , needs to be introduced carefully , under some sort of failsafe procedure , if we are to avoid rocking the boat and ensure that financial prudence under the Community budget is left well alone .
I therefore think it would be advisable if the Commission were to fine tune this proposal , so that we can evaluate how and to what extent it can be implemented in the initial phase and then go on to examine application guidelines for it .
We shall also have to monitor the implementation of this extended partnership closely , in tandem with the potential for decentralisation of each Member State , both old and new .
I should also like to point out that , despite the simplifications and changes decided under Agenda 2000 , there is still a serious take-up problem and appropriations are not turning into payments .
So what do we conclude from all this ?
Do we need to keep simplifying procedures or is there perhaps a deep-seated structural problem which the Commission and Member States need to address ?
Has Community funding perhaps become so complicated that it no longer holds any attraction for investors ?
To close , may I point out that this matter deserves our serious attention , especially in the run up to enlargement , which will obviously exacerbate the take-up problem in that our new partners will also have to deal with difficulties caused by their lack of experience in applying the acquis communautaire .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank Mrs Schroedter for drawing up an important report .
Measures to achieve economic balance have been inadequate .
Differences in levels of prosperity between regions have even increased to some extent .
Differences in levels of unemployment have also to be taken into serious consideration when planning regional and structural policy .
Commitment on the part of small and medium-sized enterprises to projects , and targeting structural actions at the most disadvantaged regions are important areas of emphasis .
Furthermore , regional development must be supported by other areas of policy , such as agricultural , taxation and transport policy .
I agree with many of the other speakers that GDP is not the only criterion to use when determining eligible areas .
Permanent handicaps due to difficult natural conditions must equally be taken into account .
For example , an exceptionally sparse population , migration , an ageing population , long distances , and a cold or hot climate cause permanent problems .
In the future we shall have to pay very special attention to the issue of strengthening rural vitality and diversity .
If Union enlargement is to take place , cohesion policy will need to be strengthened .
At the same time we have to remember that regional differences are not going to disappear because new poor regions will be joining the Union .
Enlargement must not come about at the expense of the more disadvantaged areas but through united efforts .
As Mr Caveri said , the simplification and clarification of regional and structural policy also remain a continual challenge .
The administrative load must be lightened , for example , by switching to the ' one fund ' principle .
It is important that all the Union 's resources should be efficiently utilised , even in the remotest regions .
Together we must ensure that the whole of the area of the Union is included in the single market and enjoys the benefits which that brings with it .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , this report forms a link between three major processes : the revision of cohesion policy , the reform of the CAP and the completion of the process of unifying and enlarging the Union .
The future of Europe will depend to a large extent on how the three major processes interact , and the extent to which the European Parliament succeeds in influencing these processes will determine the extent to which its role of codecision is a proper political role rather than just a formality .
The debate has only just begun , and I am pleased to say I have just three points to make today .
Firstly , cohesion policy must remain one of the driving forces of the European Union . Secondly , the need for cohesion support cannot be determined on the basis of the unfair , unreliable , misleading parameter of GDP .
We call upon the European Commission to specify new parameters - unemployment , infrastructure and quality of the environment - which are more correct indicators throughout the Union .
We in this House want to help you .
Thirdly , the implementing phase of Agenda 2000 must be monitored carefully , not just as regards quantity and expenditure but also as regards quality .
Preparing our regions for enlargement means also and above all using these funds to increase the competitiveness of our human and social capital .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , in this speech , I shall restrict myself to discussing the key political issue underpinning the future of cohesion policy .
This , as I am sure you can work out , concerns the amount of funds to be allocated to this crucial pillar of the process of European integration during the period 2007 to 2013 .
This is a key political issue because Europe will only be viable if it is founded on a project of solidarity towards its most disadvantaged regions ; the European Union will not succeed on the basis of excessive regional disparities .
By subscribing to the Franco-German agreement on the freezing of common agricultural policy spending until 2013 on the basis of spending in 2006 , the last European Council , held in Brussels , makes the assumption that the same principle of freezing could also be applied to funds earmarked for cohesion policy .
In other words , the same Union budget that has served a Europe of fifteen countries will also have to serve a Europe of twenty-seven .
To this we can add the end of the illusion that the savings made from the CAP could be channelled into cohesion policy ; not forgetting that strengthening the rural development of the CAP has been extremely difficult and the CAP , as we know , has a cohesion-based approach .
It could be said that a cohesion policy that is funded to an approximate value of 0.45 % of Community GDP would already be a major achievement .
At least scenarios of renationalisation , which have been brewing in some countries where cohesion policy is concerned , would be averted .
Nevertheless , I should like to emphasise the lack of resources , which endangers the future existence of a balanced cohesion policy that on the one hand does not ignore the cohesion deficit that still exists in today 's European Union of fifteen and on the other , that is equal to the task of the greatest challenge ever set for the process of European integration .
I would also emphasise , with regard to this matter and in conclusion , the contrast with the recent past , when financial resources for cohesion have been doubled where other major challenges have arisen .
Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteur on this very important report .
The RETT committee amendments are in line with the conclusions of the Musotto report , particularly on the need for a cohesion policy which will improve existing and future disparities between European regions in an enlarged Europe .
In this context , I would highlight and support Amendment 12 which recognises the need for a generous phasing-out period for those regions which may no longer qualify for Objective 1 support but which may still need this level of funding .
My own peripheral region has received only 10 % of all EU funding to Ireland over the past 30 years and is therefore still seriously under-developed in terms of infrastructure .
I cannot , however , support paragraph 16 , nor part of paragraph 17 .
I believe they could lead to a by-passing of national government responsibilities and duties .
Finally , in the context of enlargement , the EU must ensure adequate aid for family farmers - the backbone of our rural communities - and , in addition , specific aid to young farmers to ensure the survival of our rural communities and our agricultural sector .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Completing the internal market
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on completing the internal market .
I suggest we begin with the Commission .
We shall now hear Mr Bolkestein .
Mr President , it is sometimes easy to forget what has been achieved since 1992 .
Many of us no doubt remember the sight of lorries being stopped at our internal borders , their loads inspected and paperwork stamped .
The chances of winning a public procurement contract in another Member State were then about as high as winning the national lottery .
Setting up a European banking or insurance network was virtually impossible because of different regulatory requirements .
The cost of a telephone call was extraordinarily high , and the quality of service was often poor .
Cross-border banking fees were astronomical .
Consumers simply got a bad deal .
Our citizens were continually frustrated in their efforts to obtain residence permits to live in another Member State or to have their professional qualifications , for example as a doctor , recognised .
More competition and productivity gains have helped to create many new jobs that would not have been created without the internal market .
The Commission will soon publish figures on the employment gains and growth effects of ten years of the internal market .
These gains have been achieved even though important gaps remain within the legal framework .
We face a choice as we look towards the future .
The choice is between an ever more dynamic internal market , which will remain an engine for more jobs and affluence in both the old and the new Member States , or an internal market which fires on only one or two of its cylinders , and which will be increasingly exposed to corrosive forces .
If we choose the latter , we might just as well give up on our Lisbon objectives .
A decade ago , there was much steam behind the internal market programme .
Today , there seems to be far less appetite for taking difficult political decisions .
Even during the last two years , when times were good , we have accumulated a delivery gap .
The Community patent , COMPAT , is perhaps the best example .
How can the Council seriously say that it wants Europe to become the most competitive economy in the world if it is not willing to adopt this critical measure for innovation and growth ?
The Competitiveness Council will have another go at resolving COMPAT 's problems next week , but my patience is wearing thin .
We need to create an internal market worthy of the name also in services .
The services sector constitutes a full 70 % of all our economies and unfortunately it is still rife with barriers .
Make no mistake , once we tackle these barriers , the vested interests will again make themselves known and call on Members of Parliament and ministers to defend the status quo .
We shall need the Parliament 's strongest support to overcome that resistance to change .
Some erosion has also slipped into our framework for the free movement of goods .
Mutual recognition , one of the bases of the internal market , is not working as well as it ought to .
National marking often acts as a hidden barrier to trade .
In some important industrial sectors , there are not nearly enough European standards .
These weaknesses in the foundations of the internal market will be exposed even more strongly after enlargement .
We need an integrated capital market that is capable of channelling today 's savings into tomorrow 's investments .
We need to strengthen corporate governance , taking due account of the ideas expressed in the recent Winter Report of high-level company law experts chaired by Professor Jaap Winter .
We must offer our companies the flexibility to organise themselves on a continental scale , including through takeover bids .
We need to remove tax obstacles , which add unnecessarily to the costs of doing business .
We need to open up further the network industries .
We need to deal with the pension time bomb .
We need better and simpler rules .
Rules need to be transposed on time and correctly .
We talk about biotech as one of the growth sectors of the future of Europe . But only six Member States out of fifteen have now transposed the directive on the patentability of biotechnological inventions .
This transposition was due 18 months ago , so nine Member States have stepped out of line and are lagging behind in this area .
Overall , the transposition deficit for internal market directives is moving away again from the 1.5 % target set by the European Council .
We have our work cut out . I know that none of this is easy .
Taking decisions will probably become even more difficult in an enlarged European Union .
There is a real risk that the delivery gap will grow wider unless we begin to act strategically by putting the European Union 's long-term interests before narrow sectoral interests , which oppose change .
We have the strong support of our citizens and businesses .
Next week , the Commission will publish the results of a major survey on ten years of the internal market .
I can already tell you that the survey shows that 77 % of our citizens and 84 % of our businesses feel that the internal market has been a very positive force in their lives .
They want the internal market to serve them even better in the future .
At the level of the Parliament , the Commission is eagerly awaiting the forthcoming report on the internal market strategy , for which Mr Harbour is the rapporteur .
I expect the report to be ambitious and hard-hitting .
The recent creation of the Competitiveness Council also represents a welcome opportunity to make progress .
Ten years after the removal of our internal borders , one year into the euro , and on the eve of enlargement , now is the time for a major new push to improve the internal market .
I count on the Council 's and Parliament 's support to work towards an ambitious medium-term internal market strategy , which the Commission aims to present by next April .
If we act decisively , the best is yet to come .
- ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is a great pleasure to have this opportunity to discuss the state of affairs regarding the internal market , and the impetus behind it , with the European Parliament .
I am sorry that I was a little late .
The EU is currently facing great challenges .
We have to manage the forthcoming enlargement by ten new Member States , and at the same time we still have to carry out a number of reforms in order that the EU is able to function as an economically robust global player .
As President-in-Office of the Council , I have chosen to discuss the state of affairs regarding the completion of the internal market with you today , as I consider it crucial that we have a true internal market encompassing all of the new countries , and , at the same time , an economy which can compete at external level : in the spirit of the ambitious Lisbon vision .
The European Parliament of today is a major co-legislator in matters concerning the development of the internal market .
As President of the Competitiveness Council , therefore , I feel that this is a natural and particularly necessary topic for discussion with Parliament today .
It is 15 years since the idea of an internal market was put on the agenda .
It is nearly ten years since the wheels were set in motion .
The internal market is one of the most ambitious goals ever set in the history of the EU .
In the sectors in which we have reached our goals , the benefits for European consumers and businesses have been tremendous .
The internal market has brought more and better products at lower prices , freedom of movement across borders , and especially an increase in competitiveness .
At the same time , however , we note that there are unfortunately still many difficult issues that need to be resolved before the internal market is complete .
The Danish Presidency has chosen to accord this area top priority .
This is firstly because a fully operational internal market is a key element in the EU 's competitiveness , economic growth and employment .
Secondly , the development of technologies and markets necessitates the removal of the remaining barriers to cross-border trade .
Thirdly , increased economic globalisation requires swifter action on structural reforms .
It is of crucial importance to have product and capital markets which function well .
The internal market must be able to deliver what our citizens expect of it : a wide selection of products and services that are of high quality , safe , and reasonably priced ; and also freedom of movement across internal borders without unnecessary red tape .
The forthcoming enlargement is vital .
The candidate countries are working hard in order to be ready for accession .
I am fully confident that they will do their utmost to cope with the legislation we have adopted over many years , and it is our responsibility to assist them as best we can - even after their accession .
There is great potential in a newly enlarged internal market - for both citizens and businesses .
An internal market with 100 million more consumers in fast-growing economies will mean faster economic growth and more jobs in both the present and the future Member States .
A 2001 study by the Commission shows that enlargement will lead to an increase in the candidate countries ' GDP of between 1.3 % and 2.1 % per annum .
For the existing members , the overall increase in GDP will be 0.7 % .
The growth potential of the forthcoming enlargement will depend on whether we can push through the structural reforms which are still lacking .
One of the greatest challenges we face is the completion of the internal market in the areas in which it is not functioning as intended .
The services sector is vital to European growth : two out of three jobs are in this sector , and the private and public service industries account for 70 % of EU GDP .
The Commission 's report on barriers in the internal market for services shows that there are many barriers of both a legislative and a non-legislative nature .
We must find a solution to this .
As soon as the Commission has submitted its proposals , the Council and Parliament must consider how the remaining barriers can be removed as quickly as possible .
The internal market for financial services is also extremely important .
In the face of global financial markets , regulation must take place at EU level .
The economic benefits of the implementation of the Financial Services Action Plan have been analysed by the so-called ' Gyllenhammer group ' , amongst others .
The analysis suggests that financial integration will bring about an annual increase in growth of up to half a per cent of GDP .
I note with pleasure that 30 proposals have now been adopted , including four of the eight proposals mentioned in the conclusions from the European Council meeting in Barcelona .
Freedom of movement for persons and businesses is also essential .
Increased mobility is crucial to maintaining a good rate of growth while at the same time avoiding bottlenecks in parts of the European Union .
Many changes to company law , among other things , have been implemented , but a need for further harmonisation has become apparent in the light of such things as the Enron scandal .
The package concerning the internal market for electricity and gas is also an important element in the completion of the internal market .
The Presidency attaches great importance to ensuring impetus in this matter .
It is the intention that political consensus be reached on the whole package concerning the internal market for electricity and gas at the meeting of the Energy Council on 25 November .
A dynamic consumer policy in an enlarged EU must take account of market developments and the real level of consumer protection needed .
In this connection , it is crucial to have common rules on the marketing of goods and services in the EU .
The Green Paper forms a good basis for continued work in this regard .
Lastly , it is more important than ever that we simplify and improve our rules , to make life easier for citizens and business in the EU .
At its meetings in May and September , the Council reached agreement on the amendment of the public procurement directives , and the Presidency is now working towards communicating a common position to Parliament as quickly as possible .
We must work together to ensure the simplification and improvement of EU legislation by means of effective implementation of the Commission 's action plan .
Studies carried out by the Commission show that better lawmaking could save businesses approximately EUR 50 000 million per annum , corresponding to 4 % of GDP .
The Presidency accords high priority to the matter .
In the Council 's conclusions from its meeting on 30 September , priorities included the work on simplification of EU rules , and also impact assessments and methods for following up the implementation of the action plan .
Our goal is to adopt the interinstitutional agreement before the end of the year .
This depends , of course , on the course of the negotiations currently taking place with the European Parliament and the Commission .
It is impossible to meet everyone 's wishes if the agreement is to be concluded by the end of 2002 .
The Competitiveness Council , together with the European Parliament and the Commission , has a responsibility for ensuring that we give an impetus to the work on boosting growth and competitiveness in the EU .
We must bear in mind that we have to work together closely if we are to meet these challenges .
Achieving competitive businesses and securing continued economic growth are tasks requiring a concerted effort .
It is in everyone 's interests that we work together as effectively as possible in order that progress can be made quickly in those areas of legislation in which we , the legislators , have joint competence and a joint responsibility .
Mr President , I am delighted to welcome the statements of the Commissioner and the President of the Council both on behalf of my Group and as the Legal Affairs Committee 's rapporteur on the internal market strategy .
These statements are very important and very timely .
From my own point of view as a British Conservative Member who joined this Parliament three years ago and who has been consistently engaged in internal market activities since then , it is the first time we have had a statement of this kind .
It does mark something of a milestone for me , and I hope for the Parliament .
We must ensure that we do not have such a long gap between these sort of engagements and discussions about future strategy .
I also hope , on the tenth anniversary of the 1992 programme , that colleagues will not mind me mentioning that it was a British Commissioner , Lord Cockfield , who was responsible for pushing that programme through with the active encouragement of the British Conservative Government under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher .
This tenth anniversary provides us with an important opportunity to launch a new initiative to push on further and faster with the drive towards completing the internal market , shifting it into higher gear .
That can only be done by engaging all of the European institutions , business and consumer organisations in a much more powerful coalition .
There is a sense in which we have taken the internal market too much for granted .
As both the Commissioner and the Minister said this morning , that certainly is not the case .
I want to say to Commissioner Bolkestein that , as the rapporteur for the committee , my draft report is certainly going to be hard hitting and ambitious .
I hope my colleagues will support me , and I think they will because the Legal Affairs Committee has been a strong supporter of internal market policy .
We have had lively debates , but the general direction will move towards the sort of programmes that the Commission wishes to encourage .
We are certainly prepared to rise to the challenge of creating the internal market for services .
That is going to be difficult and will need a lot of political support , which , Commissioner Bolkestein , we will give you .
As for the Council , I would like to commend Mr Bendtsen very much on his leadership on this issue and on launching the Competitiveness Council .
You do not need to wait for the Commission to take initiatives to move this forward .
Looking at this report about the barriers to services in the internal market - which , colleagues , I urge you to read - it is clear that Member States could now get on with the task of freeing up business establishment , removing the bureaucracy about the launch of small businesses and encouraging service businesses to establish in other countries .
Those of you in the Competitiveness Council could take that initiative next time you meet .
You do not need to wait for the Commission .
This is the sort of positive approach that we want to see the Member States making and clearing up the sort of deficits in transposition that Mr Bolkestein identified earlier .
So , please , Council , take the initiative .
In conclusion , a few months ago Mr Bolkestein published an article on the Parliament 's work on sales promotion directives , which was headlined ' Parliament comes to the rescue of the internal market ' .
We are not here just to rescue it , we are here to drive it forward and that is what we intend to do over the next 12 months and beyond .
Mr President , I am very grateful to both the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner for their statements today , which remind us of the tenth anniversary of the internal market .
This is a special date for me , as it was in the final analysis the European Union 's internal market project that sparked debate in Austria , Sweden and Finland as to whether we too ought to join the European Union , and I am very glad that we took this step and can take part in today 's event , which is in part a review .
I believe it is the imminent risks and historic projects of the European Union - the forthcoming great enlargement and the Convention 's fundamental reform of the EU - that make it necessary to consider whether yesterday 's objectives have been achieved .
It is also right that we should be proud of what we have achieved and constantly remind ourselves of it .
The internal market is already regarded as all too self-explanatory , yet it is all the more painfully apparent that it still has loopholes resulting from the deficient or delayed transposition of directives in the Member States , and my own country , alas , lags behind significantly in this respect .
These loopholes and obstacles came about , though , because we did not have enough success at European level in taking the necessary action to harmonise and coordinate .
Commissioner , you adduced some very pertinent examples of loopholes and obstacles that still remain , mainly in the area of the provision of services and the movement of goods .
I believe that , where this is concerned , we also have to very strongly highlight the area of the free movement of workers , where obstacles to the internal market still persist , affecting the truly mobile elements in the population .
One aspect needing to be addressed here is the situation of third-country nationals , both in their role as workers and in the provision of cross-border services .
I believe that , even if we review the objectives of the internal market and are willing to do everything to ultimately achieve them , we should also recall that our concern must be with guaranteeing a high standard of protection for consumers and the environment .
Let us not be concerned only with the range of goods and services available , but also with their quality .
I will conclude by asking all those who are working on the final realisation of the internal market to help prevent its legal basis from being put at risk by the debate on the future of the European Union , its competences and the principles by which they are exercised .
It is particularly with reference to the subsidiarity principle that the occasional tendency in that direction is noticeable in the Convention .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his wake-up call on the internal market , which is to be congratulated on its ten-year anniversary .
We sometimes forget that the internal market is still a process and represents a lot of unfinished business and you were right to remind us of this , Commissioner .
If we look at our committee 's agenda , most of the work has as its basis the good functioning of the internal market .
Still , sadly , as you reminded us , with issues like the Community patent , those big decisions are still being flunked , sometimes , it has to be said , in the Council .
It is strange because the internal market has been such a success story for Europe , a vision that we managed to sell effectively to our citizens in the run-up to 1992 .
Maybe it is drifting a bit and it really is time to re-engage our citizens , and particularly small and medium-sized enterprises , in what we are doing .
What is in it for them ?
How does the market work for them ?
It is again a paradox : with the euro and with e-commerce , the internal market really ought to be taking off .
Although you mentioned a survey which showed so much support for the internal market , I really do not think we can take that for granted .
I and my colleagues on this committee were glad to be a part , some months ago , of an internal market forum that was organised in this parliament .
We should do more of that to re-engage with our citizens and businesses about what the market is there for .
If we achieve that , and if citizens and businesses are engaged , the level of implementation and excitement in Member States will be much greater and much more complete .
I would like to echo Maria Berger 's concerns about the European Convention .
The internal market must find a key place in those discussions , or we risk losing what we have created and made such a success of .
Mr President , I want to put my voice mainly on the side of what Mr Harbour , Commissioner Bolkestein and others have said about the need to develop and improve the single market , particularly in the context of services and patents and other matters which have been discussed .
We must , however , bear in mind that the confidence of our fellow citizens in this process also depends on proper observation of what you might call boundary conditions .
For example , the single market could clearly be pursued in a way which ignored environmental side constraints .
That is not happening , but it is vital that this situation be sustained .
The same applies for certain social conditions and constraints .
In relation to services , there is a nervousness among our citizens about public services and services of general interest .
To what extent are these fully exposed to the single market conditions and to what extent are they properly kept aside ?
I was looking today at Commission document COM ( 2002 ) 208 and just reflecting on what we mean by services of general interest .
I note the following definition , at 3.1.5 : ' services of general interest are defined in the Commission Communication on ' services of general interest in Europe ' as being services which the public authorities class as being of general interest and subject to specific public service obligations ' .
I do not think I have ever come across such a fine exercise in tautology in a public document .
A service is a service of general interest if the public authorities say that it is in the general interest , and that is how they define it .
Now , what that suggests is a certain conceptual lack of clarity .
We have a notion that there is an area here which is subject to different conditions and constraints from that aspect of the market in services which lies fully in the private sector .
If we do not get that right , we will definitely lose the confidence of our citizens .
I have a large mailbag dealing with the fears people are now expressing about the way in which the general agreement on trade and services might be likely to go and the effect that could have on public services in Europe .
As well as being clear about the need to extend and improve the single market and what the limiting conditions are , let us try to get out of the realm of tautology and into clear thought .
Thank you , Mr President .
I should like to confine my speech to the European Patent .
This is in line with what Commissioner Bolkestein and the majority of speakers here have said - although the President-in-Office of the Council did not mention it in his speech .
We should give the Council a firm push and urge it to implement a European patent as quickly as possible .
The problem that the Council faces , as we understand it , is the language regime , but this must not get in the way of a competitive economy , as the President-in-Office emphasised in his speech .
When we take out a patent in the EU , we usually take it out in the USA as well , which means that we have to translate it into English , so why not decide once and for all that a patent taken out in the EU only needs to be issued in English ? This would be simpler and would save enormous expense , and would be in keeping with the way inventors work .
They say : I have an innovative idea , I can sell it worldwide , and therefore I have to translate it into English .
All inventors speak English ; and I wish , therefore , to be a strong advocate of our now having a European patent with one language , and one language only : English .
It would increase competitiveness , and would be in keeping with the costs we have to incur in any case . It would seem to me that the Council should now make an effort and push this through .
Mr President , I would like to express my support for Commissioner Bolkestein 's analysis , ten years after the creation of the European internal market , which originated in the Single European Act , which first amended the Treaties , in the belief that we needed to create an economic area that matched our economic capacity and European companies ' development possibilities .
Unfortunately , a number of aspects , which have just been listed , are as yet unresolved - the lack of agreement on the European patent , takeover bids , tax obstacles , financial services - and these should drive the Council to make good its commitments and effectively implement all the agreements and commitments instigated in the Lisbon process so that we do not have to wait another ten years for the entire European internal market to become a reality .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the internal market probably got its best birthday present today in the form of the Commissioner 's words that , despite its achievements , his patience is wearing thin .
I thank you for your impatience , hoping that , for the good of the internal market , all who operate in it and especially all who impede its progress will be made increasingly aware of how impatient you are .
Europe must become a continent , and the EU must become a political union .
We therefore give an unreserved ' yes ' to an internal market that is developing fully and is able to give full expression to its dynamism for the good of Europe .
We have only a year left to implement the internal market strategy for 1999 / 2004 , a year in which we will need greater seriousness of purpose in place of half-heartedness , more speed in place of hesitancy and greater responsibility for the whole rather than parochialism .
There is no mistaking the internal market 's significance , which became apparent in the aftermath of 11 September .
The stronger our internal market , the stronger is Europe 's position in the world , and the more independent we are .
This , then , makes me very glad that we are now discussing enlargement , as enlargement will extend our internal market and thereby strengthen Europe .
The euro has made the internal market into a domestic market for many countries and thus strengthened it overall , so I also want to expressly welcome the internal market safeguard clause in the accession treaties .
Directives need to be transposed with greater speed .
We need the decision-making process to be speeded up , rather than have it take twenty-eight months as it did with company pension schemes .
We need a debate to get the regulation of competences revised in the light of the internal market strategy and of the Lisbon strategy and made the basis of the work in the Convention .
So what I expect of you - even bearing your impatience in mind - is that you avail yourself more of your right of initiative and name names rather than keeping quiet about those who are blocking progress .
Mr President , just now in his introductory speech , Commissioner Bolkestein mentioned two directives which are of great importance for the implementation of the internal market - the directive on public procurement and the directive on the mutual recognition of professional qualifications .
I am the rapporteur for these directives . Both directives address matters which are of considerable direct or indirect importance to the self-employed such as the implementation of free movement , freedom of establishment , citizens ' security , health and freedom in general and , of course , the safeguarding of civil rights .
It would appear quite clear that the Commission is not taking sufficient account of the needs of the self-employed .
The self-employed are the providers of intellectual services , not entrepreneurs , and they cannot easily be made subject to competition .
There must be a definition in the Treaties , minimum rates must be established and the self-employed must be recognised on the basis of the training they have received rather than on the basis of their qualifications , which , moreover , differ from State to State .
The associations and societies must be given due importance .
The Commission 's plans for legislation in this area are inadequate and the self-employed are being penalised by this bureaucratic approach when they have the right to a social approach .
The Commission and the Council are pressing forward in leaps and bounds with little consideration for the political positions of Parliament .
I hope that what Commissioner Bolkestein said just now is a true reflection of the situation and that a proper dialogue is taking place involving the millions and millions of self-employed individuals , who are , I reiterate , the providers of intellectual services , not mere administrators .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament 's Kangaroo Group has made an essential contribution to making the European internal market a reality .
Many of the Members speaking today belong to the Kangaroo Group .
It is this group that is today presenting you with an initiative demanding the further development of the internal market as it is today into a true European home market .
Over recent months , we have had talks with a large number of people in the business world in order to analyse where we have got to , what progress we have made in making the European internal market a reality , and it is the results of these that we are presenting to you today .
For a start , the European internal market is a success story .
A fundamental change occurred in the realities in Europe when the borders between the countries belonging to the European Community were thrown open .
Standardised entry requirements then made European firms substantially more competitive , and the creation of new instruments , among which I will mention only the European Patent Office , makes it very much easier for small and medium-sized enterprises in particular to gain access to the European market .
We have , though , at the same time discovered that there are many areas in which no internal market exists , where we have fifteen domestic markets within a European internal market that does not really work .
We all know , for a start , that this is true in financial services .
It is the case in the life sciences , pharmaceuticals and other areas in which there is no internal market either , and it is true in the defence field , where the first hesitant moves are being made towards the creation of common policy and a common internal market .
Last but not least , the leap from internal market to domestic market demands of us - and I say this also for Mr Harbour 's benefit - that we should have a common European currency in all the countries of the European Union , and this development also requires us to work on the basis of a common economic model .
This must , in my view , be that of the social market economy .
We now call on the Commission to come up with a coherent concept for introducing this new stage in the development of the European home market .
- ( DA ) Mr President , I am very pleased that so many interesting views have been put forward in today 's debate .
As I mentioned in my opening speech , we are together making decisions on many proposals affecting the functioning of the internal market and the competitiveness of the EU .
It is also important , therefore , that we debate the essential issues of the internal market on an ongoing basis , especially in order to focus on the areas in which it is not working , often to the detriment of the EU 's competitiveness .
I have noted the views expressed today .
Many people have given examples of areas in which the internal market is still stalling .
I can say that I agree with several of these views , and I should like to make the following comments on them .
First of all , I agree with Commissioner Bolkestein and Mr Karas that it is decisively important for the functioning of the internal market - for the benefit of both citizens and businesses - that directives are implemented on schedule .
I support the Commission 's work in keeping an eye on this area .
The implementation of directives has top priority in the Council , especially in the Competitiveness Council , which is responsible for legislation on the internal market .
We must of course achieve the goal - set by the Heads of State and Government at the Stockholm European Council and then in Barcelona - of implementing 98.5 % of the directives by the 2003 spring summit .
As regards the Community Patent , in particular - which of course many have mentioned today - I can only share the widespread concern .
It is an extremely important matter .
The absence of a breakthrough in the negotiations at the Council meeting on 21 May made it necessary to rethink the strategy in relation to the Community Patent .
It was concluded that the Danish Presidency should focus on the judicial system , and we have therefore held discussions in this field on the basis of a consultative document from the Commission that we received in September .
The issue of the judiciary , together with other essential parts of the proposal for the Community Patent , constitutes a so-called ' package solution ' , according to the principle that nothing is finally agreed until everything has been agreed .
In this connection , I have of course noted Parliament 's position as regards the judicial field .
We have included Parliament 's proposals in our deliberations on possible solutions .
The Community Patent is a high priority for the Danish Presidency , but despite strenuous efforts it has not been possible to create the necessary basis for a joint draft compromise .
The countries are still too far apart , and I should like to say to the Members here that I too am very impatient in this matter .
At the meeting of the Competitiveness Council on 14 November , therefore , it will be a case of reviewing the status of the negotiations and working out how we can make headway in this extremely important matter .
Political consensus has now also been reached in the Council on both of the public procurement directives .
A technical examination of the proposals is currently taking place , so that they can be forwarded to Parliament together .
A number of Parliament 's proposals have been incorporated into the text , including on the possibility of incorporating environmental and social considerations into public procurement contracts .
It is my hope that Parliament will approve of the proposals , so that we can see the new , improved , public procurement rules in the EU as soon as possible .
With regard to the internal market for services , in particular , I can tell you that it is anticipated that the Council will adopt conclusions regarding the report on barriers at the meeting of the Competitiveness Council on 14-15 November 2002 .
There is political support in the Council for the Commission following up the conclusions , and a work schedule has been drawn up under which the Member States and the Commission are committed to a number of supply contracts in 2003 .
Amongst other things , the Commission will launch a legislative initiative on a system for removing the barriers .
The Member States undertake to actively comply with and implement the judgments of the Court of Justice .
By way of conclusion , I should like to express my thanks for the inspiring debate .
The Danish Presidency accords the completion of the internal market a very high priority .
It is the basis for our being able to realise our Lisbon vision .
We are looking forward to continuing our good working relationship with the European Parliament in order that we can succeed in completing the internal market , especially on the basis of enlargement .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to reply to all the Members that have spoken this morning .
May I begin by agreeing with Mr Harbour when he said that Lord Cockfield played an important role in constructing the internal market .
This is perfectly true .
He added that this happened with the support of the British Government , and may I say that it is all the more regrettable that Lord Cockfield did not return to Brussels as a Commissioner for a second period .
Mr Harbour commented on services .
Indeed , since our economies are roughly 70 % service-based , he is quite right to raise the point .
This point has also been mentioned by others .
In reply , it cannot be right that companies are subjected to a number of requirements which they have already fulfilled in their home country .
To do so would add considerable cost to doing business in the European Union and would not be compatible with calls for less red tape .
It is vital for Member States to press ahead with action to modernise and simplify their legal framework .
In many cases , the removal of barriers requires much improved administrative cooperation between Member States or , where necessary , harmonisation .
That action will necessitate involvement of Member States , and in the light of the report on services , the Commission intends to propose both a legislative initiative to remove unnecessary legal barriers , and also non-legislative actions to address non-regulatory barriers .
The Commission will certainly keep this uppermost in its mind and intends to return to Parliament as the occasion requires .
I also agree with Mr Harbour that the transposition deficit , which is now creeping upwards again , is a most serious matter .
May I appeal to all Members of Parliament to use such influence as they have with their home governments to stress the absolute need for a transposition deficit that is as close as possible , if not identical to , the 1.5 % which was set as an aim by the European Council .
Mrs Berger mentioned the need to look after and improve the mobility of employees .
I agree with her and that is one of the reasons why the Commission is at pains to see to it that in the area of pension funds , when employees contribute to a certain pension fund in their own country , they can then go and work in another country and contribute to the same pension fund , retaining their rights to tax deductibility on their contributions .
Recently , there was a case involving a citizen of Finland who contributed to a pension fund which was not Finnish .
The tax deductibility of the contributions was not allowed by the Finnish authorities .
After recourse to the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg , this error was redressed and we now have the possibility of retaining such fiscal advantages .
That is a good thing in defence of the mobility of employees .
Mrs Berger also drew attention , as did Mrs Wallis , to Article 95 , which is one of the bases , if not the basis , of the internal market .
There have been noises in and around the European Convention that Article 95 should be amended .
The latest comments that have reached me on that point assure me that this is not the intention and that the Convention does not want to change Article 95 , which would be a very bad thing .
Mr MacCormick drew my attention to services of general interest .
It is obviously a general term but what is meant are public services which not only at national , but often also at regional or local level , have until now been shielded from competition .
The Commission is favour of liberalisation .
I would like to make the distinction between liberalisation and privatisation .
Privatisation is not the concern of the Commission .
In fact , Article 295 of the Treaty says that nothing in the Treaty should have any impact on the ownership of whatever it may be .
Member States ' governments are free , according to the Treaty , to nationalise , de-nationalise , privatise , expropriate or whatever .
Privatisation is not the concern of the European Union and is not the concern of the Commission .
However , liberalisation is indeed our concern .
Liberalisation means opening up to competition and it is my view that if such services of national interest , otherwise known as network services , are open to competition , the ordinary citizen stands to gain from that .
Mr Rovsing spoke on the Community patent and suggested that such patents should be expressed in one language only .
He may be right but I know at least one Member State which would be strongly opposed to such a proposal .
I wish Mr Rovsing the best of luck in trying to persuade that Member State that all patents should be expressed in English .
Mr Karas said mehr Tempo statt Verzögerung - more speed rather than delay - and I cannot agree more with him .
He also said that the stronger our internal market is , the stronger Europe 's position in the world will be and , of course , he is right .
Economic clout is necessary for political clout .
That is one of the reasons we should all support the internal market .
He also agrees with the Schutzklausel , the guarantee clause in the accession treaties about the internal market in its widest sense , encompassing energy , transport and so on , not just the areas under my portfolio .
An important part of the accession treaties , the guarantee clause works for two years as from entry , but under the guarantee clause , measures may be proposed which go beyond this two-year period .
We have the possibility , should the need arise , to impress upon accession countries the need for a period longer than two years .
They should do whatever needs to be done to bring them into line with the internal market thus defined .
To Mr De Clercq , who also spoke , perhaps I may answer in the language which we have in common .
The next item is the report ( A5-0342 / 2002 ) by the Earl of Stockton on behalf of the Committee on Petitions on the petition declared admissible on discrimination towards priests in the UK by Reverend Owen ( Petition 395 / 2001 ) .
Mr President , the case of the Reverend Raymond Owen raises a number of interesting , not to say esoteric , points .
Members may feel that whether a priest is employed by his or her church or by God is a question that must have been decided decades , if not centuries , ago .
In preparing this report , I took informal advice from leading churchmen , but have only received a formal submission from the Archbishop 's Council of the Church of England on 4 November 2002 .
Not surprisingly , there are certain parts of the report with which they do not agree .
I will come back to them shortly .
However , the fundamental questions of principle thrown up by this case include whether members of the clergy should enjoy the same rights as other citizens .
As I have made clear in the report , while Directive 2000 / 78 / EC establishes a general framework , I accept that certain types of worker must be dependent on definitions in national legislation and implementation .
I also accept that Directive 91 / 533 / EEC , while applying to clergy in some Member States , does not apply in the UK , and that the various directives are vague and imprecise in their reference to workers , employees and the working population .
Who falls into which category is frequently left to be defined by national law .
Members may be interested to note that while our staff and assistants are clearly employees , we are not covered by any of these definitions .
The conclusions of the report accept and include those of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , which is the committee with the competence and expertise on most of the issues raised by the petitioner .
I have to say that my opinions , and those of my colleagues in the British Conservative delegation , are somewhat at odds with some of the conclusions reached but after exchanges of views , however , it was clear that the report faithfully reflects the consensus of the committee .
The submission presented by the petitioner highlighted prima facie evidence of shortcomings in the Church of England 's procedures .
In fairness , I must tell the House that since the committee adopted the report , the Church of England has pointed out that the decision taken was not to terminate Reverend Owen 's tenure of office . Rather , it was a decision not to grant an extension beyond the 18-month extension allowed in Section 20 of the 1983 Pastoral Measure .
I should remind the House that as the Church of England is an established church , its rules and regulations form part of the canon of the law in England , although not in the rest of the United Kingdom .
It is clearly not the role of either the committee or this House to adjudicate in questions of fact .
Equally , it is accepted that the Petitions Committee is not a judicial body and nor should it exercise or try to exercise a quasi-judicial function .
Nevertheless , it is clear that the directives in the area of employment , and in particular the aforementioned Directive 91 / 533 / EEC , are confusing and even inconsistent .
Accordingly , the report calls for a review to clarify this position .
In parenthesis , this only serves to underline the wisdom of the former Conservative government in opting out of the Social Chapter .
Finally , while we accept that where protection is afforded to workers by European legislation , it should extend as widely as possible . It would be quite wrong for the European Union to try to impose a monolithic structure that would not allow for diversity in cultural , religious and social customs in Member States .
This is a sentiment that I am sure will be heartily endorsed , not just in Lambeth Palace , but also in the Vatican .
Therefore it is my sincere hope that , as pointed out in paragraph 12 of the report , the Commission works with Member States to find the means of securing for workers with distinct constitutional status all the employment rights consistent with their national policies as soon as possible to avoid further such confusion .
Thank you , Lord Stockton .
Commissioner , what shall we now do about the Church of England and Reverend Owen ?
Can Europe help this clergyman to remain employed , or can it not ?
Mr President , I do not know whether Europe can always assist but at least it tries .
I would first like to thank the rapporteur and the members of the Committee on Petitions and the members of the Employment and Social Affairs Committee for their excellent work and analysis .
As reported by the Earl of Stockton , Reverend Owen alleges that his fundamental rights have not been respected and that European directives have either been breached or incorrectly applied by the United Kingdom authorities .
In his petition , he refers in particular to the fact that he has been discriminated against , contrary to Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , and contrary to Articles 48 ( 2 ) and 112 of the Treaty of Rome .
He furthermore claims that Council Directive 91 / 533 / EEC concerning information on individual employment conditions has not been properly incorporated into UK law .
It is true that we have been dealing with this issue for more than one and a half years and a lot of legal and other work has been done .
As mentioned in the Commission Communication of 13 December 2001 on the case , and in my letter of 11 January 2002 to honourable Members Ford , Cashman and Hughes , the Commission could not identify any breach of European law , nor any failure by the British Government to transpose properly the relevant European legislation into UK law .
I do not believe I need to add anything to what I have already communicated in my letter , but I will attempt to explain and analyse some of the aspects of the directives and the articles of the Treaties .
Council Directive 91 / 533 / EEC applies to every paid employee having a contract or employment relationship defined by the law in force in a Member State .
It does not , however , provide an EU definition of an employee , which is left to national employment legislation .
The United Kingdom confirmed that members of the clergy , in respect of their core duties as clergymen , are officeholders and not employees under UK employment law .
As clergy are not employees for the purpose of the scope of this directive , it was not necessary to specifically cover or specifically exclude them .
As regards the issue of discrimination , Article 13 of the EC Treaty allows the Community to take action but has no direct effect .
It does not , therefore , grant individuals any rights which can be enforced by national courts or the European Court of Justice .
Directive 2000 / 78 / EC of 27 November 2000 establishes a general principle of prohibition of any direct or indirect discrimination .
However , the directive does not need to be transposed by Member States until 2 December 2003 so we cannot apply it to this case at present .

Article 48 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Rome ( now Article 39 ( 2 ) ) refers to the treatment of workers of different nationalities within a Member State , and not to differences in labour law and employment rights between countries .
It is therefore not obvious that Article 39 is relevant in this case .
Article 118 of the Treaty of Rome ( now Art. 137 ) , which I suppose the Reverend had in mind as regards the harmonisation of working conditions , gives the Community a number of competences in the social field , including the issue of working conditions .
On the basis of these considerations I cannot identify any breach of European law nor any failure by the British Government to transpose the relevant European legislation .
I hope that this clarifies the issue .
Thank you , Commissioner Diamantopoulou .
The reverend gentleman is not getting a great deal of help from you , then .
Mr President , it seems clear that the Reverend Owen 's situation does not involve any breach of the letter of European Community law , contrary though it may be to its spirit .
The European Parliament is therefore grateful for his petition since it draws attention to a problem with the law .
As the Earl of Stockton has already pointed out , because directives use a variety of terms to identify the range of working people they cover , and because that range is often left to be determined by national law , certain groups may fail to benefit from the protection they afford .
It is of course accepted that there can be some differences , both in the extent of employment rights , and in the means of redress in the event of breach .
This is particularly so where those involved have a particular constitutional status .
Members of this or any other parliament would not , for example , be expected to be able to appeal to an industrial tribunal against the decision of the electorate not to return them for a further term .
That said , all those in a working situation should have the fullest possible set of rights with deviations permissible only where these can be fully and objectively justified .
In the case of the clergy , such rights may not be for the secular authorities to determine , but surely in such instances the churches themselves should aspire to the highest possible standards , particularly where avenues of redress and issues of discrimination are concerned .
Following the petition we are asking the Commission to review European employment legislation to ensure that it is as comprehensive as possible .
It is good to know that , in the UK , such coverage is something to which the Department of Trade and Industry is already directing its attention .
We are also asking for constructive dialogue across the European Union to secure for all those in non-typical but economically dependent working situations - including , where necessary and by appropriate means , the clergy - all the employment rights , both substantive and procedural , that must be regarded as fundamental to a dignified working life .
Mr President , as you suggested this may seem something of an obscure and even idiosyncratic issue to reach the floor of the European Parliament .
For the Reverend Owen , however , it is anything but obscure .
It is his livelihood , his home and I suspect even more than that , it is his belief that right will be done , that justice will prevail .
It would seem that the legal system cannot defend him , although he has done no wrong .
Increasingly , I fear that appeals to a moral principle do not work , although one might have hoped that within the Church of England , and I am myself a communicant member of that church , such an appeal might get some countenance .
I am afraid that once the lawyers of the consistory courts don their wigs and gowns it is the letter of the law that will prevail , rather than moral justice and still less Christian spirit .
I hope the publicity of this case is making the bishops of the Church of England feel just a little ashamed .
If the Church cannot set an example of Christian charity , understanding and fair treatment towards its servants , who can ?
The Church should not be surprised if its pews are increasingly empty .
It is a clear tribute to the democratic procedures of this House , and to the work of the Petitions Committee , that the Reverend Owen has at last found one public body which is at least ready to listen , one that does not require expensive lawyers .
I trust that His Grace , the new Archbishop of Canterbury will carefully consider this small and obscure case and show that the Church has not totally lost its belief in Christian charity , and might accord to his rector the rights that other European citizens enjoy as employees .
Thank you , Mr Perry .
Please allow me to make a personal comment .
It is indeed noteworthy that the European Parliament should take the time to deal with the problems of an individual citizen , but this is precisely what democracy is about - the ability of every citizen to bring his personal problems to the attention of a great Parliament .
Thank you for your observation .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group and as a member of the Petitions Committee I welcome both the report from the Earl of Stockton and the opinion from the Employment and Social Affairs Committee drafted by Mrs Attwooll .
The Reverend Owen is actually in the gallery today listening to this debate .
His case is very simple .
He was employed as a team rector in Stoke-on-Trent for a number of years .
There was a secretive and flawed review of his work in the post and a decision was made at a meeting , without proper notice , that he was to be sacked .
He was given no reasons for his dismissal .
Like any employee he believed he had the right to an independent appeal against this casual ending of 30 years ' work with the Church and a threat to his tied accommodation .
Without a post in the Church he would be evicted from his family home .
To cut a long story short , he was refused access to an industrial tribunal in the United Kingdom because of a 1911 judgment that members of the clergy have no terrestrial employer , that is , he is employed by God , although God does not sign his stipend cheques at the end of the month .
However , employment legislation and the world have moved on since 1911 .
For example , women even have the right to vote , and , in the United Kingdom , female teachers no longer have to resign on getting married .
Even in the EU , we have legislation that should apply in this case .
No longer when you join the Church should have you have to leave your basic civil rights at the door .
The Employment and Social Affairs Committee backs that argument , the Petitions Committee backs that argument .
We believe that clergy throughout Europe should have the same employment rights as millions of other workers , the same rights as they enjoy already in Denmark , and in the United Kingdom if they happen to be hospital or prison chaplains .
So there is even an anomaly within the United Kingdom .
We hope the UK Government and the Commission will look again at this matter .
I still believe that the directives have not been properly implemented in UK law .
The Reverend Owen seems to meet all the criteria for being an employee .
That the Reverend Owen has been badly treated by the Church of England seems very clear , and we hope that on the basis of this particular case , which is illustrative of a much more general problem affecting hundreds of clergy in the United Kingdom every year , the Commission will press the UK Government to close the loophole for future cases .
In the United Kingdom , there are 30 000 clergy treated in this feudal manner : more than the number of those employed in the mining industry .
Across Europe , close to a quarter of a million clergy , encompassing all faiths and religions , are employed and at the moment have some doubts as whether they are covered by this legislation .
Finally , while we do not expect miracles , we ask that the Church authorities in the UK practise some of the Christian charity they preach in this particular case .
Mr President , I would also like to thank the rapporteur and Mrs Attwooll for providing the opinion for the Employment and Social Affairs Committee .
It is a pity that this is beginning to sound like a British debate , because a number of the issues here actually apply right across the European Union .
As we have heard , the case provides an example of just one of the many anomalies which occur in employment law in many of our Member States .
Generally of course these only come to light when people want to cross borders to work and find that their employment status changes and thus their rights to social security and employment-related rights change as well .
In this case , as we have been hearing , we are looking at a national situation in which historical anomalies , and to some extent theological anomalies , have led to an unacceptable situation which has already been clearly outlined .
We found that the Reverend Owen discovered that the means open to him to seek adjudication of his case lay either within the body against which he wished to complain - thus making this body judge , jury and defendant , one of the minimum standards that we do not want to see applied across the European Union - or with a judicial review which can examine the process but not the content of the complaint .
As the Commissioner has already pointed out , it appears that the situation is legally correct .
Morally , however , it is certainly is not correct .
The European Union seeks to establish at least satisfactory core standards in its employment law and expects Member States to implement these standards , and the spirit of them , across the board .
My group therefore fully supports the call for Member States to review their employment practices to ensure that situations where individuals are denied access to normal dispute resolution procedures in employment are as few as possible , can be fully and objectively justified , and that redress is available in other forms .
We also support the call for clear definitions of employment status to be used .
We raised this issue in the discussions on the insolvency directive and will be doing so again in connection with the coordination of social security systems .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the Earl of Stockton on the production of an excellent report and also Elspeth Attwooll for the very clear opinion she produced for the Employment Committee .
I would also like to congratulate the Reverend Owen for the courage and determination he has shown in pressing his case this far .
Those attributes , together with his communication , advocacy and other skills , really make me wonder why the Church of England wanted to terminate his services in the first place .
I think he would be a considerable asset to any organisation and I hope they will think again .
There is no doubt in my mind that he has been given a raw deal .
Either he had an employment relationship with the Church of England - in which case he would have had the protection of well-established procedures in UK employment law - or he was an office-holder who should have had the protection of the Church of England 's own code of recommended practice , including the right of appeal .
He seems to have fallen completely between these two stools and therefore a real injustice has been done .
It is in that context that we need to read paragraph 2 of the Earl of Stockton 's report , where it mentions an unacceptable situation in terms of the spirit of Article 136 of the Treaty of Rome , Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms on the right to a fair and public hearing by an independent , impartial tribunal , and Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
It is quite right to underline those references .
There are broader implications arising from this case , as Jean Lambert has said .
There are increasing numbers of workers right across the European Union who find themselves totally dependent upon one source of income but who are not regarded in their national law as having an employment relationship .
These quasi-forms of independence and self-employment are spreading .
We have been working with the Commission on this for some time and most recently in relation to the latest review of the insolvency directive .
The Commission has commissioned a study as a result of our work on that review and it has also committed itself to holding a joint hearing with the Employment Committee to seek to establish common definitions .
Without such definitions , it is increasingly clear that larger numbers of workers will find themselves outside the protection of the law .
We need to establish definitions which will apply across the European Union .
Finally , I would like to echo the sentiments of other Members in expressing the sincere hope that even at this late hour all of the parties involved in this dispute can get back around the table and , in a Christian manner , right the wrong which has been done to the Reverend Owen .
Mr President , I think we all agree that God has no employees and there are no labour market rules in our holy books .
Of course , He has left us the task of organising our labour market and of course clergymen have their civil and social rights .
I would like to make two points .
The first one concerns the definition of employees .
This is a very difficult and sensitive issue , and we know that in the majority of directives the Member States are left to define what employees are .
There are many problems , and , as Mr Hughes has already said , we are moving forward with amendments to two directives in order to define , in a more effective way , the protection of employees and the definition of an employee .
I would like to refer to the questions mentioned in Lord Stockton 's report .
We have carried out a new study which concerns economically-dependent workers , and a public hearing will be organised with the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
We believe that after this discussion and after the report , the Commission could draw some new conclusions in the light of the results .
This is why I believe that there is always an opportunity after an individual case to move forward and to take into account the particular needs of groups of workers across Europe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 10.44 a.m. and resumed at 11 a.m. )

I am pleased to announce that Mr Christopher Smith , Member of the United States Chamber of Representatives and Chairman of the War Veterans Parliamentary Committee , is in the official gallery .
Mr Smith is going to meet with a large number of the Members during his time here and we hope his visit to Parliament will be fruitful .
Mr President , our first report is from the Petitions Committee by the Earl of Stockton on the case of the Reverend Owen .
It is unusual in that it is a report on the fate of a single individual within the European Union .
Members may be interested to know that the Reverend Owen is with us today in the public gallery .
Thank you Mr Ford .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , an oral amendment has been agreed on , which now reads : ' reiterates its call for a negotiated solution and urges the Council to take a strong political initiative in this sense . '
The remainder is deleted .
Mr President , the day before yesterday North Korea threatened to resume missile testing if relations with Japan did not develop in the way that it wanted and expected .
This threat is unacceptable .
I presented an amendment on behalf of my group , which has been accepted by Mr Ford and the Socialist Group , and which reads ' condemns the new North Korean threat of resuming missile testing ' .
Mr President , the meeting mentioned on 11 November 2002 is now no longer taking place , so we would like to amend paragraph 6 to read ' expects the EU to be invited as a full member to all meetings discussing the future of KEDO ' .
Mr President , I wanted to propose deleting the last sentence of my own amendment which starts with the words ' stresses that ' and ends with ' Association process ' because it is very harsh , in my eyes too harsh , on the Croatian Government and its efforts .
Mr President , I would just like to say that , because of problems with the electronic voting system , I have had , on a number of occasions , to put my card into the machine on the desk next to mine .
Considering , not least , the disputes which have arisen in Italy , I would not want this to be interpreted as sleight of hand .
I did , in any case , only use my own card .
Mr President , my group is not satisfied with the resolution that was passed today .
It is actually well over a year since the resolution on Echelon was passed by this Parliament .
It seems that very little has been done to ensure the public 's right to privacy within the European Union .
Also , if we actually look at what the Council has been doing recently with a view to bringing telecommunications interception capabilities in line with new technologies , this is also an infringement on the individual 's right to privacy .
What is most disappointing is that the Council has not acted on what the Parliament said in its initial report after the temporary committee of enquiry .
It is completely unacceptable that European citizens are exposed to such sweeping interceptions of communication .
The Council should actually do something about it .
The resolution passed this morning was much too weak and we are very disappointed that the points that our group proposed were not included in that resolution .
The fundamental right to privacy and , in particular , the right to confidentiality of communications , are now under threat .
In combating terrorism , the States have reduced - or are gradually preparing to reduce - the safeguards protecting citizens provided for by law , particularly by Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and related case law , by Article 7 of the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights and by Directives 95 / 46 / EC , 97 / 66 / EC and 2002 / 58 / EC .
The idea that terrorism can be combated by restricting citizens ' freedoms and rights is nothing but an illusion , as is shown by the Echelon case .
Not even the systematic interception of the contents of all communications by Echelon - a system which is now being enhanced by the rules being drafted on the gathering of data on insider dealing - succeeded in preventing the terrorist attacks of 11 September or the other tragic events which followed , since , in practice , it focuses wholly on industrial espionage .
The only effect of Echelon - which is clearly and indisputably illegal - has been to make a mockery of the law and the Courts , to distort free market competition and to jeopardise democracy and citizens ' rights and freedoms .
.
( FR ) The tragic events of 11 September 2001 provide yet another opportunity to address the subject of Echelon : even though on this occasion the system showed its extraordinary ineffectiveness in the only field that could have justified its continued use - security and the fight against terrorism - a certain amount of confusion over type is leading the Commission and Council to pretend they believe that the answers to the problems are essentially technical and can be solved within the context of the CFSP .


The problem , however , is political - the umbilical cord between NATO and European security , defence and information systems - and the CFSP does not exist , and , moreover , will only ever be able to make its point through silence , because , although we all fiercely oppose terrorist barbarity , we are not , however , all prepared , on the pretext of economies , affinities or an absence of any alternative policy , to place ourselves fully in the hands of the United States in the field of defence and foreign policy .
That is where the problem lies , and this is not , therefore , a matter of cooperation in the field of security , which obviously goes without saying .
That is why the French delegation of the UEN Group voted against this useless text .


There continues to be a storm of incomprehensible hypocrisy on the subject of Echelon and the interception of citizens ' communications : hypocrisy on the part of the Member States of the Union which are part of the Echelon system and yet remained silent as to its existence , hypocrisy on the part of those Member States - Holland , France and Germany , in particular - which , although not part of the Echelon system , have developed and implemented systems which perform exactly the same functions of intercepting the international and national communications of citizens through the recognition of key words , and hypocrisy on the part of the European Parliament , which decided not to furnish itself with the powers of inquiry which would have enabled it to carry out a proper investigation into the existence and functioning of Echelon .
Although Echelon is a completely illegal system under international , European and national law , no European institution or Member State is taking any steps to protect citizens ' rights by instituting a lawsuit for violation of the right to privacy .
If - as regards Echelon and interception of communications - the aim is to produce a European intelligence system , this system must be subject to the basic rules of democracy : the law must be genuinely transparent , it must be clearly regulated , it must be subject to democratic and judicial control and there must be guarantees for the citizens .
- ( FR ) We voted for this report because it criticises the fact that some categories of employee are not covered by ' employment protection afforded under European Community law ' and calls upon the Commission to ' [ ensure ] that existing rights are extended to the widest possible range of workers ' .
Having said that , we thoroughly disagree with paragraph 13 , which claims that ' the spirit of reconciliation and understanding which is the way of the Church [ ? ] corresponds to the basic principles on which democracy is founded and preserved within the European Union ' .
Religion must remain a private affair and secularism must be the rule in public affairs .
- ( ES ) This parliamentary vote has fulfilled the commitment imposed on Parliament by Parliament itself and by the European citizens to create , as quickly as possible , a legal measure to allow the EU to mobilise the necessary funds to help disaster-stricken areas .
We must congratulate ourselves on this .
In my opinion , however , the result could have been even better .
First of all , greater transparency .
What was adopted today should have been annexed to the existing interinstitutional agreement , not a new standard .
Secondly , a matter of rigidity .
Item 2 states that , in October , 25 % of the Fund must be available as a matter of obligation .
This is too rigid .
If , in a given tax year , 75 % is spent in spring , would the Commission have to make a recommendation that we all avoid bringing disasters on ourselves until the beginning of October ?
Lastly , an inconsistency on the part of the Council .
In order to make the best use of appropriations , the Council asked to be able to redistribute existing appropriations , but only in the amended spending categories : Internal Spending and Pre-accession .
In Internal Spending , however , there is not a single euro left to spend .
Redistribution in the event of a disaster can therefore only apply to pre-accession countries .
Would it not be possible to use any agricultural appropriations that are not spent during the year ?
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of this report because I consider the legislative process that has now ended to be exemplary , not only because it remedies shortcomings that have been tragically demonstrated in the past , but because it is underpinned by a process of drafting laws that is duly proven and consolidated .
In fact , following the terrible disaster of the Estonia in 1994 , eight Northern European countries decided , in 1996 , to adopt and implement stricter standards than those laid down previously , so as , by means of special technical requirements for ships , to guarantee greater resistance and to improve the stability of passenger ships , thereby making them safer in the event of an accident , delaying their capsize and enabling all passengers to be evacuated in good time .
It is precisely the evaluation of the effectiveness of this agreement and , at the same time , its extremely positive impact on safety that the Commission has highlighted , considering - quite rightly , in my opinion , in the framework described - that a legislative initiative in the form of a directive , intended to extend this legal step forwards to all the Member States of the European Union is justified .
It is , therefore , a matter of adopting a set of measures designed to improve Community legislation on the safety of passenger ships , in full accordance , as a matter of fact , with the political objectives outlined in the White Paper on the matter - which obviously warrants my full support .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of this report largely for the same reasons I agree with the Poignant report on specific stability requirements for ro-ro passenger ferries .
With the Stockholm Agreement , the countries of Northern Europe committed themselves to adapting their passenger ferries to more rigorous safety criteria than those currently in force , in order to make the ferries more stable , by means of certain construction measures , in the event of an accident at sea .
This basically involved enabling ships to float longer in the event of a shipwreck .
Since some of these measures were considered to be effective and their validity was also acknowledged for seas other than those in Northern Europe , the Commission is now proposing to revise Directive 98 / 18 / EC of 17 March 1998 , extending these safety measures to passenger ferries operating in European national waters too .
In a parallel directive , the Commission is proposing to extend these measures to ships undertaking international journeys in all European seas .
I agree with this range of concerns and , at the same time , especially welcome the particular importance this report attaches to promoting actions to improve access for passengers with reduced mobility .
. ( FR ) The Treaty of Nice , which has just been adopted , is already out of date on certain points .
This is what we can glean from the conclusions of the Brussels European Council , from which we learn in particular that :
the Treaty of Nice only stipulated the new weighting for votes in the Council as of 1 January 2005 ( Article 3 of the enlargement protocol ) .
As enlargement will take place during 2004 , however , what will happen in the meantime ?
it seems preferable to lay down a derogation to the rule of the Treaty according to which Member States hold the presidency in turn , in order to enable the new Member States to better prepare themselves for their turn ;
lastly , the rules on weighting and qualified majority and on the number of MEPs should be adapted to take account of 10 new Members , rather than 12 .
I shall confine myself here to making two general comments .
Firstly , these are not the only points on which the Treaty of Nice is already out of date .
We shall see this more clearly tomorrow .
Secondly , as it now needs revising , what do we do about the rules laid down to this end by Article 48 of the Treaty on European Union , the aim of which , in particular , is to ensure debate and transparency ?
The Brussels Council did not say a word about this .
I abstained from the vote on the compromise resolution concerning the results of the Brussels Summit .
First of all , I do not believe we should congratulate ourselves on Mr Giscard d 'Estaing 's progress report on the Convention .
So far , the Convention is off to a poor start , focusing as it does on the renationalisation of certain policies and a more intergovernmental approach , thus weakening the Commission and the European Parliament .
Furthermore , the European Council has not regulated the future funding of enlargement in any way .
In fact , the problems remain .
In 2006 , at the latest , the European Union will face an agonising debate over the solidarity required with the candidate countries .
The Brussels European Council confirmed our worst predictions .
The powers that be took a colonial stance towards the candidate countries ; they set accession terms and conditions , limited funding between 2004 and 2006 and reduced funding in real terms under the ? U budget for 2007 to 2013 , a move that will affect all the members of the enlarged ? U.
Yet again , the main victims of these decisions are the workers , who are expected to bear the entire cost of enlargement , in that appropriations for so-called real cohesion have vanished into thin air .
They are closely followed by farmers in the Member States and candidate countries , who will see their income eroded as the result of cuts in agricultural spending .
Negotiations with ? ? ? ? on a European army are in keeping with the plans of the imperialist warmongers .
The ? U is being placed under ? ? ? ? without any guarantee as to the inviolability of its Member States ' borders , it is bowing to pressure from the USA and it has appointed Turkey to judge developments in south-eastern Europe and the Mediterranean , ' washing its hands ' of any conflict which this may provoke between Turkey and the Member States of the ? U.
The people of Europe have woken up to the negative implications of these developments and are reacting against these prospects , refuting these options and fighting against the new order , war and imperialist plans .
. ( NL ) I am in favour of a speedy EU enlargement by the twelve countries with which negotiations are now under way .
In my opinion , the Commission 's assessment that ten of those countries will meet the prescribed criteria by 2004 is doubtful .
It is because the resolution supports this assessment that I cannot endorse it .
. ( NL ) I am in favour of enlargement but against this resolution because I regret the absence of a critical approach to various areas .
First of all , many of the candidate countries do not meet the Copenhagen criteria .
Problems involving corruption , detention without trial , discrimination and administrative capacity are still too widespread .
Secondly , the accession of new countries has been announced to coincide with a ' big bang ' in 2004 .
It is not the criteria , but the date , that has become decisive .
It has therefore become politically impossible to delay the accession of a country until such time as it fulfils the criteria , the underlying message being that the criteria are actually unimportant .
Thirdly , it is acceptable to admit countries even if they do not yet meet the Copenhagen criteria , but proper testing mechanisms ( accompanied by penalties ) should ensure that these criteria , and the acquis communautaire , are adopted as soon as possible .
Such mechanisms ( which should also apply in the current Member States ) are put in place for the economic criteria , but not for the rule of law , democracy and human rights .
The Dutch D ' 66 party sees these last shortcomings as even more serious than the economic ones .
Finally , we are still waiting for the reforms to the disastrous agricultural policy .
Recent agreements between Germany and France do by no means serve this purpose .
Introducing the old , failing agricultural policy in the new Member States first only makes it less likely that there will be genuine reform in 2007 .
- ( SV ) We Moderates have today voted against the resolution concerning the mid-term review of the common agricultural olicy .
We have done so because we believe that it is of the greatest importance that expenditure on the common agricultural policy should not increase in the manner proposed in the resolution and that the current interinstitutional agreement should be respected .
Nor are we able to support a resolution recommending customs duties in the agricultural sphere .
The ways in which the resolution is worded impair the Commission 's proposals .
We regret that we are unable to support this resolution because , by broadly supporting the Commission 's proposals , it recommends commendable changes to the common agricultural policy .
The Commission 's prime objective is to create a competitive agricultural sector that is of benefit to consumers , taxpayers and the agricultural sector as such .
- ( DA ) Firstly , we should like it to be noted that we strongly support revision of EU agricultural policy , that is to say , the actual aim of the report .
As we believe that the revision has crucial shortcomings , however , we have chosen to vote against it .
We should like the revision to incorporate the ' Sustainable CAP Initiative ' declaration , which has been approved by 85 environmental , developmental , agricultural and consumers ' organisations across Europe , including the Danish Society for the Conservation of Nature .
The European Parliament must oppose any amendment of the common agricultural policy that would break the terms of the contract which , until 2006 , links European power and the agriculture sector , particularly as all the signs indicate that European agricultural spending is still substantially lower than the amounts laid down in Berlin in 1999 .
The common agricultural policy must , as a matter of priority , ensure both food safety and food security , and the European Union must therefore impose the same quality and health requirements on agricultural products imported from third countries as on European products .
Furthermore , given that agriculture is extremely important in maintaining economic activity in rural areas and in achieving balanced land use , we need to establish and maintain specific measures .
In fact , regulatory stability and the maintenance of income policy guarantee investment choices and the continued operation of farms and agricultural businesses .
We must prevent restrictions on aid to farmers from encouraging large undertakings to expand further , to the detriment of the family farm model , which is environmentally friendly and which has a human aspect .
- ( SV ) We welcome the resolution 's focus upon wanting to reform the common agricultural policy , as well as its emphasis upon the place of the environment , food safety , health and animal protection within that policy .
It is also encouraging that the European Parliament wishes to support young farmers and traditional family farms , above all in less favoured areas .
We also wish to argue that , as a general principle , food production cannot be placed on an equal footing with industrial production and must therefore be safeguarded by special trade conditions , especially with a view to taking full account of environmental considerations .
We welcome the fact that the original paragraph 21 , expressing the view that the Commission 's proposals require the EU budget to be increased up to the ceiling of 1.27 % of GDP , was voted down ( 356 ' yes ' votes to 135 ' no ' votes ) .
That would have meant an increase of a good SEK 150 000 million , something which is unacceptable .
Nowhere in the resolution is it stated that current agricultural policy is protectionist and hits many of the world 's poorest countries very hard .
On the contrary , the impression conveyed is of a defensive policy , with the European Parliament expressing the view that agriculture must benefit from qualified external protection , that is to say be protected against unfair competition from outside .
We have therefore chosen to vote against the whole of paragraph 21 of the resolution and to abstain from voting on the resolution as a whole .
. ( NL ) The common agricultural policy needs to be reformed on account of the high costs , environmental damage and the disastrous impact it has on developing countries .
European agricultural policy must also be acceptable at international level , actually achieving the objectives of the Doha round .
This resolution , however , pleads in favour of an outmoded system .
It still underlines the need to guarantee prices , while for years this has proven to be fatal to the sound functioning of the market .
This resolution does not sufficiently emphasise the need for far-reaching reforms and settles for the marginal reforms before us .
Consequently , we are unable to support Mr Daul 's resolution on any count .
D ' 66 demands democratic control over European agricultural policy .
In this connection , the European Parliament must be given the right of codecision and full budgetary authority .
Instead of policy reform , the European Parliament today is consenting to more money for agriculture and a continuation of the present disastrous policy .
We are shocked that our Dutch Christian Democrat counterparts in this House should agree to the removal of the budget ceilings in the field of agriculture .
. ( PT ) The admission by the North Korean authorities that they have been developing a secret nuclear weapons programme requires the European Parliament to adopt a firmer stance than that contained in the joint motion for a resolution , which has just been voted on .
Specifically , its text should include a demand for this programme to be terminated and for the activities concerned to be inspected in accordance with the safeguard rules set by the International Atomic Energy Agency .
Furthermore , the position of the European Parliament should seek to ensure that further dialogue between the EU and North Korea in the fields of cooperation , humanitarian assistance , investment and support for democratic institutions is dependent on the clarification of this issue .
This is why I had no alternative but to abstain from this vote .
. ( PT ) I have supported this report because I believe that , without a genuine stabilisation of the European territorial area as a whole , it will be hard to address the concerns and the expectations of the European peoples for a lasting peace and the consolidation of a dynamic , competitive and socially fairer economic area throughout the continent .
We all know that the strategy pursued by the European Union towards the five countries of the Western Balkans - Albania , Bosnia-Herzegovina , Croatia , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , and Serbia and Montenegro , including Kosovo - has been undertaken within the Stabilisation and Association Process and that this strategy is intended to develop , in that particularly sensitive region , forms of democracy and solid market economies similar to those in the EU .
Consequently , in terms of promoting a European area in which the Rule of Law and economic progress prevail , I must highlight some of the points referred to by the rapporteur , specifically : the clarification of the status of Kosovo ; the clear application of a policy for the return of refugees and an active policy to combat organised crime and corruption ; strengthening the Rule of Law , specifically by means of creating an independent judiciary system proper to democratic models ; improving the educational system in order to consolidate peace between peoples , promoting the objective knowledge of history , mutual understanding and respect for other nations and their cultures and the promotion of the role of a credible media , independent from all and any political control , which is able to function as a genuine form of opposition .
- ( SV ) We have chosen today to vote in favour of Mrs Schroedter 's report .
We disapprove , however , of recital B , which sets the appropriations to the cohesion policy in stone .
Against the background of enlargement , it is difficult to know exactly how much will be needed in terms of resources for various forms of regional aid .
That is why it would be better not to decide in advance what maximum and minimum levels are to apply to the cohesion policy .
Otherwise , we believe the report to be sound .
I can only add my final support to this report which emphasises how pivotal and crucial cohesion policy is for all those who want the European model , based on integration and solidarity between the richest and poorest regions of the European Union , to be more than just a pious hope in the enlarged Union .
As this policy is crucial , it therefore needs to be reorganised , to be adapted to and meet the specific needs and socio-economic reality that will result from enlargement .
We now need to transform the economy in a way that is ecologically and socially sound and direct it towards sustainable development .
Sustainable development must become the goal of the steps we take with regard to cohesion , as Jacques Delors emphasised as long ago as 1993 .
In order to identify regions in need of aid , therefore , the per capita GDP criterion should no longer be the only indicator used .
We need to supplement this with other regional statistical indicators . That is why I shall support Amendment No 10 .
I shall therefore give this report my full backing precisely because it strongly reiterates the fact that tomorrow 's cohesion policy must be based on the principles of solidarity , partnership and additionality .
I voted in favour of this report , together with my group , because I believe that , overall , the cohesion policy is a good one .
We must , however , note that EU State primacy has meant that it is the States with no significant regional problems that have benefited most of all , such as Ireland and Portugal .
Furthermore , the concept of region , which is often technocratic , applies to situations that are often entirely different from a human perspective .
Nations such as Catalonia and the Basque Country , therefore , often contain regions which are not recognised as such by the respective States that could benefit from these funds and are unfairly excluded .
Lastly , it should be pointed out that cross-border policy not only brings together different nations , but sometimes also brings together fragments of the same nation that have been unjustly separated .
. ( PT ) We support the statements contained in this report declaring that ' cohesion policy must be based on the principles of solidarity , partnership and additionality ' and that ' the most remote regions must be given priority in the new regional policy ' .
We also agree that ' EU policies must be made considerably more consistent , to the benefit of economic and social cohesion ' .
And for this reason , we can only condemn the damaging effects that the proposals we are debating on the mid-term review of the CAP and the common fisheries policy would have on the Union 's cohesion policy .
Nevertheless , with regard to the funding of cohesion policy in a future enlarged Europe , the mere acknowledgement that it is impossible to drop below the current share of 0.45 % of the Union 's GDP is inadequate .
Given the implications of the restrictions imposed by the Stability Pact on the least-developed countries - not least Portugal , where the draft budget proposed by the government , in the aim of complying with the convergence criteria , will considerably accentuate regional imbalances - this answer will have to be given on the basis of a real evaluation of cohesion policy needs and with a revis