Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 8 May 2008 .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , last week , on Wednesday , 14 May 2008 , the terrorist organisation ETA carried out another attack in Spain .
An officer of the Guardia Civil , Juan Manuel Piñuel Villalón , was killed by a car bomb in front of the police barracks in Legutiano , in Álava province .
The European Parliament strongly condemns this despicable murder as well as the despicable act that resulted in injuries to other officers .
On behalf of the whole European Parliament , I should like to express our deep sorrow and sincere condolences to the family of the victim .
I also wish to declare our solidarity with the people of Spain and with their public authorities , their democratic institutions and their security forces .
We will now keep silence in memory of the murdered police officer .
( The House rose for a minute 's silence . )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Composition of political groups : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Declaration of financial interests : see Minutes
Calendar of part-sessions for 2009 : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
( DE ) Mr President , in connection with the coordination of the calendar , a document has been distributed in which an election date is shown in blue for the first weekend in June .
You know yourself that all European elections since 1979 have been held on the second or third weekend in June .
I would like to ask who decided , and when they decided , to move next year 's European elections forward to these new dates around the first weekend in June .
We shall minute your point of order , Mr Posselt , and we shall provide you with an answer in the appropriate manner .
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 15 May 2008 , pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
( DE ) Mr President , once a year - in May , for some inexplicable reason - it is customary for all the committees to meet in Strasbourg .
There appears to be no logical justification for this .
As a result , we have committees meeting this evening at the same time as subjects within their sphere of responsibility are on the plenary agenda .
This is an untenable situation .
The only possible solution , really , is that the committees meet in Strasbourg in future and that we move the plenary sittings to Brussels to resolve the conflict !
Seriously , though , committees meetings here in Strasbourg cannot continue to clash with plenary sittings and group meetings to the extent that this has been happening , especially over the last two years and in spite of all the declarations that such clashes were to be avoided .
Now we even have a cooling-off period .
There is no practical reason whatsoever why committee meetings here in Strasbourg need to clash with plenary activities .
I should be grateful if you would do everything in your power to put matters right .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Nassauer .
I shall apprise the Conference of Presidents of the situation you have described , and I am confident we shall find a satisfactory solution .
The following amendments to the agenda have been proposed :
Monday :
No amendments .
Tuesday :
The Socialist Group has requested the addition to the agenda for Tuesday of a Commission statement on the situation of the Roma in Italy without motions for resolutions .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to clarify the nature of our motion .
We are requesting a statement from the Commission not only on the situation of the Roma in Italy but on their situation there and in Europe in general .
At our group meeting today , we discussed the fact that there is a very difficult situation in Italy at the present time .
We have no wish to imply , however , that the situation is confined to Italy or that the protection of minorities and the social integration of the Roma are specifically Italian issues .
We have merely referred to Italy because that is where the problem is currently surfacing on a huge scale .
We want to know from the Commission what it has done in recent years with the substantial funds we have allocated to it to support local projects effectively with a view to avoiding the sort of scenario that we are now experiencing in Italy .
What we are requesting , then , is a general debate .
Its starting point would be the situation in Italy , but please let me stress categorically that I do not want it to focus on Italy alone .
We have many other factors to take into consideration , not just the Italian situation .
Above all , we want to know from the Commission what it has done in the past and what further action it intends to take in the future .
We would therefore be grateful if the Commission could make such a statement on Tuesday .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Verts / ALE Group supports this proposal and it supports it on two counts , because we feel that it is important to discuss what is happening to the Roma in the European Union as such - being only too well aware of recent events in Italy - and also because we all know that the European Union has the means to intervene , but those means are not well known and tend not to come up for discussion .
From both points of view we are perfectly happy to have this debate , but we fear that it may not be the last , at least as far as Italy is concerned .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , the Conference of Presidents did not foresee this but obviously there is room for it on the agenda .
We had a debate in September 2007 .
The problem of the Roma is a very real one , for Europe generally and also for Romania , and it was something we were aware of when we visited Romania .
I believe we are scheduled to debate the issue in September .
Would it not be preferable - as our group proposes - for the problem in Italy to be discussed initially by the Committee on Civil Liberties , and to hold off on an official debate here in the House until we have prepared for it ?
That is the position of the PPE-DE Group .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
Wednesday , Thursday :
No amendments .
( The order of business was thus established . )
( DE ) Mr President , for the sake of good order , I wish to announce that we intend to move a postponement of the vote on the Grosch report , which deals with rest periods and the question of bus drivers .
There is agreement in principle between the employers ' and the employees ' sides , and we want to see this reflected in the Grosch report .
I only wish to forewarn the other groups that we shall be asking for this postponement of the vote .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( FR ) Mr President , an administrator 's post in the European Parliament information office in Luxembourg has been vacant for more than two years .
I should like to know the outcome of advertising the post ; why was there one candidate whose application file was incomplete ; and what was missing from the file ?
Why have we had no information on this matter ?
I should also like to know what the administration intends to do about filling this post that has been vacant for so long ?
( ES ) Mr President , many thanks for your words at the beginning of this plenary to the family of the murdered Guardia Civil officer , the Spanish Armed Forces and , of course , the Spanish people .
Thank you , Mr President .
I believe that the only way to defeat ETA and the terrorists is for us to remain united against terrorism .
I think that all European democrats should show their unity and support for the governments of Spain and France in this collective task and we should put to one side the absurd divisions of the recent past .
Let us show we are all united against terrorism .
( SL ) On 28 April a plane belonging to Macedonian airline MAT , en route to Egypt with 76 passengers on board , was forced to land in Istanbul because the Greek authorities refused to allow it to cross Greek airspace .
In February , the Greek authorities had refused to grant MAT a permit for charter flights to Corfu , citing as grounds the airline 's name , MAT ( Macedonian Airlines ) .
The aim of the European Common Aviation Area Agreement signed in June 2006 was to create an expanded common aviation area with neighbouring states , including the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Under the Treaty , the Greek authorities are obliged to grant MAT 's request .
The Greek blockade of MAT flights constitutes a breach of the law applicable , of the EU Treaties , and of international law on air traffic .
Citing the airline 's name as grounds for this decision is also contrary to common European values .
I should be interested to learn what action the European institutions and the Commission propose to take to put an end to this discriminatory practice , which is contrary to free movement of persons , goods and services , and is directed against states that are applying for European Union membership .
( HU ) Mr President , in the eastern central European region we are also having to deal with Communism 's harmful legacy for the environment .
In no way can this be considered a purely domestic issue ; it is a common European problem that affects us all .
When the regime change came about , our countries , including Romania , were unprepared as regards environmental protection strategies .
I support the report by Mr Hartmut Nassauer of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ( PPE-DE Group ) on protection of the environment through criminal law , and I want to see those who cause serious environmental harm being held liable for it under criminal law by tightening and ensuring compliance with European Union legislation .
Cyanide technology must be banned in Roşia Montană ( Verespatak ) .
The destruction of forests in the Szekler Land and other regions of Romania is also harming the environment .
The motorway that is under construction in Transylvania could likewise cause serious environmental damage .
Construction work on the Bystroye Canal in Ukraine continues .
In Bulgaria a new nuclear power station is being built after this Member State was forced to shut down the Kozloduy plant .
We should be paying greater attention to these issues .
( DE ) Mr President , in the debate on the Lisbon Treaty in Germany , some left-wing groups are alleging , and invoking the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms in support of their allegation , that the Treaty would reintroduce the death penalty , so that - as they claim - people could be executed for the purpose of quelling an uprising .
This is essentially an outrageous slur on the EHRC , which represents the inalienable core of the European value system and hence the symbol of a Europe which is committed to peace , freedom and the rule of law .
I am appalled that people are being exposed to this kind of scaremongering about the EHRC , to which the EU is to accede under the terms of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I also protest vehemently against the statements made by some adherents of the Left equating the Reform Treaty with Hitler 's Enabling Act of 1933 .
These are not only utterly absurd ; they also amount to a monstrous trivialisation of German fascism .
That goes beyond the bounds of decency and morality .
Mr President , Britain is one of seven countries proposing legislation to adopt a Council framework decision for common rules on the enforcement of legal decisions rendered in absentia .
It will mean that a British citizen can be tried , convicted and sentenced in a foreign country without their presence in a court of law , and then removed to that country for imprisonment .
They will find themselves in a position not of defending themselves in a trial , but of proving themselves innocent after a conviction .
Whilst there is a provision for retrials , not all EU Member States recognise retrials under their legal systems .
This will further destroy the principle of habeas corpus and the freedom from arbitrary arrest and imprisonment traditionally enjoyed by British citizens and fundamental to English law and freedoms .
Everything that was good about Britain is gradually being destroyed by membership of this malignant organisation known as the European Union .
( BG ) Mr. President , ladies and gentlemen , the actions of Bulgarian authorities over the past several weeks clearly indicate once again that they have no intention nor any will whatsoever to deal with the main problem our country faces : to reform the judicial system and home affairs .
Instead of protecting the lives and rights of citizens , the president , the prime minister , the prosecurot 's office , the Ministry of Interior and the Sofia mayor have merged into a symbiotic entity and are using the levers of power solely for political recketeering of those who disagree with them .
What is worse , most of the media in Bulgaria , which ought to be the staunchest safeguards ensuring the irreversibility of the democratic path of development of our country , have entered into a bond , through financial interest , with the criminal element , and with the powers that be , and have become their vehement protectors and accomplices .
Anyone who disagrees with the official line has their voice muffled and is deprived of access to the public stage .
Unfortunately , all our efforts to raise these issues and discuss them in Bulgaria have met with vehement resistance by the corrupt authorities , which is why we have been forced to seek the involvement of the European Court of Justice in order to save statehood in our country .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to say something about the very critical and deeply worrying situation in Lebanon .
In Parliament we have been watching the situation and have on many occasions debated the consequences of a prolonged crisis caused by the breakdown in the operation of institutions , the inability to elect a President of the Republic , the economic impasse resulting from occupation of the commercial and administrative centre , and fear of terrorist attacks .
This situation has culminated in all kinds of violence at the hands of Hezbollah because of the government 's decision to ban the former 's uncontrolled telecommunications network from operating .
Mr President , let me remind you that a delicate national consultation is under way in Qatar .
We must try however we can to encourage this national dialogue , which needs to be conducted with due regard to the general interests of the citizens of Lebanon and their desire for prosperity , security and national independence .
Let us take advantage of all the opportunities offered to us by our Association Agreement with the country .
Mr President , I would invite you to join with me , on behalf of the European Parliament , in sending good wishes for success to all the troops from the European Union Member States serving in Chad .
That high-risk EU mission , sanctioned by the United Nations , will have 4 000 Member State troops on the ground , seeking to protect and assist the 430 000 refugees and internally displaced people currently living in 42 camps .
It includes many hundreds of Irish troops who are following in the proud tradition of the Irish army 's peacekeeping and humanitarian role .
This mission is an example of what we in Europe can do now , and indeed an indication of what we could do even more effectively and in a more timely fashion as soon as we can implement the humanitarian aid , the Petersberg tasks and the common foreign and defence policy provisions of the Lisbon Treaty .
I would urge you , Mr President , to convey our good wishes to the troops on the ground .
Mr President , I rise on the situation of the Roma minority and citizens from new Member States in Italy .
In recent days there have been police raids on Roma communities in Rome .
118 of those detained have been ordered to be expelled immediately and the new mayor has said that he will expel 20 000 people .
There have been arson attacks on Roma camps in the suburbs of Naples , with the mob preventing fire services getting in to extinguish the fires .
Hundreds of immigrant families have fled for their lives and there are reports of a number of children missing .
My colleague , Viktória Mohácsi , has been in Rome .
She has sent worrying reports and I hope she will have an opportunity to respond to the Council 's statement tomorrow .
We know attacks in many of our Member States on immigrant communities are a problem , but the level of violence in Italy is unusual .
The OSCE has accused Italy of stigmatising migrants and it seems to me that the nature of the recent election campaign has led to a culture of impunity for those carrying out these attacks .
Even Commissioner Frattini , who was the first to lecture the new Member States on the integration of ethnic minorities , is now questioning the Schengen Agreements .
This issue is of Europe-wide concern .
It goes to the heart of the reasons for founding the European Union and I would urge the Commission and the Council urgently to discuss the matter to see what can be done to help .
( PL ) Mr President , at the Lima Summit pro-abortion amendments to the resolution on poverty and social exclusion were tabled by a Member of the European Parliament .
This is an issue beyond the decision-making powers of the European Union institutions .
Such matters are decided by national law .
During the deliberations of the Committee on Social Affairs , Exchange Programmes , the Environment , Education and Culture , in a separate vote for representatives of the parliaments of the two continents , the representatives of the European Parliament rejected the amendment , which meant that the committee did not adopt it .
Neither parliament found it worthy of adoption .
Between the deliberations of the committee and the plenary proceedings , the voting procedure was changed to a joint vote of representatives of both parliaments .
The amendments were then adopted thanks to the votes of the Latin-American parliamentarians .
Acceptance of this practice would mean that each of us could introduce into international documents , on behalf of the European Union , provisions that exceed the EU 's mandate and engage its responsibility .
I protest against such practices .
- ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that the relevant bodies and institutions of the Community need to deal urgently with a serious phenomenon of the emergence of nationalist paramilitary groups in some Member States , specifically the Czech Republic and Hungary .
As you know , so-called National Guards have been formed in these countries and are tolerated by the State authorities .
The aim of these extreme right-wing organisations is to support nationalism and racism , and intimidate non-nationals and anyone with left-wing opinions .
This was clearly demonstrated in Prague a few days ago .
While the Hungarian Guard concentrates mainly on destroying relations between Hungarians and neighbouring nations , the Czech Guard , while also bigoted , is now becoming an instrument for intimidation not just of the left but of all democratic-minded citizens .
These organisations , which are incompatible with the idea of a Europe based on friendship between nations , are all the more dangerous as they recruit into their ranks both former and present members of the military forces of these countries .
I would like to make you aware of these facts as a matter of urgency .
( DE ) Mr President , the Conference of Presidents recently decided to curb the influence of the Intergroups .
Our meetings can henceforth take place in Strasbourg on Thursdays only .
On that day , human rights experts , for example , cannot attend Intergroup meetings , because they are on the speakers ' list for debates on matters of urgent importance .
Moreover , most Members set off for their constituencies on Thursday afternoons , and many have to travel for several hours before they reach home .
While I fully understand the need to devote sufficient time to legislative work , the Intergroups are indispensable .
We have voluntarily joined forces to examine issues that there is not enough time to deal with in committee , such as Tibet , the family and child protection , the Fourth World , the Baltic region or animal welfare .
We are visible , we are audible , and we are responsible for many of the initiatives that emanate from the European Parliament .
Now these most active of MEPs are being singled out , muzzled , stopped in their tracks and presented with a fait accompli in the form of a decision that they must no longer meet on Tuesdays or Wednesdays .
Please ensure , Mr President , that this unwise decision is reversed .
I do not wish to comment on the decision , but I have to say that the President of Parliament is not as powerful as you seem to assume .
Nevertheless , I shall , of course , look into the matter .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
In the Vatican last week the Pope welcomed members of the Hungarian Conference of Catholic Bishops .
At this audience , the head of the Catholic Church expressed appreciation for the activities of the Hungarian church and criticised the secular state , which he said penalises families ; he condemned the law allowing unmarried couples to register as legal partnerships on the grounds that it legalises cohabitation by unmarried couples and gives civic rights to gay partnerships .
He asserted that this law not only runs counter to Church doctrines , but also violates the Hungarian Constitution .
In secular Europe the Member States do not intervene in religious matters and the church does not put ideological pressure on the state .
The Lisbon Treaty guarantees fundamental human rights , including freedom of religion , and establishes institutional relations between the EU and the churches .
Cooperation can only be based on reciprocity , however , and for this reason we strongly urge the Commission President , Mr Barroso , to act on the basis of the mandate he has been given and initiate a dialogue with the Catholic Church to protect secular Europe and European values . Thank you very much .
Mr President , I would like to continue the topic raised by my colleague , Thomas Mann , about moving intergroup meetings to Thursday afternoons .
If the point is to help MEPs to concentrate more on plenaries , I really doubt it .
In a way it is our job to be Mädchen für alles , to divide our time between different activities , and such a step also cannot prevent most MEPs leaving Thursday afternoon , because they have to catch their planes to reach their homes , to meet their voters the next day , Friday .
And I am afraid that in this way the intergroups will unfortunately be placed between the hammer of plenaries and the anvil of constituencies .
I think it would deal a crippling blow to their vibrant activities .
Maybe the best way is to trust intergroups to find the most practical and flexible modus vivendi by themselves , and I am encouraged by your response to Thomas Mann , Mr President .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is somewhat worrying that the Commission should have to be reminded of its responsibility for the fair implementation of European policies within each national territory .
The fact is that the French Government has singled out the region of Auvergne and withdrawn responsibility for the management of European Social Fund resources there from Local Employment Plans .
The Government 's position is incomprehensible .
The bodies concerned have an excellent administrative track record and this partisan decision jeopardises structures that have been working for years to integrate the poorest people in society .
The European Commission needs to remind the French Government of its duties to be consistent and to respect the rules on implementation of European funding .
We cannot have agreements with the European Union being applied in a divisive , partisan manner in different parts of the same country .
Mr President , the opening of negotiations on a new EU partnership and cooperation agreement with the Russian Federation has experienced certain setbacks , owing to the behaviour of some Member States , that many might perceive as obstructionist .
I am glad the EU Council Presidency , the Commission and Lithuania have reached a consensus that enables us to renew the old agreement , which expired last year .
In delaying negotiations with Russia we are sawing off the branch on which we are sitting .
There are several topics , from the environment and energy to visa regimes , immigration , cross-border projects and unresolved issues relating to Georgia and Moldova , that require a comprehensive political agreement on common objectives and measures .
I trust that the Commission will use its mandate in the negotiations to the best interests of all the Member States .
( HU ) Thank you for the opportunity to speak , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , the forthcoming Russia-European Union summit in Siberia may open up new opportunities .
One potentially important outcome of the meeting will be the bilateral treaty , which could define relations between the two parties in the long term .
Energy issues must be given a key place in this agreement , while at the same time keeping sight of the principle of reciprocity .
A major prerequisite for building reciprocity is ratification of the Energy Charter Treaty by Russia .
This treaty creates transparent relationships in the energy market , contributes to security of supply , and stimulates investment .
All of these are issues of vital importance for Russia too .
After all , if capital investment in development is neglected , Russia could find itself suddenly unable to meet its commitments .
Ratification of the Energy Charter Treaty by the Kremlin is therefore in both parties ' interests .
The success of the forthcoming summit will depend on whether the Member States are able to step out of the shadow of short-term considerations and speak with one voice in order to protect the common interest . Thank you very much , Mr President .

( FR ) Mr President , you did indicate earlier that you were not all-powerful : nonetheless , I am sure you are powerful enough to implement decisions by the Conference of Presidents .
On 24 April this year the Conference of Presidents decided , quite rightly , to ask the Quaestors to reconsider their decision of 26 September 2007 , allocating facilities on the premises of the European Parliament for the European Business and Parliament Scheme .
During our last part-session we adopted the Stubb / Friedrich report on lobbyists .
Quite frankly , for representatives of employers ' organisations to set up shop within a parliamentary institution would seem to me to be a case of combining two things that should be separate and skewing our relations with the social partners - a step entirely alien to our parliamentary tradition in the European Union .
Furthermore , I do not understand why - following that decision by the Conference of Presidents - we have received invitations on your behalf from Mr Vidal-Quadras , Vice-President of Parliament , to a launching ceremony for the European Business and Parliament Scheme on 3 June .
I hope , Mr President , that you will bring your full authority to bear to restore order here and ensure that the decision by the Conference of Presidents is respected .
( BG ) Mr. President , colleagues , the next Monitoring Report on Bulgaria is coming up .
As a deputy chair of the Regional Development Committee and as a member of the Movement for Rights and Liberties , a party which is part of the ruling majority , I have been following closely the implementation of the Agreement on Bulgaria 's accession to the EU .
I am positive that in the past month the government of our country has once again rendered an unbiased analysis of problem areas and has declared its determination to deal with them .
An indicative fact is that in order to improve the absorption of European funds , a new deputy prime minister post was created , to oversee and coordinate operational programmes .
This will improve communications with the European Commission and she will monitor the accurate and proper fulfilment of commitments made .
Structural changes are underway to streamline the functioning of administrations within ministries and state agencies .
There have been changes of ministers in the government , the legal framework of home affairs and security is being amended , top officials are being replaced .
The new Minister of Interior is taking measures to combat corruption and crime .
Bulgaria is proceeding on its way to cohesion with the Member States and I am confident that European institutions will make an objective assessment of our country 's efforts .
( LT ) I will take this opportunity to speak about the EU diplomatic mission in Belarus .
Quite recently a European Commission Office was opened in Minsk .
A total of 14 Member States have their diplomatic missions in the Belarusian capital .
Two more EU countries - the Netherlands and Finland - are covering Belarus from other EU countries .
However , as many as 11 Member States are covering Belarus from Moscow .
A few examples of these are Austria , Belgium , Greece , Denmark , Spain and also , regretfully , the country currently holding the EU Presidency , Slovenia .
In my opinion , the wrong signal is being sent to the people of Belarus , especially when they are struggling to resist the designs of the regime to sacrifice Belarus to Russia .
I believe it is time to urge all the Member States to start covering Belarus from their own territory , not from Moscow .
That concludes this item .
Protection of the environment through criminal law ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Nassauer , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the protection of the environment through criminal law - C6-0063 / 2007 - .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , the European Union is resorting to the instrument of criminal law .
In other words , sentences are to be passed in future in the name of the European Union , and these powers are to be exercised initially in respect of infringements of environmental law .
This is a far-reaching and remarkable step , because criminal law is actually outside the sphere of competence of the European Union .
Indeed , it is one of the core areas of the Member States ' national sovereignty .
That is precisely why it took two rulings from the European Court of Justice to break the ground for this directive .
That is curious in itself , because both the Council and the Commission and Parliament have long been in agreement that penal measures are a valid instrument for the enforcement of environmental law .
It took several years , however , to establish where responsibility lay for such measures - with the Member States on the basis of framework decisions or with the Community on the basis of a directive .
The European Court of Justice endorsed the position adopted by the Commission , which is not surprising .
Moreover , having now been defused , the conflict is unlikely to resurface , since the new Treaty of Lisbon addresses the problem and comes down more heavily in favour of the Community than the rulings of the ECJ .
This , indeed , is the reason why we concluded a first-reading agreement .
We wanted to avoid having to restart the whole procedure from scratch if a solution did not materialise this year .
Given a change in the substantive legal basis and in view of the forthcoming European elections , a considerable length of time might no doubt have elapsed before the appropriate legislation could be enacted .
This is why we unanimously took the view that we must make every effort to reach a solution at first reading .
When I say ' we ' , I mean the Slovenian Presidency - and I very much regret that it is not represented here , especially since I put on a tasteful tie in its honour - the Commission and the shadow rapporteurs , to whom I wish to pay special tribute for their amicable , constructive and informed cooperation .
It was a joy to work with them .
The new directive rests on three pillars , which I should like at least to outline briefly .
First of all , we have not only defined the criminal acts that would henceforth be punishable but also set out in an annex the specific provisions under which offenders may be charged .
That accords with the principle of nulla poena sine lege .
It is not just any criminal offence which would be punishable but the infringement of one of the legal provisions precisely defined in the annex .
It was important to enshrine this principle in the legislation .
The second point is , to a certain extent , an incorporation of the proportionality principle .
The purpose of the directive cannot be to throw the book at everyone who commits even the most trivial environmental transgression but rather to combat significant offences .
For this reason , petty offences would not be punishable under the directive .
Thirdly , we also laid down that punishability would presuppose unlawful conduct .
We unanimously enshrined these three principles in the draft .
We also decidedly improved the definitions .
I now keenly await the debate .
Let me reiterate my thanks to all the Members of the House who have made this compromise possible .
Thank you , Mr Nassauer .
You referred to the particular quality of your tie .
I had noticed that too but did not venture to remark on it .
Now that you have done so yourself , however , I gladly confirm that it had indeed come to my attention .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Nassauer and I may not be wearing entirely identical ties , but he nonetheless has my entire support for the work he has done - and my sincere thanks .
The Commission welcomes the outcome of the negotiations with Parliament and the Council , and the fact that agreement at first reading seems possible .
This is yet another success for the three institutions and it demonstrates , Mr President , that the codecision procedure is very effective , even where the issues are complicated and difficult .
I must say that Mr Nassauer , as rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs , the draftsman of the Environment Committee 's opinion and the shadow rapporteurs all worked hard and constructively with the Council Presidency and the Commission to achieve this compromise from the informal trialogue , which is before you today .
Mr Nassauer has explained the issues well , so I shall be brief .
It is true that efficient environmental protection depends on the effective and complete transposition of Community policy .
Criminal law is an indispensable tool in that respect .
When it comes to the most serious offences , the only real deterrent is the sharp sanction of criminal penalties , always bearing in mind , as you have pointed out , the need to respect the principle of proportionality .
While the Commission would have wished to approximate the level of penalties , the Court of Justice judgment of October 2007 makes that impossible on the legal basis of the Treaty , and the Court 's ruling must be respected .
Even without approximating the level of penalties , however , the directive will contribute significantly to more efficient protection of the environment - not least through its deterrent effect .
The Member States will agree on definitions of environmental offences , on the extent of corporate liability for such offences , and on the need to introduce effective , proportionate and deterrent sanctions .
We therefore hope and trust that , given the ground we have already covered , all this can be achieved .
The Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of the Environment through Criminal Law was signed here in Strasbourg 10 years ago - and it has not yet come into force !
It is thus high time that we created an effective European legal instrument concerning protection of the environment in criminal law .
I am counting on Parliament 's support so that we may achieve our goal without delay , and I should like once again to thank the rapporteur .
In conclusion , the Commission is bound to make certain declarations which form part of the compromise agreed with the legislative institutions .
I shall now read these declarations , Mr President .
' Declaration No 1 : the European Commission takes note of the following amendment , adopted by the Parliamentary Committee on Legal Affairs .
" Where a continuing activity proves after a lapse of time to give rise to environmental damage which may in turn give rise to criminal liability under this Directive , the question whether or not the perpetrator of the damage acted intentionally or negligently should be determined by reference to the time when the perpetrator became aware , or should have been aware , of the facts constituting the offence and not to the time when the perpetrator commenced its activity .
It should be borne in mind in this connection that the prior grant of an authorisation , licence or concession should not constitute a defence in such circumstances . ”
The Commission fully understands the concerns expressed in this amendment .
These matters lie within the competence of the Member States and we are confident that the Member States will take these important questions into consideration . '
' European Commission Declaration No 2 : the secondary legislation associated with Annex B of this Directive , concerning health and safety and intended to protect the public and the environment against dangers arising from activities involving ionising radiation , was adopted on the basis of the Euratom Treaty .
Member States ' obligations to introduce criminal penalties in application of the Directive therefore extend to unlawful behaviour in breach of the provisions of legislation adopted on the basis of the Euratom Treaty , and they must be determined with reference to that legislation . '
I am sorry that I had to read these two texts out , but I was required to do so .
That done , Mr President , I now intend to give my full attention to the debate .
Mr President , I would like to start by saying that there is not only reason to praise Mr Nassauer 's tie .
There is also reason to say many nice things about his major contribution in connection with finding a compromise in this difficult matter .
The decision that we are now taking is an extremely important one .
One of the major problems with the EU 's environmental policy is that it is unfortunately not being implemented uniformly in the individual countries , and in particular is not being managed uniformly in the individual countries .
This is therefore the problem that we are now seeking to resolve through this major step forward .
In the future , we will ensure that the same breach is punished in the same way in all EU Member States , wherever it is committed .
I am also very happy to note that we now have some definitions of what such breaches consist of .
We now have a clear list , which we stress must not be static , but dynamic , and which shows when the fundamental principles of environmental policy are being breached .
In the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , we have been very concerned about ensuring that habitat areas in particular are protected , and we are pleased that this has been included .
We would also like to have had more details on how tough the penalties should be .
This was unfortunately not possible on the basis of the current treaties , but overall we are very pleased about the result .
It is a big step forward for environmental protection .
Mr President , last summer Greece suffered one of the worst disasters it has known in recent times .
More than 60 people perished , there were many casualties , and thousands of hectares were reduced to ashes .
Such was the tragic toll of the fires of the Western Peloponnese , Attica and Evia .
Similar disasters have been experienced in previous years by other Mediterranean EU countries such as Spain , Italy and Portugal .
Forest arson endangers human lives and the natural wealth of a region .
It is undoubtedly one of the gravest and most heinous criminal acts of our times .
A Commission directive on the protection of the environment through criminal law has been proposed .
The directive does not take into account the final outcome of the relevant legislative process , which will owe more to differences in legal technicalities than to substantive issues .
However , a move is being made in the right direction ; it will provide vital means of protecting the environment more effectively in the years to come .
I should personally like to thank the European Parliament 's rapporteur , Mr Nassauer , for the sensitivity he has shown in a conciliation amendment by adopting a provision billing the act of arson as a criminal offence .
I also thank the members of the Spanish delegation of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats who have supported my amendment .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President .
I believe that , in a few years time , this European Parliament part-session will be seen to have established an important precedent in the development of European Union law .
In principle , the European Union has no competence in matters of criminal law , which lies with the Member States .
As the rapporteur said , the two Court of Justice rulings have opened the way for a certain level of Community competence in criminal law , albeit limited .
Mr Jørgensen said this is not about harmonisation , but about the approximation of laws , and in this respect I believe that Parliament , through its rapporteur Mr Nassauer , the Council and the Commission , the Slovenian Presidency and Commissioner Barrot have all helped to promote an agreement that is acceptable to all .
As I said , we are talking about harmonisation and not legislative approximation .
We are going to harmonise the categories of crimes , which is the principle of criminal law , and as Mr Nassauer said , with legal precision , criminal categories cannot be general or arbitrary in character .
We are respecting the principle of proportionality while eliminating minimum sanctions , and we are establishing the principle that you cannot prosecute conduct if there is no sanction available for such conduct .
I believe that the Commission 's Declaration , especially what it said about negligence and the establishment of liability , will help us to continue making progress on this issue .
For the moment , we can go no further , and I believe that we will only be able to do so if there are substantive changes to European Union law , with new constitutional rules .
However , Parliament , along with the Council and the Commission , is doing everything it can to strengthen the law on the protection of the environment and the corresponding criminal regulations , in accordance with the old Council of Europe Convention , which provided for the establishment of criminal liability for breaches of environmental regulations . Thank you .


on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , as has already been said , we should thank Mr Nassauer for his work on this first-reading agreement ; also particular thanks should go to the Commission for helping us get there in the end .
As Mr Medina has just said , it has been and will be a noteworthy first-reading agreement .
It is historic in the development of the codecision process and particularly for this House to be involved in setting penalties in relation to criminal law .
It really is a noteworthy development .
This directive will at last bring legal certainty in an area where in the past we have witnessed a rather undignified ping-pong between the European Court of Justice and the various arms of the European legislature .
Now we have some certainty and some clarity .
Above all , it is a big plus for protection of the environment .
Over the years , as a member of the Committee on Petitions , I have noted that it is damage to the environment that most frequently brings our citizens to seek our help in implementing what they see should be European law .
Now at last we will be able to say that we have - or should have - the effective means to make sure that European environmental law is indeed implemented and enforced as our citizens expect across the European Union .
But not only that - there is another strong message for this Parliament here .
One of the things we insisted on in this agreement was the so-called correlation tables .
These would enable us to see , in this very complex piece of legislation , exactly where Member States insert European legislation into their national law .
This is something that we are serious about as a Parliament and at last we have been heard .
I think it goes a long way towards showing our competence and growing effectiveness as a legislature , which augurs well for the coming entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my Group does not usually like first-reading agreements , because the quality of the law is often compromised in the rush and pressure to reach agreement .
I have to say , Mr Nassauer , that if you had asked me a year ago whether in my opinion we would reach a bipartisan agreement on protection of the environment through criminal law , with Mr Nassauer as rapporteur and at first reading , I would probably not have believed it .
Nevertheless it has happened , due to excellent teamwork , made possible through strict observance of the informal dialogue procedures with the Commission and the Council who , whenever possible , have involved the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs , and due also to the valuable work of the Environment Committee .
I would therefore like to thank the rapporteur and his colleagues most sincerely because this is an important achievement , as indeed all the other speakers have said .
Mr President , the Court of Justice ruling has clearly prevented us from establishing penalties and this has clipped our wings somewhat but , as a result , I hope that after the vote we , the European Union , will collectively keep this issue in mind .
I think we should pay serious attention to this matter when the Lisbon Treaty has been ratified .
Of course , as with everything in life , this directive is not perfect .
For example , we are not very happy with the complicated annex which gives a long , albeit exhaustive , list of the directives to which this new law is to apply .
We would have preferred simply to have a system proposed by the Commission and approved by the Environment Committee , which made it perfectly clear that a whole series of offences were automatically classed as punishable under criminal law in addition to the directives in question .
Nor are we all that happy with the fact that the transition period is two years .
We feel that this could have been improved and , like Mrs Wallis , we are very pleased about the obligation placed on the Member States to provide correlation tables , in other words States must inform us swiftly of how they are applying the laws , which they often fail to do .
However , we fully support the move to ensure that a series of offences can no longer go unpunished .
I come from a country , Italy , where there has been a temptation to do this , where it has actually been done , and I am pleased that this directive rejects the possibility and that the destruction of natural sites , vandalism and other similar matters will no longer go unpunished .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) There is no doubt that anyone who offends against environmental laws must be punished .
The penalties must be severe and have a deterrent effect so that environmental crimes will not be repeated .
But should we harmonise the criminal provisions ?
Should the EU say what the sanctions should be - custodial sentences , fines and other penalties ?
No , it is up to the Member States to decide on those matters .
The risk in harmonising legislation is always that progressive countries may be forced to lower the standard of their provisions .
That is not acceptable .
If we hand over the right to decide on these matters to the EU , what is the next step ?
Of course the EU must act to ensure that the Member States improve their environmental legislation .
We can and must disseminate good practice , and we can help and support those Member States which for various reasons are lagging behind .
Drawing up tables with concrete indicators by which Member States can be compared is an excellent example .
In that way we create a system which has a high degree of legitimacy and is democratically anchored .
That is also how we can work best to defend the environment .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for collaborating so thoughtfully and to say how pleased I am that we managed to find a solution in our discussions which everyone could accept .
Having said that , I would like to make three points .
Firstly , I fully support the idea this report has to be adopted before the Lisbon Treaty enters into force .
This will mean that all Member States will have to apply criminal sanctions in accordance with the new directive sooner rather than later .
The burning of forests in Greece should be very instructive for all of us .
Secondly , I would like to stress the desirability of the new wording for point ' h ' of Article 3 in relation to any conduct which causes ' the significant deterioration of a habitat within a protected site ' .
This represents a considerable improvement over the narrower wording originally proposed by the rapporteur .
Thirdly , our most controversial discussions concerned the annexes .
In this connection , I note that the scope of Member States ' competence will not be limited thereby , with regard to Article 176 of the EC Treaty .
In addition , a list of relevant Community legislation will provide the necessary legal certainty required in the context of the criminal law .
This approach also avoids the need to define certain terms , such as water or waste , in the directive .
For this reason , I support the introduction of the two annexes to the directive .
I fully support the document proposed by Mr Nassauer .
( SL ) We in the Environment Committee expected the creation of common standards for criminal prosecution in the case of environmental offences to go beyond this compromise and , in addition to Community law , to cover Member State legislation as well .
However , it turns out that at the moment the compromise reached is the limit of what is acceptable .
Nevertheless , it is a major step forward for environmental protection , since in the case of serious criminal offences against the environment as listed in the Annex , coordinated application of effective , commensurate and deterrent sanctions is provided for .
With regard to the criminal law policy of the individual states , which will develop on this basis , we should like to draw attention to the rules of modern criminal law , under which the level of the threatened penalties is less crucial than the reliability of criminal prosecution .
The perpetrators can be certain that they will not find a safe haven anywhere in Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , it is really very heartening that the Commission did not let itself be unnerved by the Member States and has presented a proposal on the criminal liability of environmental offenders , because we cannot go on treating infringements of environmental law as mere peccadilloes .
It is also encouraging , on the very day when the UN Biodiversity Conference opened , that the legislative proposal defines nature reserves better and more clearly and helps to spell out what constitutes an offence .
It is , however , regrettable that there are no sanctions and that there is no blanket treatment of offences as criminal acts .
That , sadly , creates loopholes , especially with regard to the protection of flora and fauna , where offenders are not sentenced as a matter of course and many are able to escape by pleading ignorance .
It would therefore have been logical and beneficial if this directive had covered genetic engineering too .
Criminal conduct in environmental matters must be punished , and I hope that this directive will be a milestone and will demonstrate clearly that the environment is an asset which is worth protecting and that we must make every effort to ensure that infringements of environmental law do not go unpunished .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , this debate really has highlighted the fact that we are taking an important step into a new phase .
Perhaps I should say we will be taking that step if , as we hope , this text - and I would again like to thank Mr Nassauer for his role in preparing it - makes clear , to borrow Ms Frassoni 's words , that ' offences can no longer go unpunished ' .
That , I believe , is what matters .
It is a genuine step forward .
I would add that the Commission was not initially in favour of annexes ; however , while the Commission still takes the view that this type of annex is not necessary , its inclusion , in accordance with the wish of most Member States , is acceptable .
The annex as it is now tabled is comprehensive and includes all the major pieces of environmental legislation of potential relevance to the offences described in the Directive .
At the same time , of course , we cannot claim to have produced an exhaustive list , and indeed it would have been risky to claim that any such list was exhaustive .
On the other hand , it is now my conviction - and I would simply like to share it with the Members of the House , Mr President - that , once the Directive has been adopted , the Member States will have 18 months to transpose its content into their national laws and it goes without saying that the Commission will scrutinise the transposition process in great detail .
In the light of the legal framework , it will reassess the need to bring forward proposals for additional legislation .
I am convinced that particularly vigilant screening will be needed to ensure that the transposition properly reflects the spirit which , on the European Parliament 's part , has informed this legislation .
I am told that the compromise time limit is 24 months .
Yes , that is correct , 24 months is indeed the compromise .
I was being rather more ambitious .
That said , the Commission can assure you today that it will be keeping an extremely close eye on the transposition of this text , which does indeed signal major progress on environmental protection in Europe .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , if I may begin with the last point , namely the transposition period , let me say that this directive sets a precedent .
Mr Medina rightly pointed out that all of the environmental legislation in the Community will have to be screened for penal compatibility , as it were , in the light of the new definitions of criminal offences .
This will be being done for the first time and is a very extensive undertaking .
Accordingly , it makes sense to give the Member States 24 months rather than only 18 .
The other thing I wanted to say is addressed to the Commission .
This matter may not necessarily lie within your sphere of competence at the present time , Commissioner Barrot , but it will in the future .
The Commission now has a new resource ; it has a new set of instruments at its disposal which , as I have said , are essentially and fundamentally in the hands of the Member States .
I believe that the Commission would be well advised to exercise caution in the use of these instruments .
Penal screening of Community law , of course , is not solely applicable to environmental legislation but can , in principle , be applied to all other areas of Community activity .
That is why I believe the Commission would be well advised to proceed with caution here , for criminal law is the last resort in the enforcement of legislation and not an instrument for everyday use .
The Member States will not exactly be over the moon about all of this .
Besides , to put it very delicately , legal scholars have been extremely hesitant to incorporate the judgments of the European Court of Justice into legal doctrine and jurisprudence .
My advice to the Commission is therefore to make cautious use of these instruments , and the directive will be all the more effective when it is subsequently applied in practice .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 21 May 2008 .
2009 budget : Parliament 's estimates ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Lewandowski , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on Parliament 's estimates of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2009 .

rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , in assessing the European Parliament 's estimates of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2009 we have taken account of the special circumstances and challenges facing us in the coming year .
All of us here agree on what those challenges are : Parliament needs to be adapted to its increased powers after the expected entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty ; elections are in the offing , and the election campaign has to be funded ; new rules on MEPs ' remuneration are to be adopted , as well as - let us hope - transparent rules governing the employment and remuneration of parliamentary assistants .
Not every challenge of the year to come has been quantified and taken into account in the expenditure estimates .
In cases of uncertainty , the obvious answer is a budget reserve , and this was precisely what we discussed at our meeting with Parliament 's Bureau , referred to in our budgetary jargon as the ' preconciliation ' meeting .
I am pleased to be able to tell you that the atmosphere at the meeting was good and that many of our proposals were accepted .
Specifically , the 65 new posts planned were integrated into the estimates , with some of the money placed in reserve .
Also , a ' Lisbon reserve ' was created to take account of the findings of the ad-hoc working group now assessing the impact of the Lisbon Treaty on Parliament 's new needs .
The Budget Committee considered the demands of the political groups and recognised the need to strengthen the support staff , but subject to the principles of budget discipline , i.e. reemployment must take precedence over the creation of new posts .
With regard to buildings and buildings policy , we await presentation of a long-term strategy in May , especially as the sums allocated and held in reserve for the time being , together with carry-forwards from the current year , are considerable .
We found in the budget an appropriation of EUR 3.4 million for the removal of asbestos from the SDM building in Strasbourg .
In view of the rather unfavourable publicity surrounding the conflict with the Strasbourg municipal authorities and the sensitivity of the issue , the matter requires clarification , and there are amendments to that end .
They go so far as to demand a reserve to cover the necessary measures .
I shall not go here into other issues involving a heavy financial burden , namely computerisation of the Visitors ' Centre and additional services for MEPs .
What should be stressed above all is the fact that we are still below the ceiling of 20 % of the overall administrative expenditure of the European institutions .
This figure of 20 % is not an end in itself but a sensible self-imposed limit that increases our credibility when we call for budgetary discipline on the part of other institutions .
I hope the expenditure estimates will prove to be close to Parliament 's final budget .
I hope that we shall maintain the climate of trust that is to a considerable extent the personal achievement of Secretary-General Rømer .
Tomorrow 's vote should go smoothly , as only four amendments have been tabled .
Finally , I would like to thank all those who have helped to make the pilot procedure - which was thought likely to prove troublesome - run smoothly so far .
I hope it will continue to do so until the final adoption of Parliament 's budget .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that only four amendments to the Lewandowski report have been tabled is ample evidence of the rapporteur 's outstanding preparatory work and his sterling efforts to arrive at an understanding with the political groups .
Perhaps it also demonstrates the purpose of what is known as the pilot process , in which we seek to take a first step this year towards a successful system of cooperation between the Bureau and the Committee on Budgets , based on a division of responsibilities and preceded by very intensive discussions with both the Bureau and the parliamentary administration in order to eliminate the sort of misunderstanding and even incomprehension we have frequently experienced .
Apart from anything else , we need to adopt a common approach .
It is also important , particularly at a time when the implementation of the Reform Treaty is under discussion , to re-emphasise that Parliament remains firmly committed to budgetary discipline and that it will not exceed the limit of 20 % of heading 5 as long as the present situation continues .
It is likewise important to re-emphasise that it amounts to a virtual cultural revolution , and at least represents a good start , when the Bureau itself decides , as it has now done , to put the appropriations for certain new posts into the budgetary reserve and not simply to rubber-stamp an administrative proposal here and there but to engage in a more detailed substantive discussion of what lies behind the budget .
That will also facilitate the work of the Committee on Budgets and make it easier for the Committee and the Bureau to engage with each other .
At first reading we must , of course , discuss in far greater detail the question of reallocating funds for the purpose of strengthening the committees and the political groups so that we can successfully perform the tasks assigned to us by the Reform Treaty .
To put it very plainly , I expect - not least on the basis of plenary decisions and of our preliminary talks with the Bureau - that this week , either today or on Wednesday , the Bureau really will take the essential decisions on the questions of the assistants ' regime , the assistants ' statute and on the other outstanding matters .
There have been clear plenary decisions on these matters , and the Bureau need only implement them in order to respond fittingly to the internal and public debate .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) How much longer is at least one in ten of the MEPs ' assistants going to be working here without any social security protection , in a maze of different kinds of contracts that is totally unclear and gives rise to a suspicion of fraud ?
Whenever the Socialist Group in the European Parliament attempts to give the Members ' assistants a proper contract , with all the usual social security guarantees , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats tries to stand in the way of such a statute for assistants .
The word ' statute ' really is taboo for the PPE-DE .
This time the word ' statute ' is to be replaced by ' regime ' .
That is not just a play on words .
This Parliament should set an example with working conditions , but it is hopelessly behind what have long been perfectly normal standards .
Without a uniform statute , our colleagues will never be given the protection to which they are normally entitled .
This one point , a statute for assistants , is therefore important , and the amendment aimed at scrapping it would be a blot on the otherwise excellent report by Mr Lewandowski .
I agree with his comments and those by Mr Böge .
The budget is still within the limits , despite the wider responsibilities Parliament is given under the new Treaty .
Certainly more clarity is needed , firstly on the allocation of staff and secondly on the removal of asbestos from the European Parliament buildings .
Clarity on those points must be an express requirement if the amounts we wish to place in reserve for that purpose are to be released .

Mr President , the Parliament 's budget is not adopted until October , but with Mr Lewandowski 's report we are in principle supporting the proposed budget for 2009 adopted by the Bureau in April , and in particular the dialogue on the details of the proposal , which is being carried out as a pilot project this year .
I think that the initial experiences show that it is useful to have such a dialogue .
It means that the budget will be reviewed in detail by those who are politically responsible , and that the Committee on Budgets is properly involved .
This is good .
The dialogue has focused very strongly on the staff requirements in connection with Parliament 's new tasks arising from the Treaty of Lisbon , not least the matter of ensuring that needs are met through possible reshuffles before we start talking about increasing the number of staff .
We have of course seen large increases in staff numbers with the expansion of the EU , and we must now have a period of consolidation while we review the staff requirements carefully .
We have also agreed to prepare a long-term strategic plan for buildings and their maintenance before the end of this month .
Again , it is necessary to consider future policy in this area .
The asbestos case shows that details are of interest .
We are surprised that funding has been set aside for the removal of asbestos from the SDM building , as when Parliament purchased the building , we were told that there was no asbestos !
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe thus supports the proposal put forward by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament to put the money in reserve .
Last , but not least , I would also like to underline the need for us to adopt a regime for the assistants , as discussed with Parliament 's Secretary-General , Harald Rømer .
It must not go wrong this time .
We must sort this matter out .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the motion for a European Parliament resolution on Parliament 's estimates of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2009 tabled by Mr Lewandowski , together with the preliminary draft budget , reconciles the achievement of Parliament 's tasks in that year - the tasks imposed by the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , the European Parliament elections , the new Members ' Statute , buildings policy , the improvement of services for MEPs , energy saving , and so on - with further budget savings .
What has always been said about the EU budget as a whole - that you cannot do more for less money - has now proved possible .
The know-how and enormous experience of Mr Lewandowski and the rest of us , plus excellent cooperation with the Bureau , has worked a miracle .
My group will be voting in favour of the motion for a resolution .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , on 21 April the Bureau adopted preliminary draft estimates totalling over EUR 1.5 billion for the cost of the European Parliament .
2009 will see the impact of the Lisbon Treaty - if indeed it is ratified by all Member States .
We were told that the Lisbon Treaty - in fact , the European Constitution by another name - was just a tidying-up exercise which would simplify the workings of Parliament .
But EUR 2 million is being asked for by officials to cover the additional costs that will be created by the Treaty and 65 new jobs will be required in Parliament alone to help political groups understand it .
This is all being approved before the Treaty is ratified in Britain and before the people of Ireland have had their say in a referendum .
Of course , Parliament has already decided that it will ignore the decision of the Irish people if they vote ' no ' , and , in order to encourage the Irish to vote ' yes ' , the EU has promised Ireland another EUR 332 million in funding .
Let us hope that the Irish do not hold their freedom so cheap .
But as that great Englishman , Ken Dodd , once remarked , every cloud has a silver lining , plus VAT .
The report notes that there is an additional need for more money for the Visitors ' Centre .
I have always thought that the more visitors that come to Parliament and see the great talking shop and legislative sausage-machine in action , the more they will turn against it .
If every European citizen could see the chaotic and shambolic way in which legislation is voted on in this Parliament , then there would be a party like the UK Independence Party in every EU Member State .
That , at least , would be money well spent .
( EL ) Mr President , I think we have made a very good start on the parliamentary budget for 2009 .
It is a realistic and politically astute start because it should not be forgotten that 2009 is an election year .
I believe the plan we are discussing today has three plus points that allow us to talk of a good start .
The first is discipline .
Contrary to what we hear from the Eurosceptics , this is the third successive year that the European Parliament has kept below the 20 % administrative cost limit .
Parliament has disproved extreme European views by functioning in a disciplined , rational manner .
Secondly , human resources reflect for the first time our increased need for co-decision under the new Treaty .
We have an organisational structure that is transparent and clear-cut .
The third positive aspect is the buildings policy .
I think we should be generous here .
When it comes to removing asbestos , we should be aware that we cannot put a cost on safety ; price is irrelevant .
We must therefore be generous and act wisely .
Every one of us here as well as our fellow civil servants must work in an environment where health and safety in the workplace are guaranteed .
Of course , this is only the start ; we are not ready yet and first reading will take place in the autumn .
I think the excellent cooperation between the Committee on Budgets and the Presidency on these matters should continue .
We expect the Presidency to stay in direct contact with us in order to give the forthcoming stages of first and second reading a truly sound basis .
( SK ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this excellent report .
This budget is specific in the way that it has to take several important new realities into consideration : ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , European Parliament elections , and introduction of the new status for Members of the European Parliament and , I believe , for assistants , too .
However , we must also consider and set effective parameters for a property policy , including maintenance and environmental protection costs .
In order to make the right decisions we need a long-term strategy in this area , which we will be able to consider as early as next month .
Our main task is to prepare good legislation .
The proposed knowledge management system , interpreting and translation services , and the library analytical service will ensure higher quality services and save resources .
That is another reason why we should have all the necessary analyses available to us before the first reading of the budget , so that we can prove to our citizens that we are using their money in a responsible way .
( NL ) Just like many other people , I also think there should be a statute for MEPs ' assistants as soon as possible .
It could save us a lot of trouble in the future .
I should like to say something about the buildings .
When we bought several buildings in Strasbourg some years ago , whether or not they contained asbestos was very important .
An expert inspection was carried out and revealed that there was asbestos in the buildings - that was true of all buildings built at that time - but it was definitely not dangerous .
We bought the buildings on that basis .
There was never any suggestion that we would have to remove the asbestos as quickly as possible .
I therefore think that the administration is on the wrong track in asking for that now , because if it has to be done , Strasbourg council should pay for it .
Whilst there is uncertainty on that point , I do not think we should start removing asbestos from the buildings at Parliament 's expense .
We need to clarify the position with Strasbourg city council first , because they must pay for it .
( PL ) Mr President , I wish to make three points .
First , if the Treaty of Lisbon is ratified by all Member States , 2009 will be the first year in which Parliament will operate on the basis of that Treaty .
Not only will the European Parliament have greater powers , it will also be obliged to consult the parliaments of the Member States with respect to proposed legislation .
That will certainly mean a considerable increase in operating costs , with the employment of more staff , greater expenditure on expert opinions and consultation , etc .
Second , the year 2009 will see new elections to Parliament , and especially the introduction of the new Members ' Statute , which will undoubtedly involve a considerable increase in Parliament 's expenditure .
Third and last , experts estimate that the average annual inflation rate in the EU in 2009 will be around 4 % , which will result in an appreciable increase in Parliament 's administrative costs .
I trust all these factors will be taken into account in preparing the final draft of the European Parliament 's budget .
( LV ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to the European Parliament 's 2009 budget estimate , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the fact that his rigorous approach to budget expenditure has been proved right and the European Parliament 's total level of expenditure next year will not exceed 20 % of total EU administrative expenditure .
Thus , regardless of the changes to the European Parliament 's work expected in 2009 - pursuant to the Lisbon Treaty , this will include a growing volume of legislative work , a change in the system of remuneration for MEPs , as well as a public information campaign in connection with the European Parliament elections - the total amount of expenditure will remain within the bounds previously set .
Within the context of the 2009 budget we should also properly evaluate the return on individual ambitious projects .
Firstly , there is talk about the European Parliament 's web TV project .
In order to assess the usefulness of this and similar projects , we ought to aggregate data on the popularity of the European Parliament 's web TV and find out how many viewers are in fact attracted through these multi-million investments .
In relation to the European Parliament 's communication policy and the expected public information campaign , greater weight should be placed on decentralised communication through Parliament 's information offices in the Member States .
Communication with citizens of the various Member States takes place more effectively by this means than when it is centralised . Thank you for your attention .
( FR ) Mr President , once again in this budget debate thanks must go to Mr Lewandowski for his very well balanced report .
And once again I would remind you what an important year 2009 will be for European democracy : with both a new Parliament and a new Commission taking office , it will be a key year in terms of our institutions ' communication with the public .
However , in order that members of the public should feel interested in , and affected by , European issues and should turn out en masse to vote , communication emanating from the different institutions will have to be consistent and clear .
With that in mind and in the interests of greater efficiency , close cooperation among the three main institutions that are engaged in communication - either directly or on a decentralised basis through their representations in the Member States - is of the utmost importance with elections just a year away .
Such is the thinking behind Amendment 2 to Mr Lewandowski 's report , which my group has tabled .
Our aim is to be more citizen-friendly and that is a matter of real concern to all of us here in this House .
( FI ) Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Lewandowski , for doing an excellent job , and I would like to focus attention on a few points .
Firstly , I would like to say something about the regime for assistants .
I am in favour of what the rapporteur has proposed .
He states here that this is an important issue and it must ultimately be resolved as a result of this report .
Now I want to turn to the issue of the asbestos problem which has been discussed here .
Before any financing is granted it needs to be established who is responsible and how much money will actually be needed .
There also needs to be a clear plan as to how to proceed .
It is quite obvious that we cannot work in a building where , incredibly , we find there is asbestos after we have bought it .
I would also like to draw your attention to the fact that there has been talk about an Engineered Materials Arresting System ( EMAS ) for a long time now , although there are no clear plans regarding it .
I also hope that the majority in Parliament have clearly decided that the administration should draft a proposal that we invest in more environmentally friendly vehicles for everyday use here in Parliament , but there are no plans yet for this either .
( FI ) Mr President , I approve of Mr Lewandowski 's report in principle , but we are abstaining because Parliament 's budget will not be voted on in its final form until the autumn and Parliament 's first draft budget is unsatisfactory .
Our experience shows that by the autumn it will be clearer and so we cannot as yet adopt a position on the final wording , which will not be presented until then .
On a positive note I would like to draw attention to the statement by Secretary General Rømer , who said that travel expenses during the next parliamentary term will be paid entirely on the basis of genuine costs , and that no interim or temporary solutions will apply .
I agree with the criticism made by Mr Mulder regarding the Strasbourg building programme : in our view it will be a swindle if we have to carry out renovations due to asbestos .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , in the first place , transparency in the rules governing the remuneration of parliamentary assistants that were are trying to achieve ought not to be an area for haggling and conflict among the political groups : it is the joint responsibility of Parliament as a whole , which will be asking next year for a renewed vote of confidence .
Secondly , the climate of trust between us and the Bureau will be all the better , the more frequently and more fully we are informed in advance of undertakings with financial implications .
Thirdly , the purpose of our work on the budget is precisely to prepare for the most likely scenario in the coming year .
Where there is uncertainty , the answer is a budget reserve , and that applies also to uncertainty with respect to the Lisbon Treaty and its impact .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 20 May 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) The purpose of the report before us today is for our institution to state its position on the estimated budget for the European Parliament for 2009 .
It will be a crucial year : a year in which Parliament will be renewed ; a year that will also see significant changes in the statutes for MEPs and their assistants ; and , above all , the first year in which the Lisbon Treaty will be in force , giving our institution extra responsibility and the extra work that goes with it .
I wish to support the draft estimates that the Bureau has submitted .
Taking account of the increased financial requirements Parliament will face , these draft estimates keep us below the threshold of 20 % of expenditure under heading 5 .
Our administration must pursue its rationalisation drive with a view to further optimising our efficiency , notably through staff redeployment .
I would add that an impact analysis is being carried out of the needs that will be generated when the simplified treaty comes into force , and that adjustment of the estimates will be possible until the first-reading vote on the budget in the autumn .
Trade in raw materials and commodities ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Holm , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on trade in raw materials and commodities .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Ladies and gentlemen , first a big thank you to all the shadow rapporteurs for their close cooperation .
We have all seen pictures of the scenes precipitated by the recent food shortages .
Agricultural prices , not least for foods , have shot up over a very short period .
This has come as a mortal blow to many developing countries which are heavily dependent on food imports and were already living on the margins .
Let us hope that this report on international trade in raw materials will help to remedy some of these problems .
After all we have committed ourselves to eradicating hunger and poverty in signing up to the so-called Millennium Goals .
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon recently warned that the increased food prices were jeopardising the most important objective of the Millennium Goals , namely to halve poverty in the world .
So it is high time that urgent measures were taken .
In particular , the recent food crisis has shown that food is not just any raw material .
If such an elementary requirement as to ensure that people are fed cannot even be met , the rhetoric on development is not worth much .
We should therefore be careful in making food an international trade commodity like any other .
The world 's developing countries have even been forced to deregulate their food policy and switch from production for national needs to export production .
This is the policy of the IMF , the World Bank , the USA and the EU as well , which have all imposed these demands .
By abolishing protective tariffs and subsidies many developing countries have become extremely vulnerable to heavy fluctuations in food and raw material prices .
Take Haiti , for example , which was previously self-sufficient in rice .
In 1995 the International Monetary Fund forced that country to reduce its rice tariffs .
State-subsidised rice from the USA flooded in , and local production collapsed .
Today three quarters of all rice consumed in Haiti is imported from the USA .
I hope that this report can give us tools to deal with the problems and challenges posed by the uncertain trade in raw materials .
The matters we focus on in the report include support to the developing countries in diversifying their economies , so that they can break free from a situation in which they only export one or two raw materials and move towards more advanced production patterns involving more highly processed products .
We also highlight the importance of flexibility in development policy .
It must allow scope for these countries to develop possibilities and economic policy instruments , for example , to support the development of their domestic agriculture .
We also demand that the European Commission review the finance scheme FLEX , the purpose of which is to stabilise prices of raw materials .
We also address the equality dimension in raw materials trade , or rather the lack of one .
It is immensely important that we always take account of the gender issue in the negotiation of international trade agreements .
This report also takes account of fair trade .
Fair trade can be used as a tool in supporting small-scale producers in developing countries and in stepping up pressure for the raising of social and environmental standards in these countries .
We call on all the EU 's institutions to apply the principle of fair trade in their public tenders and purchasing policies .
We also take issue with the growing consumption of animal products , i.e. increasing demand for meat and dairy products , which is in turn boosting demand for grain to feed animals instead of human beings .
A great many other matters are also covered .
Finally I have to say that this work has exposed the true face of the EU .
While on our side we have sought to address the needs and circumstances of the developing countries , European industry , with help from its representatives in the European Parliament , has endeavoured to switch the focus to the short-term commercial interest of business organisations in having stable access to cheap raw materials .
I urge everyone to approve the amendments tabled by the Left , Socialist and Green Groups .
Amendments 20 and 21 are particularly important .
In that way we can balance the report so that we get a stronger development dimension .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank Parliament for giving us the opportunity to discuss access to raw materials , which is an issue that is high on the European Union agenda , especially in the light of our competitiveness agenda .
Let me first thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs for the report , which embraces numerous areas such as climate change , poverty alleviation and development .
Development is indeed a key issue in this context .
I will therefore briefly touch on development issues , before addressing our concerns and actions regarding the proliferation of measures restricting access to raw materials .
The fight for poverty alleviation and development , as well as food security , is high on the Commission 's agenda .
You are well aware that the European Union is the world 's largest donor of development funding .
Also in the specific field of raw materials , the Commission has undertaken several development-oriented programmes : for instance , through FLEX , the Commission supports developing countries ' national budgets , where there has been a drop in export-related fiscal revenue .
The Commission also promotes the transparent management of tax revenues generated by the exploitation of raw materials and natural resources through several initiatives such as EITI , the Kimberley Process and the FLEGT programme .
Let me also refer to our Everything But Arms programme , which grants duty-free access to imports of all products from least developed countries ( except arms ) , allowing them to diversify their exports .
Let me now turn to our key concern , which is from the trade perspective .
It takes two to trade .
We need to import and we need to export .
It is therefore critical to ensure that access to raw materials in third countries is free from unjustified distortions such as quotas , export duties and export bans .
Today , unfortunately , this is not the case .
On the contrary , third countries ' appetite to impose export restrictions is increasing .
Our specific concerns are those imposed by some key emerging economies as part of their aggressive industrial policy objectives .
Let me underline that we are not focusing on poorer developing economies but rather on large emerging economies .
Measures imposed by these countries result in distorted competition at global level which damages European industry .
Unfortunately , the size of the problem is growing .
By now at least 20 countries have put in place measures affecting exports of importance to the European Union .
We have counted over 450 restrictions affecting various raw materials .
Most , if not all , European industrial sectors are concerned , directly or indirectly .
What can be done ?
The work carried out so far shows that there is no quick-fix solution even if the elimination of export restrictions is high on our agenda already , be it in bilateral free trade agreements or in the World Trade Organisation , but we will do more .
First , it will be important to develop an overall strategy for access to raw materials .
In this respect , the Commission is working on a communication which will include an important trade component .
Any such strategy evidently should fully and coherently take up all policy areas , including critical issues such as food security , development and the environment .
All means will have to be used to their maximum .
A sustainable and coherent policy on access to raw materials would therefore combine : firstly , negotiations securing international commitments in the WTO and bilateral context ; secondly , enforcement of WTO rules and existing agreements ; and thirdly soft measures such as dialogue and alliance-building .
While none of these elements is new , it is their combination and their coherent use which will determine their strength .
This will be discussed at a conference with stakeholders later this year .
Considering the importance of access to raw materials , the Commission welcomes the discussions in Parliament on this issue .
The Commission particularly welcomes the amendments to the first draft of the report .
The report now highlights more clearly the significance of this issue .
It proposes ways to tackle this issue in a constructive manner , such as enforcement of agreements and negotiations with partner countries .
We stand ready to fully cooperate with Parliament in designing and implementing our further strategy .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am pleased that you have made yourself available today , Mr Potočnik .
Commissioner Mandelson , we note , has once again opted to travel to some important conference in another part of the world instead of discussing key issues for European industry policy with us in Parliament .
Imagine my delight , then , at hearing you present the subject far better and with far greater clarity and vision than our Trade Commissioner could ever have done .
I am very pleased with the outcome of our deliberations in committee , for I am afraid that the rapporteur , in his original draft , for all the good points he made about the developing countries , entirely lost sight of the interests of European industry .
In the Committee on International Trade we inserted a new first part of the report dealing with the interests of our industry policy .
The nature of those interests , indeed , has become crystal-clear .
We must focus sharply on securing the supply of raw materials to European industry .
As the Commissioner rightly said , we are experiencing major difficulties in this respect .
In the WTO framework we urgently need better rules designed to outlaw , as far as possible , trade-distorting measures such as export duties .
We need free access to raw materials in the world market .
It is intolerable that countries such as China should misuse raw materials as a political tool .
We must do everything possible , not only in multilateral negotiations but also in our bilateral negotiations , to safeguard genuine open access to markets in raw materials .
The fact that the Commission gave way in the talks on Ukraine 's accession to the WTO and accepted a degree of leeway for the imposition of export duties is intolerable and sets a bad example .
Our acceptance of dual pricing in connection with Saudi Arabia 's accession to the WTO , an arrangement that has caused severe difficulties for our European petrochemical industry , was also intolerable .
Nor am I very hopeful when I see what is happening at the present time with regard to Russia 's accession to the WTO , and I would like the Commission to take great care to ensure that no more trade-distorting measures are introduced .
May I reiterate my sincere thanks to all my fellow committee members for this report .
I hope that we do not change it too much in tomorrow 's plenary vote .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur .
The problems currently arising in access to raw materials are largely a result of a structural change in their respective markets which is related to changes in the international economy .
The raw materials market used to develop in a cyclical manner , going from periods of extreme shortage to periods of scarcity , and sometimes achieving a balance .
We now seem to be facing a new situation of structural shortage which is largely the result of a sudden increase in demand triggered by rapid progress in industrialisation and urbanisation in several emerging countries .
It is clear that efforts must be made in the appropriate fora , particularly the World Trade Organisation , to achieve consensus with a view to facilitating access to raw materials .
This must not allow us to lose sight of another essential issue , however : we now have a new situation in these markets which arises in both foodstuffs and energy .
In the European Union , therefore , we major raw materials importers have to view this issue with special concern .
On the one hand we have to consider the impact it may have throughout the world , since it could lead to excessive pressure on raw materials consumption with very negative environmental and economic and social organisation consequences in the developing countries , while on the other we also have to look at our own situation and understand our own difficulties .
This raises two seemingly fundamental questions .
One is linked to the need for us to review our own economic development model , because it is incompatible with a situation in which raw materials are over-exploited .
The other suggests that we should lay greater stress on applied scientific research to ensure greater innovation , to promote the recycling of raw materials and to find new answers for the new problems this structural shortage is creating for us .
( PL ) Nature has distributed its riches - the raw materials under the ground , the foodstuffs and trees on the earth 's surface and the fish in the waters - unevenly across the globe .
Human needs are the same , but meeting those needs requires solidarity in the exploitation of resources and in their distribution through international trade .
The Holm report has much to say on the subject .
I wish to stress a few points , following on from Mr Caspary .
First , rational exploitation of limited resources .
I repeat : limited resources .
Second , protection of raw materials against confiscation , against the neo-colonial expropriation of poor countries , especially in Africa .
We have no transparency regarding the trade in such materials engaged in by China and certain other countries .
Third , the purpose of trade in such raw materials should be the development of poor countries .
That is our main aim .
The benefits must go to the inhabitants , not just to representatives of the authorities or big international companies .
Fourth , EU raw materials policy must ensure that the Union does not become a hostage , for example , to Russia in the case of gas , and perhaps in future to Brazil in the case of sugar .
Fifth , all partners share absolute responsibility with regard to the exploitation of maritime resources .
As we know , several species of fish are threatened with extinction , just like the forests of Asia and Amazonia .
In conclusion , Madam President , the watchword for free and fair trade must be responsibility in the exploitation of limited natural resources , so that future generations can have access to the raw materials necessary for human existence .
Similarly , poor countries must be helped to develop the technology required for the production of basic foodstuffs .
And in that respect Europe can do a great deal .
( BG ) Madam President , Commissioner , bearing in mind the role played by trade in our globalizing world , we need to support the efforts to promote fair trade , and all initiatives which contribute to sustainable economic development .
Prices of raw materials affect market developments and in a number of cases have an aggravating effect on economic development , particularly in countries where deposits of raw materials are scarce .
This affects the overall market situation , and the availability of raw materials .
The expected high oil and electricity prices can and should be dealt with through effective technologies in both extraction and processing of raw materials .
This effectiveness and the implementation of innovations , as well as maintaining a strong research sector determine the level of success in improving the market situation and strength , in enhancing diversification and energy security .
In terms of agricultural trade , attention should focus on relaxing the pressure on producers caused by the imbalance between farmgate purchase prices of agricultural produce and their retail price levels .
This distorts the market but it also indicates that the market has its social cost .
Madam President , it is a pleasure to speak on Mr Holm 's report on trade in raw materials and commodities .
Last month I had the privilege of attending , on behalf of Parliament , the UNCTAD XII Conference in Accra .
From that conference there came a cry for help for the world 's poor .
Escalating food prices are increasingly leading to rioting on the streets , and we need a fresh approach if we are to deal with this situation .
The new crisis threatens to kill more in a day than have died from terrorism in the six years since 9 / 11 .
Politicians and governments may not yet have noticed , but the world 's poor are seeing their children increasingly go hungry .
The impact will be particularly acute in Africa , where commodity prices have more than doubled in the last 12 months and continue to soar owing to speculation , shortages and changing patterns of production .
The root causes are growing demand from East Asia and the supply consequences of a failure to invest in agriculture .
Climate change , written in the language of floods , droughts and record-breaking temperatures , is only making the situation worse , particularly for the world 's poorest .
It is therefore my hope that we adopt this resolution .

( EL ) Madam President , access to raw materials is of truly vital importance for the European economy and competitiveness . This is especially so because the EU depends to a large extent on imports of raw materials from third countries .
Pulling down the barriers that third countries have placed in the way of EU access to raw materials markets must be a priority .
This is true of the current WTO negotiations and in those under way for bilateral free-trade agreements .
Lastly , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that support mechanisms and a transfer of know-how to the developing countries are necessary in order to enable viable , transparent management of the use of raw materials and natural resources .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , it goes without saying that the competitiveness of our European businesses depends to a large extent on the supply of raw materials .
We therefore need an integrated strategy today to ensure access to world markets .
This will help to secure international cooperation , legitimate competition , fair trade and respect for restrictions based on serious development incentives in less-developed countries .
It will also help to promote investment in environmentally friendly technology research and development and in recycling .
Our aim must be the sustainable development of the EU , as well as solidarity with the world 's poorest countries .
Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the work he has done on this report .
There are three key elements that I see .
First of all there is global competition for the raw materials and commodities .
We have to realise at European level that we have to be better placed to do bilateral agreements and bilateral deals if we want to succeed in getting access to these commodities .
Obviously the issue of the world trade talks is very important with regard to the long-term developments , but further leverage can be gained through our economic partnerships with the developing world .
I would also caution that the giving-up of certain rights under the world trade talks for short-term access to raw materials and commodities could be to the detriment of a lot of our industry in the European Union and in particular to our agriculture .
Finally , as our previous colleague said , fairness is the most important consideration of all .
We have to invest now in the developing-world countries to allow them to succeed - not just this year and next year because of the high price of oil and gas , but in 20 years ' time .
That should be linked to investment in their countries in education and health care for their people , to stop further problems all along the line .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank the honourable Members for their interventions .
They have been quite clear on the challenges we face .
It is also quite clear , on the one hand , that we have to ensure the balanced development of our work , thus focusing especially on the poorer countries and establishing the fairness that Mr Crowley talked about ; on the other hand , we also have to secure fair trade rules for access by our industry to raw materials .
It is a fact that the European Union is a net importer of raw materials and that it will remain so .
We are now facing stronger competition on our supply markets , as well as rising prices owing to heightened competition from a number of emerging economies .
At the same time , those emerging economies are raising barriers to access to their raw materials , thereby distorting competition .
Fair access to raw materials under transparent conditions is therefore an essential part of the equation in our global competitiveness strategy .
The Commission 's intention in the years to come is to use all the available instruments to maintain a sustainable supply of raw materials for our industries .
In doing so , it will pursue a comprehensive and balanced strategy .
As Parliament rightly emphasises , that strategy must take into account not only the interests of our industries and our competitiveness , but also the interests of the poorer countries .
As regards the development angle , we must , and will , make a distinction between , on the one hand , justified measures maintained by poorer developing countries , such as export taxes , which are indispensable for those countries ' budgets and , on the other hand , measures imposed by emerging economies as part of their industrial policy and which distort competition on world markets .
I appreciate Mr Assis ' comment on R & D commitments , which also need to be increased in this connection .
I would like to thank Parliament for supporting us on this policy .
We will keep you informed on the further implementation of our strategy .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Commissioner Potočnik , we look forward to the communication from the Commission and the conference .
It is good that you intend to take up the issues of food security , development and the environment .
Francisco Assis , I entirely agree with you that we need to review our model of economic development .
Zbigniew Zaleski , I agree that trade must not amount to a kind of neocolonial theft of raw materials from developing countries .
I therefore call on Zbigniew Zaleski and everyone else to be sure to back Amendments 20 and 21 .
Please study them carefully .
Look as well at Amendment 26 , which deals with biofuels .
In that , we call for environmental and social standards to be imposed in respect of biofuels .
It is a major problem that more and more grain is used to produce meat , in other words we are feeding grain to animals , but at the same time more and more grain is being used to produce fuel for our cars .
This is a call to the Commission - we want measures to reduce private motoring and meat consumption so that we have more grain to feed people !
In the report we demand urgent measures to deal with climate change .
Trade must also bear its responsibility .
We must reduce all unnecessary emissions and reduce transport .
A considerable amount of trade involves products which could just as easily be produced locally .
We need to facilitate trade in ' green goods ' and smart environmental technology .
If we do not do so and trade does not bear its responsibility , we shall soon have no raw materials left to trade with and we shall then have no food left to eat either .
It is immensely important that we take our climate responsibility seriously !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 20 May 2008 .
Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Locatelli , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council regulation setting up the Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking - C6-0446 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first and foremost , I wish to express my gratitude to Parliament and particularly to the rapporteur , Pia Locatelli , and also to Teresa Riera Madurell , who will be replacing her , for supporting our proposal for setting up the Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking .
Let me also thank each of the shadow rapporteurs for their constructive support , as well as the Committee on Budgets for its opinion .
The Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking will have two founding members : the Industry Grouping and the Community .
Private industry has established the Industry Grouping , and its members represent a major share of Europe 's fuel cell and hydrogen companies , such as car manufacturers , energy providers , developers of fuel cells and developers of their applications .
All sizes of companies are represented - from micro to multinationals .
The cooperation between the Commission and industry during the preparation of the regulation has clearly shown the strong driving force of the industry concerned .
The assurance from the public side to provide stable funding on a long-term basis will provide additional confidence .
As a result , we can expect a commitment of considerable additional resources from the private sector .
In addition to the two founding members of the Joint Undertaking , universities , research centres and other research organisations are presently establishing a Research Grouping that is expected to become the third member of the Joint Undertaking .
Representation of the Research Grouping on the Joint Undertaking Governing Board was considered necessary owing to the importance of fundamental research to this Joint Technology Initiative ( JTI ) .
In total , it has been estimated that the creation of this JTI will speed up , by up to five years , the delivery of robust hydrogen supply and fuel cell technologies , developed to the point of commercial take-off within the time-frame 2010-2020 .
I also want to mention its relevance to our efforts in the area of energy technology acceleration , as this JTI is a very interesting model for some of the industrial initiatives that we have proposed be set up under the Strategic Energy Technology Plan .
The opinion of Parliament includes a number of very pertinent suggestions for amendments .
One example is the underlining of the importance of breakthrough research .
Fundamental research will be included in the R & D programme , and that will increase the probability of achieving progress and success .
Another example is clarification of the participation of the Joint Research Centre ( JRC ) in the activities of the Joint Undertaking .
The JRC has wide competence in several areas that are of importance , and its strong future involvement will strengthen the Joint Undertaking 's research .
Both the Council and the Commission look forward to receiving your input and opinion , as everyone is eager to move ahead and start implementing this important initiative without delay .
Mrs Locatelli should really have spoken now , being the rapporteur , but she had nominated Mrs Madurell as her replacement ; however I do not yet see Mrs Madurell and we are very sorry that she is not here .
I will therefore proceed directly to those speaking on behalf of the groups .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Locatelli , for her very thorough and detailed work on this report , which deals with one of the main strategic technologies for our energy future .
I really welcome the initiative of the Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Technology Platform , the key player in achieving success .
The concept of JTIs was introduced in the Seventh Framework Programme as a new mechanism to implement long-term , public-private partnership in research at European level .
Up to now , four JTIs have been set up in the field of innovative medicines , embedded systems and so on .
With this proposal , the fifth JTI will be set up in the field of fuel cells and hydrogen .
Faced with challenges such as electricity security , energy dependency and the often discussed mitigation of climate change , the EU needs to boost the development and deployment of cleaner and more efficient energy technologies .
Fuel cells and hydrogen technologies have the potential to contribute significantly towards these goals .
The non-existence of a joint European strategy has until now disqualified Europe from keeping up with the Asian countries and the United States .
As regards amendments , I support those which have been tabled in order to strengthen the proposal and to provide coherence with the other JTIs .
From my own experience and communication with SMEs , I especially support amendments that put more emphasis on the innovative potential of SMEs and the specific barriers that they encounter , for example in reduced access to research infrastructure .
They also need to stress the importance of breakthrough-oriented research .
As was mentioned in the Implementation Plan , especially in the early stages research should form an important element of the activities of the JTIs .
In my view , this joint initiative of the public and private sector is the right path to take in order to become more competitive with the USA and other countries which have a tradition and development strategy for hydrogen research .
on behalf of the PSE group . - ( RO ) I would also like to congratulate the Rapporteur and emphasize the importance of this document .
This initiative is extremely important for the research activity .
Unfortunately , often funds are insufficient or sometimes inadequately used .
The maximum contribution of the European Community to the administrative expenses of this joint undertaking will be 470 million euros .
It is possible to provide new funds after 2013 as well , but only for the projects for which a financing agreement is signed by 31 December 2013 .
I would like to emphasize the fact that this joint undertaking is extremely useful because it implements and is part of the Framework Programme for Research especially in the field of energy and transport , including aeronautics .
I believe this report is extremely important because it co-ordinately supports the research and technological development activities and this initiative will also support the implementation of research priorities in the field of communications and information technology regarding fuel cells and hydrogen , but it will also encourage and increase public and private investment in fuel cells and hydrogen research in the Member States and associated countries .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( BG ) Europe needs to overcome climate change and ensure security of supply of natural resources .
With prices of raw materials and finished goods constantly on the rise , this task is proving to be extremely difficult .
There is a solution , and it lies with new technology which will bring a preventive decrease in green house gas emissions on the one hand , and a more efficient use and savings of raw materials , on the other .
This is a way for Europe to be the leader in overcoming global warming and retaining its competitiveness on the global market of raw materials .
This requires increased investment in research and new technology , taking into account the potential of each and every Member State .
New technology , hydrogen technology and fuel cell development in particular , will play a key role in overcoming the shortage of energy resources , as well as in environmental protection and meeting the targets set in the Kyoto Protocol .
We should consider , however , that these technologies demand the use of metals such as platinum , paladium , gold , which are integral in the design of the new devices and equipment .
Only if we implement new , highly efficient and environmentally safe methods to extract and recover these metals , we can have the effective and sustainable development of hydrogen technology and fuel cell development .
Putting a joint undertaking in place should integrate the efforts of all countries which have experience in both the direct development of hydrogen technology and fuel cells , and in developing technologies for the sustainable and environmentally-friendly extraction of the necessary raw materials .
It is necessary to encourage these developments in new Member States which have extensive experience in those areas , such as Bulgaria , which has research teams that have been working on such projects for many years now , and have achieved considerable success .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , it is hard to disagree with an attempt to establish suitable rules for a joint undertaking in the field of fuel cells and hydrogen technology .
Mrs Locatelli 's interesting report describes this initiative as a promising example of a public-private partnership for the implementation of a joint technological initiative .
Yet in the opinion I have before me , the Council confirms the enormous complexity of the technological challenge involved in the practical application of such cells .
The experts are facing an immeasurably difficult task in finding avenues for research that would guarantee a successful outcome .
Some scientists , for example , predict the emergence of significant limitations to the practical application of fuel cells .
If we accept that hydrogen is only an energy carrier , we must remember that its practical application , in fuel cells for example , requires on each occasion the use of other energy sources for its production .
If we overcome that difficulty , further difficulties lie in store , if only the need to find suitable technologies for storing and transporting hydrogen .
I draw attention to this issue with a view to further legislative work on the text on which the European Parliament is delivering its opinion .
Let me put it bluntly , and not as some marginal comment : my chief expert says this approach will not succeed .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I should like to thank the honourable Members for their comments .
I would also like to say that in introducing the Joint Technology Initiatives we are truly starting out with a new concept .
I sincerely hope that it works , because this new approach should be instrumental in bringing some new realities to Europe .
What we are introducing is actually a move from financing projects to financing programmes , and stronger support in the private-public partnership , and I mean ' private-public ' partnership , because it is clear that initiatives and strategic research agendas are coming from technology platforms which have formed the basis for these Joint Technology Initiatives .
Working together is a must , and what I am seeing in these Joint Technology Initiatives is groupings actually coming together on a European Union scale .
Some of the major competitors in Europe are coming together so that , in this pre-competitive phase , they are able to pool their knowledge and strengthen Europe on the global map .
I would also like to say , in this context , that this specific technology initiative is extremely important because it relates to the energy sector , and every day we are reminded of the importance of that sector .
One of the most important objectives of the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan ( SET Plan ) is to accelerate the development and implementation of low-carbon technologies .
I know that you are working on your opinion on the SET Plan , and am very much looking forward to hearing your views .
As I said earlier , The Fuel Cells and Hydrogen JTI is an interesting model for other areas and will certainly become part of the SET Plan , once it is be approved .
Hopefully we will see the difference this makes in the future .
One last thing I would like to mention , as I do not know whether the interpretation was correct , is that the European Commission will contribute up to EUR 470 million for the six years this Joint Technology Initiative is to be implemented and , of course , expects that figure to be doubled by the private sector , which will also contribute to this endeavour .
Mrs Madurell is certainly not here , but I am sure that the rapporteur , Mrs Locatelli , will be in touch because what the Commisioner said is extremely important .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) Over the past fifty years the population of the world has doubled , while energy consumption has quadrupled .
For this reason , there is no other option but to welcome the Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking and provide all possible support for its establishment .
I understand Mrs Haug 's concerns about the financing of the Joint Undertaking , but financial issues cannot be allowed stand in the way of this initiative .
The key words are innovation and change of lifestyle .
This , however , costs money , but on the other hand it will bring returns .
In modern economies , innovation accounts for 70-80 % of annual GDP growth .
Why should we invest in hydrogen ?
Because it is an intermediate source of energy .
' Supplies ' cannot run out ; it is the most abundant element in the universe .
It can only be considered an alternative to fossil fuels , however , if we can produce it from renewable energy sources at a competitive price , without emitting carbon dioxide or other greenhouse gases into the atmosphere in the process .
In Canada and the USA , the importance of hydrogen was recognised as far back as 2002 .
Over there , several hundreds of thousands of ' eco-vehicles ' are already on the road , and the number of filling stations with hydrogen pumps is steadily increasing .
In the European Union , around eighteen thousand eco-friendly vehicles are in operation , while the number of hydrogen pumps available is not even worth mentioning .
If we are to avoid the ultimate collapse , we cannot hold back support for this technology and fuel ; we must take action .
I would like to use this opportunity to invite my fellow Members to my Greenovation conference , scheduled to take place in Parliament next week , on the afternoon of 28 May .
Following the discussions , participants will have the chance to take a ride in a hydrogen-powered bus or car .
Community Tobacco Fund ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Berlato , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1782 / 2003 as regards the transfer of tobacco aid to the Community Tobacco Fund for the years 2008 and 2009 and Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 with regard to financing of the Community Tobacco Fund - C6-0062 / 2008 - .

rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the aim of the Commission proposal is basically to continue deducting 5 % of the tobacco aid granted for the calendar years 2008 and 2009 and to use those funds to continue financing the Community Tobacco Fund , whose sole purpose is to finance information initiatives for improving European citizens ' awareness of the harmful effects of tobacco consumption .
First of all , I think it would be appropriate to highlight a few objective terms of reference .
The transfer of CAP aid to the Fund is a rare and positive example of integration and cooperation between the agriculture and health policies of the European Union .
Since the activities of the Fund are important for the citizens of the Union , and will continue to be important in the future , as the Commission has underlined , we consider that its continued financial support is necessary for 2007 and for 2009 .
The deduction from coupled aid granted to farmers has always been the sole source of financing of the Community Tobacco Fund .
The financial basis of this deduction was substantially reduced with the reform of the tobacco CMO and by the decision of some Member States to opt for complete decoupling , thereby completely depriving the Fund of the income from those deductions .
It is necessary , by further extending the period of application of the deduction and by increasing its percentage rate , to make sufficient resources available from the Fund to finance programmes without impacting further on the EU budget , at least until the end of the current forecasts , while at the same time seeking other ways of financing the Fund .
One of the positive aspects of the Fund 's financing mechanism is the provision for at least 25 % of the total amount of approved projects to be co-financed by proven operators , thus guaranteeing the availability of increased funding .
The Committee on Agriculture has frequently considered these questions and maintains its own line , which is to tighten restrictions on smoking and to improve people 's awareness of its harmful effect on human health .
On the other hand , we are fully aware , as stated in Parliament 's legislative resolution of 10 March 2004 , that European raw tobacco production , which is now low and concentrated in a few , specific areas of the Union , accounts for less than 4 % of world production and has no impact on local consumption of tobacco products .
Although this topic is not central to today 's debate , it is worth remembering that the European Union is the world 's leading importer of raw tobacco and relies for over 70 % of its requirements on third countries - principally Brazil , Malawi , Argentina , Indonesia , Zimbabwe , India and China - to the advantage of tobaccos often produced under less closely regulated conditions than European tobacco .
This also results in a trade deficit of over EUR 1.2 billion per annum .
On the other hand , Member States where tobacco aid has been completely decoupled have seen , besides the cancellation of transfers to the Fund , the total abandonment of production , without any sustainable alternative in economic or employment terms .
This has had very serious adverse effects on the rural areas concerned as a whole and has not led to any change in the local consumption of finished tobacco products .
As regards the proposal to make a deduction in the aid for the calendar year 2008 , and bearing in mind that the tobacco cultivation contracts for the 2008 harvest year were concluded some time ago , the Committee on Agriculture considers that approving that proposal could give rise to a whole series of legal actions or , at any event , to a dispute which would ultimately cause serious harm to farmers alone .
Finally , the Committee on Agriculture considers that , by extending the deduction until the harvest year 2012 and increasing the percentage rate of the deduction for the Fund to 6 % , there would be enough money to cover actions under the Community Tobacco Fund until the year 2013 , and it calls on the Commission to prepare a multiannual programme which , suitably altered in accordance with the amendments proposed here , could draw on EUR 81 million without impacting further on the Union 's budget .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all I want to thank the rapporteur , Mr Berlato .
I was very encouraged by the enthusiasm with which you made your speech tonight .
I also wish to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for the report on the Community Tobacco Fund .
In 2004 the Council adopted the tobacco reform that constrains partly coupled and partly decoupled payments for the tobacco producers in the period between 2006 and 2009 .
The reform allows a relatively long transitional period because the partly coupled aid can run until 2009 .
But we have seen - as you have rightly said - Member States that chose to decouple totally from 2006 when the reform entered into force .
The 2004 reform also included the transfer of a percentage of the tobacco aid for the years 2006 and 2007 from the tobacco producers to the Tobacco Fund .
The Commission proposal prolongs the transfer of a percentage from the tobacco aid to the Tobacco Fund until the calendar year 2009 .
I very much welcome the support for the transfer of part of the tobacco aid into the Community Tobacco Fund .
Your report correctly stresses the major importance for the European public of the measures carried out by this fund , aimed at promoting information initiatives on the damage that tobacco can cause .
However , your request to prolong the transitional period until 2012 poses a huge problem .
Such an extension of the transitional partly coupled regime is totally against the philosophy of what the Commission will propose tomorrow in its communication on the ' health check ' , which is moving towards more decoupled payment , to give the farmers the freedom to produce what the market wants .
So far as I have been informed , those Member States that decided from the very beginning to decouple totally the payment to tobacco producers did so because it was more profitable for the farmers to leave the sector - perhaps because of the quality of the tobacco , it was more difficult to get a decent price .
It was also agreed in 2004 that 50 % of the Community support to the tobacco sector would go into the rural development measures .
This will start in the budget year 2011 and go , as an additional Community support , to tobacco-producing regions .
It is important to note that it is earmarked for the tobacco-producing regions .
On that basis , a yearly amount of EUR 484 million has already been included in the rural development programmes for the 2007-2013 period for those Member States that are covered by the tobacco reform .
Therefore I am quite sure that it can come as no surprise that I cannot propose a prolongation of the transitional partly coupled regime , because of the agreement supported by all tobacco-producing Member States when this package on Mediterranean products was agreed in 2004 .
However , I am looking forward to a very animated , interesting discussion tonight .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , subsidising tobacco production while at the same time combating the smoking of tobacco products has been a subject of controversy for many years .
However , the Community Tobacco Fund , which presently takes up 5 % of tobacco aid , serves to finance research on countering the effects of smoking , propaganda campaigns and the training of tobacco producers with a view to conversion to other production .
I am the draftsman of the Budget Committee 's opinion on Mr Berlato 's report .
The continued financing of the Community Tobacco Fund for the next two years is most appropriate , but it is questionable that the reasons for its existence will disappear after that period , since we know people smoke and will go on smoking .
They will smoke whether we in Europe produce tobacco or not .
The problem will not disappear even if we stop subsidising tobacco producers .
The fund must therefore continue to exist .
The only thing that can be changed is the way it is financed .
Madam President , I am glad we have the Commissioner here today , for I believe she is a very fair-minded person .
Allow me to explain .
First of all , let me point out to my colleague in the Committee on Budgets that we are against smoking and are in favour of a large-scale anti-smoking campaign .
However , if people continue to smoke and there is a corresponding demand for tobacco , we do not need to import it from third countries .
Let us produce it in Europe .
I congratulate Mr Berlato on his report and fully endorse it .
I request that funding should continue from the Community Tobacco Fund .
We farmers have gladly accepted the 1 % increase in the rate of deduction that goes into the anti-smoking public information fund , Commissioner , although this is money that is taken away from us .
We gladly accept this .
We ask of you , however , that the tobacco status quo should obtain until 2013 .
Commissioner , you are a very fair-minded person .
Why should tobacco growers alone be discriminated against ?
We therefore request that this should be revoked , and that the status quo should obtain until 2013 .
Furthermore , as you know , tobacco growers in all countries , especially in my own country , are the poorest of our farmers ; they often come from the poorest , most degraded regions , where in many cases nothing else can be grown .
If we stop this regime and discontinue the aid , these regions will fall prey to desertification and environmental degradation .
I therefore request that the status quo continue to obtain in line with Mr Berlato 's report , his amendments and my own .
Knowing that you are a fair-minded person , Commissioner , I believe we can count on your support for our proposal .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I have the impression that the aim here is , as they say in Westphalia , to throw a sausage after a side of bacon , meaning to throw out a herring to catch a whale .
In other words , the Tobacco Fund is being used in an attempt to safeguard the coupling of the tobacco premium until 2013 .
The Fund , which - as we all know - is also used to finance education on the harmful effects of smoking , was introduced here in Parliament to support the actual tobacco premiums , because there was strong opposition to smoking from a majority of MEPs , and many were asking how we could support tobacco-growing , given the dangers of smoking .
I have always been a supporter of the tobacco premium , because I believe that the two things are unrelated , but then we should not be hypocritical and undertake to do something to combat smoking if we are actually pursuing a different aim , namely the preservation of the premium .
The issue at stake here is not the preservation of the premium ; it is essentially a matter of the coupled premium , the objective being to prevent decoupling .
We always act as if decoupling would deprive tobacco-growers of the premium .
We know that this is not true , and indeed we have already discussed the whole issue in connection with cotton .
Businesses will continue to receive payments ; the only difference is that they will no longer be obliged to grow tobacco , and I believe that makes good sense .
I remember a trip to northern Greece with the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development when we visited the poorest of the poor .
We saw the impoverished regions , but they were not poor because of decoupling , which had not been introduced yet , but because the tobacco industry was not paying growers in those regions a fair price for their tobacco and was even taking advantage of the premiums paid at that time to push prices so low that tobacco-growers were left with nothing at all from their premiums .
We found that incredible at the time , and we wondered why the growers in that region , who grew spice tobacco , which is used throughout the world as a speciality tobacco in cigarette blends , did not receive sufficient payment to be able to make a living from tobacco cultivation alone , regardless of premiums .
If tobacco is no longer grown in some regions as a result of decoupling or in some countries where complete decoupling of tobacco aid has been effected , this does not mean that there are no alternatives in those regions but that growers cannot cover the cost of growing tobacco .
What is therefore needed here is a showdown with the tobacco industry so that they start at long last to pay growers a decent price .
I believe it would be better , Commissioner , to leave education about smoking to others , for we in the European Union have done enough educating , and to channel these funds into rural development and into diversification measures for these poor regions instead .
Moreover , these resources should be topped up to create other jobs in these regions besides those in tobacco production .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , rarely do decisions debated in this House have such serious consequences for such a large number of people .
The issue before us today is the existence or non-existence of tobacco producers in Europe .
Tobacco production is the livelihood of around 120 000 farmers and , including seasonal workers , it employs almost 400 000 people in both old and new Member States .
The case of Greece has already shown that the so-called reform of the tobacco sector in fact means its liquidation .
It is a death sentence for 120 000 farms , mostly small family holdings .
I know such tobacco farms in Poland , but we find them here too , on the outskirts of Strasbourg .
We are talking about a catastrophe for people who have devoted their lives to the production of tobacco .
In the name of what should they be deprived of their livelihood ?
The liquidation of tobacco production will not stop people smoking .
They will smoke cigarettes made from imported tobacco .
This reform will help no one and harm many .
I therefore fully support Mr Berlato 's report , which rightly comes to the defence of tobacco producers , and add my voice to those of Mr Glavakis and Mr Cercas .
Madam President , tobacco growers are being cruelly persecuted , as the anti-smoking campaign is tantamount to an anti-tobacco policy .
As a result , tobacco grown in the EU is considered unhealthy , while imported tobacco is not .
This is inconsistent , unscientific and unfair .
The results of this policy are well known : despite the campaigns , smoking is on the increase , whereas production in the EU is in sharp decline .
Jobs are being lost , tens of thousands of small and medium-sized tobacco growers are being ruined , yet tobacco imports have risen to more than EUR 1.2 billion a year .
Tobacco growing in Greece has declined by 73 % .
Ever-increasing numbers of tobacco growers are unemployed .
Whole areas are being abandoned because no alternative crops are grown there .
We consider it essential to repeal the regulation transferring 50 % of direct aid to the second pillar from 2010 .
All deductions from subsidies should be abolished immediately to allow tobacco growing to continue , since 70 % of demand is met by imports .
Subsidies should be linked to production ; they should be an integral part of the guaranteed minimum prices corresponding to the production cost of each variety .
As the Berlato report contains positive elements supporting all of this , we , the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece ( KKE ) , will approve it .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , subsidised tobacco growing is a clear example of the double standards which characterise the EU and the European Parliament .
The EU has proudly proclaimed that the fight against diseases must be prioritised and spends a few million Swedish kronor on information campaigns every year , while by the back door the EU subsidises unprofitable tobacco growers to the tune of several billion kronor per year .
According to the report , the scheme for a gradual reduction in this support would be extended until 2013 .
The rapporteur seeks to wash his hands of the negative consequences of tobacco consumption .
The simplistic argument is that , since EU tobacco production is so small , only 4 % , the effect on final consumption is negligible .
What kind of reasoning is that ?
Is it intended to justify continued subsidies ?
I think that EU tobacco production is 4 % too high .
Besides , European tobacco is so bad that only a fraction is sold on the European market .
A third is burned .
The special interests of the tobacco industry have prevailed for long enough .
Our people need us to face up to our political responsibilities .
Ladies and gentlemen , the last puff has a bad taste .
It is time to stub out double standards .
I therefore urge you to vote against the report tomorrow .
( NL ) Tobacco kills about half a million European citizens a year .
Even amongst non-smokers there are 19 000 deaths a year from passive smoking .
How do I know that ?
That is the message in the television adverts the European Union itself is having shown in all 27 Member States as part of a big anti-smoking campaign .
Altogether we have earmarked EUR 18 million for it , but that sum is a drop in the ocean compared with the subsidies the European Union pays tobacco growers every year .
This year Brussels is still spending EUR 320 million on them .
Three years ago it was still nearly EUR 1 thousand million .
Is it not very strange that we are trying to combat smoking and at the same time are funding tobacco production with European tax revenue ?
Furthermore , this continued funding goes against the whole idea behind our agricultural policy reforms , which is that we have to abolish production subsidies .
Mr President , the proposal by the European Commission to continue support to the Tobacco Fund in 2008 and 2009 has my full support , but the fund cannot be used as an excuse to continue tobacco subsidies in 2013 .
Although I have enormous respect for my fellow Members ' arguments , I believe in this case that public health must come first .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would particularly like to compliment the rapporteur on his excellent work .
This report achieves a twofold objective : it reinforces measures to combat smoking by extending the financing of the European Tobacco Fund whilst at the same time bringing the tobacco sector into line with the other CMOs which will naturally terminate with the 2012 financial year .
However , the fight against smoking must not mean the end of tobacco growing in Europe , because Europe is the world 's leading importer of raw tobacco and relies for over 75 % of its requirements on third countries , to the benefit of tobaccos often produced without any guaranteed health controls .
Any cancellation of the aid would lead merely to the end of production , to increased imports and would have no effect on smoking .
( NL ) It is difficult to say what is more absurd , that the European Union subsidies tobacco growing , or that Europe then uses part of the subsidies for a fund that discourages tobacco smoking .
Totally hypocritical measures like that are precisely the reason why the EU has so little credibility with the public .
The argument that the EU produces relatively little tobacco is beside the point .
There is still one EU-subsidised cigarette in every packet .
That cigarette is then in any case of such inferior quality that we do not want to smoke it in Europe and we dump it somewhere else .
The tobacco subsidy must not be continued , as this Parliament wishes .
Part of the subsidies must also not be used for anti-smoking campaigns as a fig leaf , as the Commission wishes .
I have had enough of these subsidies .
They must simply be abolished immediately .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Berlato 's report deals with a combination of health and agricultural issues .
Raising the level of funding from 5 % to 6 % , together with the proposed extension of the system to the years 2009-2012 , considerably increases the resources assigned to the Fund - by as much as EUR 81 million .
Many farmers and organisations fully support the proposed regulation .
Both Polish and European tobacco producers expect the adoption of the report to result in the extended operation of the Community Tobacco Fund , which is essential for public health , and in maintenance of the tobacco production sector for Europe 's 100 000 tobacco growers .
The proposed regulation makes it possible to maintain , without any additional budget expenditure , a system of subsidies that partly benefits the production of tobacco and thus avoids discrimination against tobacco growers compared with other agricultural sectors .
It is essential , Commissioner , that we resume the very important debate on the future of tobacco production in Europe as from tomorrow , in connection with presentation of the health check .
( PL ) Mr President , today 's debate is one in which the arguments of agricultural producers conflict with those of groups campaigning for the health of European society .
But will European society be healthier for smoking tobacco of clearly inferior quality imported from third countries ?
If we destroy our own production , we shall be importing not 70 % , but 100 % .
We also have to consider whether discrimination against farmers who grow tobacco , rather than helping to develop our rural areas , will not lead , in certain regions of the European Union , to even greater economic collapse and the growth of unemployment .
Obviously , we can then pump in financial aid for the unemployed , since we are so rich that we can afford to destroy our own agriculture for the benefit of agriculture in the Far East , which we are obliged to support in order to combat unemployment there .
I fully support Mr Berlato 's report .
( NL ) European farmers who grow tobacco should not receive a single cent from the EU for it .
Obviously tobacco subsidies have been a huge source of revenue for farmers for many years , a sort of social security policy that did not deserve the name .
However , tax revenue should not , on principle , be spent on unhealthy products .
Hence there is only one choice as far as subsidies are concerned : abolish them .
The proposal in the Berlato report is a ridiculous attempt to get tobacco subsidies extended until at least 2012 .
That should not happen , and there is another reason for this .
Developing countries see it as totally unfair that European tobacco should be subsidised .
It is unfair competition with poor farmers and it is directly counter to European Union development policy , a classic example of the way in which one policy area can cut into another .
Encourage European farmers to grow crops that now bring in a high price , such as grain , which is badly needed .
Show solidarity , though , and let the tobacco subsidies go up in smoke , for the sake of public health and for the sake of cohesion in European policy for the development of the poorest countries in the world . That is solidarity .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are certain facts which are undisputed .
First , it is certain that complete decoupling lowers production .
Second , even if we stop growing tobacco in Europe , it does not mean that the reduction in European tobacco cultivation will reduce the smoking population .
Third , we are potentially condemning hundreds and thousands of people to hunger without achieving a concrete result .
I therefore believe that , on the one hand , the aid to tobacco growers should be used to explain the harmful effects of smoking to consumers - and from this point of view the money should obviously come from the aid - and at the same time we should put tobacco growers in a position to slowly quit cultivation , allowing them the necessary time to withdraw from the whole sector .
I therefore consider that we should vote in favour of the Berlato report .
( PL ) I wish to make three points in this discussion .
First , the idea of decoupling payments for production is frequently repeated by the European Commission .
It is an approach that obviously reduces Europe 's agricultural production .
Commissioner Fischer Boel repeated the idea once again today , this time with reference to tobacco production .
Second , we have to remember that tobacco growing , in both old and new Member States , takes place on small family farms in the most poorly developed regions .
Liquidation of this production will reduce the possibilities for development in these regions and threaten the existence of small farms .
Third and last , it is true that tobacco growing is controversial , but restricting it in Europe means a growth in tobacco exports from third countries .
Mr Berlato has told us that tobacco imports reached EUR 1.2 billion last year .
I hope the European Commission will take these warnings into account in defining its position .
( EL ) Mr President , I applaud my fellow Members who have shown such sensitivity on the issue of smoking .
I believe that all of us without exception are against smoking , but , my friends , let me point out an essential difference : smoking and tobacco growing are entirely separate .
Let us provide as much money as we can , speak on this issue as much as possible , and take all the action we can to persuade our fellow Members and fellow citizens not to smoke .
Given that people will smoke regardless , I cannot understand why we have to import tobacco rather than grow it here ourselves .
Now let me appeal to you as environmentalists .
Tobacco is a crop that requires little water , little fertiliser and few pesticides ; it is grown in infertile soils by poor farmers .
I am sure that the environmentalist in you and also your humanity , even in those of you who speak against smoking and link smoking with tobacco growing , will lead you to change your minds .
Associating smoking with tobacco growing is like confusing our famous wine production with alcoholism .
Should we stop producing wines because of alcoholism ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you to all of you that have contributed to this debate and thank you once again for supporting the prolongation of the transfer into the Tobacco Fund .
I am of course aware that discussions on tobacco policies are a very sensitive issue and I can tell you that I experienced that recently during my visit to Greece in April .
I must say clearly as well that the prolongation of the tobacco fund is not an invitation to reopen the tobacco reform from 2004 , and I think you have to be aware that this reform is a done deal .
And I think you have to take into account as well that this reform was supported by all the tobacco-producing Member States . Therefore , it would be a bit difficult to restart the whole discussion again .
I think it is important as well to remember that we are not stopping subsidies to the tobacco producers .
We are actually continuing to pay the highest direct payment or the highest subsidies , more than anyone else in the agricultural sector .
No other crop is actually receiving that high a direct payment .
So we will stick to the fact that we will decouple in 2009 , and from 2011 we will transfer into the rural development policy .
Therefore , instead of wasting or using a lot of time and lots of efforts against what was agreed in the Council in 2004 , I think Member States and tobacco producers , the whole tobacco sector , should look into the rural development policy instead and see what the possibilities are , because lots of money will be available for restructuring , for trying a different business in the agricultural sector .
With a bit of imagination - although I know that you cannot produce everything in these areas - I am sure that a solution could be found if there is cooperation between Member States , the tobacco sector and the tobacco producers , to try to find viable solutions for these areas , in the period after 2011 as well .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Commissioner and all those Members who have spoken .
I would point out that , as far as the future of the European tobacco sector is concerned , a formal request was made recently to the Commission , signed by the Ministers of almost all the tobacco-producing Member States , including those countries which have opted for complete decoupling , and the new Member States , for the Commission to put forward a proposal for a regulation extending the current system of support for tobacco production until the year 2013 .
That matter must be addressed as part of the discussions currently in progress on the CAP ' health check ' .
I will conclude , Mr President , by inviting my fellow Members - who at first glance might appear to be less interested in a measure which only involves a deduction from aid to growers in five old Member States , which have maintained the aid partly coupled - to reflect on the fact that the use of those resources and the Fund 's information initiatives will continue to be aimed at benefiting the health of all citizens of the Union .
I would also like to point out that perhaps there is a fundamental misconception here : this report is not concerned with and takes no decision on prolonging aid payments to tobacco producers ; it is merely a question of voting on a report which advocates prolonging the financing of the Community Tobacco Fund .
As regards prolonging the aid payments , that is a decision to be taken later , but that is not the subject of this report which , as I said , is about prolonging the financing of the Community Tobacco Fund and not about prolonging aid payments to tobacco producers in the immediate and foreseeable future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 20 May 2008 .
The Evaluation of the PEACE Programme ( debate )
The next item is the report by Bairbre de Brún , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the evaluation of the PEACE Programme and strategies for the future .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , Ms de Brún , let me start by thanking you very much for the excellent work on the evaluation of the PEACE programme and also strategies for the future .
The Commission shares with you the opinion that the European Union 's interventions in support of the peace process in Northern Ireland have contributed in bringing the two communities closer together and have helped the development of cross-community and cross-border linkages .
The Commission also recognises that peace-building is a long-term and multi-dimensional process and we also recognise that peace-building requires a flexible approach and the willingness to allow for experimentation and the adoption of innovative measures .
But perhaps the most important lesson learned from the PEACE programme is the effectiveness of the bottom-up approach .
This has enabled people and organisations working on the ground to tackle the problems and issues faced by the communities at local level .
It has brought people from both communities together and given them , very importantly , a sense of ownership of , and the responsibility for , the peace process .
Targeting those most affected by the conflict is important , but the projects dealing with young people , our future , have been equally important in changing attitudes and perceptions .
Last but not least we have learned that the projects in support of women are essential since the role of women in peace-building and promoting reconciliation is a key factor in bringing stability and durability to the process .
The Commission also considers that the experience of the EU interventions in Northern Ireland and the peace-building initiatives should indeed be recorded with the objective of passing on good practice to other areas of the world , emerging from conflict or facing similar problems of social integration .
I know that Northern Ireland is actively working on the establishment of a centre for conflict resolution and they have my support in taking this forward .
Allow me also to mention the successful Northern Ireland workshop during the Open Days in October last year .
Indeed , not only was the event fully booked but it generated a network which is currently being set up for sharing experience on peace and reconciliation .
It will also be followed up by a workshop during this year 's Open Days , in early October .
I shall stop here .
I thank you for your excellent report and shall now listen to Parliament 's debate .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) When there are very unusual circumstances in Europe , we have to apply very unusual measures , and in this case a really tailor-made and innovative solution has been found , thanks to resources from the Regional Development Fund .
We have really reached people 's hearts with this , we have reached into their homes and we have been able to work in social organisations where trust is so important : people 's trust in their surrounding areas , which , with the great tensions there were in Northern Ireland , was so desperately needed .
In that connection , I agree entirely with Commissioner Hübner that this is a good example of a case where instruments like this , resources like this , need to be used , just as in similar situations , such as Cyprus .
Mr Nicholson , the shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , has missed his plane , so I am speaking first .
I should like to say that , as coordinator , I fully support the Peace III Programme , especially the role of the people and - as I have already said - the cross-border aspects .
The fact that people in the rest of Ireland are affected , as well as the infrastructure , is very important .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , you cannot put a price on peace , but the series of PEACE programmes in Northern Ireland since 1995 have supported the peace process in Ireland with a goal of reinforcing a peaceful and stable society and promoting reconciliation in the region .
I congratulate Bairbre de Brún on this own-initiative report , which describes the positive results and best practice gained from this EU programme .
The peace-building aspect of the programme is crucial for the future of Northern Ireland and offers lessons for other EU Member States with a history of conflict .
The PEACE II programme allowed for valuable exchanges of experience between areas - including Albania , Belarus , Moldavia , Serbia , Ukraine and Bosnia .
I welcome the current discussion on the possibilities of creating a Europe-wide network of regions and cities that are coming out of conflict , that have experience in coming out of conflict or that are living with conflict and exclusion .
Reconciliation is a long-term process and I support the continuation of the PEACE programme .
Within the process it is important to involve local communities , and Mrs de Brún 's report highlights the wide range of projects including childcare , after-school projects , enterprise parks and small business enterprise , in both the rural and urban areas .
Many of the projects funded under PEACE were set up to serve local requirements .
They also attracted a wide range of diverse participants to seek a common aim or benefit and help in developing models for public engagement in policy development .
Women 's groups played a very positive role in peace-building .
I thank Mrs de Brún and I hope that all will support this constructive report .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Bairbre de Brún , on her excellent report , which highlights the significant contribution of the PEACE programme to fostering peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland and the border counties .
It also outlines how lessons learned and best practice achieved should be shared with those who are engaged in other international peace-building work .
I am pleased that the rapporteur accepted my amendment , which states that it is vital that peace-building programmes , in particular those involving community and voluntary groups , continue to be financially supported when the PEACE funds come to an end .
Indeed , the report makes it clear that government departments on both sides of the border should ensure mainstream funding continues for this very important work , once EU funding finishes .
It is crucial that we do not pull the plug on community and voluntary groups that are engaged in this valuable work .
That would break trust with communities and would diminish much of the good work under way .
Community and voluntary organisations need to be able to work to a strategic plan and not on a short-term basis where they cannot plan for the future .
In this context , it is also important that those groups are not caught out in the funding gap between PEACE II and PEACE III .
I have written to the Commission and received a response on this issue .
Before I came down to the Chamber tonight , I once again had a look at the long list of community groups on both sides of the border who have received PEACE funds and who have been actively involved in peace-building , in reconciliation and in regeneration projects .
The EU can be assured that PEACE money was well spent and that the added value of volunteer time and volunteer work has made the PEACE programme a model for value for money .
We often speak in this House of bringing Europe closer to the citizens .
The PEACE programme was , and is , a tangible mechanism to connect Europe with the citizens .
As Commissioner Hübner has said here this evening , it shows the value of the bottom-up approach and also highlights the important role of women in peace-building .
This is an example of the EU reaching out to its citizens , acting as a catalyst for change and , in this case , citizens responding fully and wholeheartedly .
on behalf on the UEN Group . - Mr President , I would first like to say that I welcome this report .
When Northern Ireland was divided by conflict and strife the leaders and the Institutions of the European Union gave special support and encouragement to the people of the North in helping them on the road to peace .
As the rapporteur Bairbre de Brún stated , that support was worth EUR 1.65 billion and there is still another EUR 333 million to come .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur Bairbre de Brún .
It is a strange , however , that amongst the people who received the most advantage and support from the campaign to help give financial support , it is Sinn Féin that is against the Lisbon Treaty and against the European process .
The leader of Sinn Féin , Gerry Adams , seldom makes any reference to this EUR 1.65 billion .
If we listened to them , Ireland would not be in the European Union .
We would not be in the system to receive money for the peace process in Europe .
And I must say that it is this fact which most disappoints me this afternoon in Parliament .
Mr President , this is a report of verbiage , not substance , just as much of the PEACE funding itself was spent upon froth .
The irony , of course , of an IRA / Sinn Féin MEP being rapporteur on a report on peace will not be lost on thousands of people in Northern Ireland whom her wicked organisation made victims through its pernicious terrorist campaign .
It is no surprise to me that she can produce a report talking about peace without a single blushing reference , without a scintilla of regret as to how we came to need peace : because , make no mistake about it , of her IRA 's decades of terror .
Nor am I surprised that she makes no mention of one of the gross failures of the PEACE programme , namely the inequality in distribution between the two communities in Northern Ireland , with the Protestant Unionist community not getting its fair share of funding .
Not something , of course , likely to concern Miss de Brún .
Finally , let me place on record that the relative peace we have today in Northern Ireland is primarily due not to some EU peace programme but to the remarkable tenacity , courage and sacrifice of our marvellous security forces , who faced down the IRA which robbed us of peace for so long .
Mr President , the PEACE programme has contributed to the peace process in Northern Ireland not only in terms of financial assistance but also by helping to bring the two communities together .
Its approach has been to work with civil society and NGOs to promote active citizenship . It has allowed the individuals involved to seek solutions to their own problems .
This is an example of the Commission 's contribution to peace-building and reconciliation , and it should be congratulated on this .
The report refers to sharing the experience gained by PEACE with other regions facing similar problems .
As a Member from Cyprus , I think it would be extremely interesting to put this experience into effect in the case of Cyprus .
I call on the Government of Cyprus and on the Commission to examine this possibility as a component in the provisions of any political settlement .
( EL ) Mr President , the PEACE Programme has shown the contribution it can make towards peaceful coexistence and conciliation between the different communities in Northern Ireland .
Given our assured support for the continuation of this programme in Ireland , allow me to underline the following .
The programme is a shining example of the good practice that can and must be applied in other regions of the EU , such as Cyprus .
The way in which the PEACE Programme is implemented and especially how it is managed by local partnerships and NGOs ; the development of inter-community schemes ; easier access to funding for schemes or groups unable be funded from other Community or national sources : all this provides valuable experience .
It points to ways and means to be adopted more widely in programmes governed by the Structural Funds .
Such an approach works upwards from the grass roots , particularly in programmes focusing on local development , and the fight against poverty and social exclusion .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must begin by highlighting the excellent results that have been achieved through PEACE I and PEACE II , most particularly for the beneficiaries of those programmes in Ireland - in Northern Ireland - to whom both dignity and hope have now been restored .
That said , I should like to make two particular points , Commissioner , on which I hope you can obtain genuinely successful outcomes .
Firstly , as Ms de Brún has urged in her report , the British and Irish Governments really need to get behind the decisions taken by Parliament , the Commission and the Council , so that temporary and complementary arrangements can be put in place through their joint efforts .
Secondly , Commissioner , as you are in charge of the task force , you will not be surprised if I urge you to ensure that we take an integrated approach , in the interests of consistency among the various agencies involved , consistency among the different programmes and funds , and consistency between different geographical areas .
Last but not least , I hope that the Irish example will provide a valuable lesson for other countries throughout the world .
Mr President , why are we passing this resolution ?
Is it a specific remedy to an identified problem ?
Or are we rather passing it to make ourselves feel better , to feel that we have done our little bit for the peace process ?
I ask that question with some regret .
I am as big a supporter of the peace process in Northern Ireland as any Member of this Chamber and , indeed , possibly rather more than some .
Being on one side Ulster Catholic , on the other , Scots Presbyterian , I have always felt that I have something of a personal stake in power sharing .
But the peace process is not guaranteed by external subventions .
On the contrary , there is a danger that this flow of money turns what was an enterprising and thrifty part of the world in to a subsidy junkie , dependent on handouts from elsewhere .
Ask yourselves - I put this quite seriously - when you sign those cheques for those hundreds of millions of euros , whether you actually think you are buying stability and peace in that part of the world , or whether you are not just allowing yourselves to feel slightly better for a few minutes .
The idea that political violence is caused by deprivation is simply not borne out in reality .
It is one of the many ideas that derive from Karl Marx and , like a lot of his ideas , it sounds plausible on the page , but it turns out not to be true in reality .
The most subsidised territory in the world , more than anywhere in Africa per capita , is Palestine , which is also one of the most violent .
The truth is that , if we want to support the peace process in Northern Ireland , we have to create a genuine democracy there , where there is a genuine opposition and the ability to change your government .
If you do that , we will not need the money .
Mr President , I welcome this report from Bairbre de Brún , and I would like to congratulate all the people who made a contribution to the report , in particular the shadow rapporteur , Jim Nicholson , Marian Harkin and all the people involved .
The Peace III Programme is up and running , with EUR 333 million going into an area , helping the whole infrastructure and Community development in Northern Ireland and in the border counties .
I think the three PEACE programmes have made a huge contribution in bringing about peace in this area .
I would like to congratulate all the people involved in getting it together , but also all of the political parties in Northern Ireland and the community groups who have worked together to make sure that the peace programme continues to work .
I also welcome the task force that has been set up in Northern Ireland , but I think that a task force is also needed in the six border counties in the Republic to deal with infrastructure development in that area .
It is unfortunate that the Irish Government has not done likewise in relation to those six counties .
It is something that should be looked at because those counties also suffered over a period of 30 to 35 years .
We need that kind of initiative in those six county areas .
I would welcome the Irish Government putting that in place .
Again , thank you to all those involved .
( DE ) Mr President , surely there is scarcely anyone here in Parliament who harbours any real doubts about the success of the PEACE programme in terms of both its tangible contribution to economic and social cohesion and its contribution to enhanced local involvement through active citizenship and the participation of civil society in peace-building .
The report , drafted on the initiative of the Committee on Regional Development , rightly emphasises the valuable experience that has been amassed through this unique and highly innovative structural programme as well as highlighting the things that could be done better in future , the challenges that remain to be met and the conclusions that can be drawn .
As someone who is closely involved with the regional policy of the EU , I am keenly aware of the need to develop cross-border activities and strongly support cooperation between local chambers of commerce , public institutions and voluntary organisations on both sides of national borders .
I need hardly tell you that my group and I unreservedly endorse this report .
Mr President , since nobody else is asking for the floor , I would just like to make a comment .
I suppose I am not really surprised , but perhaps a little disappointed , to hear the comments by Mr Jim Allister here tonight .
We are discussing the PEACE programme and not the conflict .
Like all conflicts , this conflict 's roots go deep and it did not start in recent times , and like all conflicts it is much more complicated than indicated by Mr Allister .
But regardless of those who question the efficacy of the PEACE programme and indicate their disapproval of EU funding , there is no doubt that the PEACE funds acted as a catalyst and , as I said earlier , through voluntary effort and voluntary time achieved value for money .
Perhaps the best thing to say is that there is an end to the conflict and that the PEACE funding played a role in helping to achieve this very positive outcome .
Mr President , it is all very easy and very well for Miss Harkin to come to this House and to talk in the way she has talked .
How many constituents has she buried , murdered by terrorists ?
How many people have died in her constituency because the organisation that Miss de Brún represents decided they would die in pursuit of a political campaign ?
The IRA murdered 2 000 of my constituents , so no one will lecture me in this House about the deep-seated feelings that I have , and no one will contradict me with justification for pointing out that the people that put so many of my constituents in their graves are the IRA , which Miss de Brún represents in this House .
To now see them in the government of my country is stomach-churning , and to find that they are there because they murdered and as a buy-off so that they will not murder again makes it even worse .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to say that this debate has clearly confirmed the importance of the peace process in Northern Ireland and that important lessons have been learned during this process .
The Commission will continue its contribution to consolidating the reconciliation process and will also facilitate the sharing of the lessons learned from the experience of peace-building with all other areas facing similar problems .
In these efforts , the support of the European Parliament will certainly matter very much .
I would like to make two further comments :
To Jean Marie Beaupuy , the task force for Northern Ireland has been established to enhance and facilitate the participation of the people of Northern Ireland in all European Union policies and also to better coordinate and to build more coherence between different processes contributing to the consolidation of the peace and reconciliation process .
The second comment is that in these efforts the Commission would also like to help people in Northern Ireland to reduce the existing dependency on the public sector , on state aid and on the reliance of support coming in the form of grants .
The conference which was mentioned by Bairbre de Brún was also exactly aiming at contributing to this process of bringing more private investment - a more vibrant private sector - to life in this part of the island .
Once again , thank you very much for all your comments .
Rapporteur . -Mr President , I would like to thank those who spoke in the debate tonight .
I listened carefully to them and to the points they raised .
I am disappointed , however , by what Mr Allister had to say and I cannot agree with his allegations .
I would like to praise the work the European Parliament and the Commission have done over the years in terms of the PEACE programme .
I would like especially to thank Commissioner Hübner for the personal commitment she has shown from her first day in that post and for her regular visits to Northern Ireland .
Commissioner Hübner and the previous Commissioners have been true friends to the peace process in Ireland and it is reassuring to see the continuing role the Commission will have through the task force that was set up by President Barroso .
PEACE enabled a border community divided from the time of the partition to come together as a community .
It brought young nationalists and unionists together to learn about each other 's cultures .
We especially acknowledge the important role women have in building peace and the important and valuable cross-community and cross-border work that has been done .
My Report highlights the fact that it is the most marginalised people in society who benefited most from PEACE , which is just as it should be .
Nevertheless , if there are groups which have not already used this opportunity to make an application under PEACE I and PEACE II they should be encouraged to participate .
The next step is to ensure that the good work that PEACE has done doesn 't stop and that future generations benefit from the valuable work that started with the PEACE programmes and from the wonderful support the European institutions have provided .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 20 May 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
) , in writing . - ( RO ) The PEACE Programme represents not only a means of maintaining peace , but also an instrument favouring economic development and territorial cohesion .
Its implementation by the regional governments and non-governmental organizations leads to the involvement of a wide range of communities , local organizations and marginalized groups in the process of governance and development .
Moreover , financing regional projects through PEACE contributes to facilitating dialogue , reconciliation and agreements whose objective is to satisfy common interest and , consequently , avoid any type of conflict .
Northern Ireland is an example of good practice for all the other Member States that have experienced conflicts or are dealing with problems threatening their peace .
This is why I support the creation of a network of European regions and cities with a potential conflict risk and I believe that the promotion of local partnerships , best practice sharing and efficient cooperation between the regions and the intermediary Financing Bodies are essential factors for determining local communities to cooperate and work for maintaining peace .
I also plead for implementing programmes similar to PEACE in Southeast Europe as well , especially in the Balkans , mainly since the events in recent years have been an alarm signal .
Outermost regions ( debate )
The next item is the report by Margie Sudre , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the strategy for the outermost regions : achievements and future prospects .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's assessment of the stronger partnership for the outermost regions is one-sided to say the least , and it fails to convey all the difficulties experienced on the ground .
Nonetheless , reducing their accessibility deficit , making them more competitive and achieving regional integration remain appropriate goals that reflect the priorities of these regions .
The familiar image of the Azores , the Canary Islands , Guadeloupe , Guyana , Madeira , Martinique and Reunion as regions subsidised by Community or national funds , without consideration for the positive impact of such funding , is insufficiently offset by the genuine added value they contribute to the Union in environmental , cultural and geostrategic terms .
The Structural Funds are still contributing to the development of the outermost regions .
I hope , however , that the Commission is steadily tailoring its current and future policies more closely to the realities of those regions in order to address the permanent constraints they face .
An over-systematic methodology for quantifying additional costs would be disproportionate and would not take account of the individual characteristics of each of the ORs .
The ever-increasing importance attributed to the assessment of Community policies must not result in the creation of superfluous statistical tools .
I regret the initial lack of interest - even if it was only initial - shown by DG Trade when negotiating Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) .
I must urge the Commission , when it comes to reaching final agreements with the ACP countries , to continue seeking compromises that respect the interests of the ORs concerned and I must urge it too , in the interests of the wider neighbourhood , to give genuine substance to the Wider Neighbourhood Action Plan .
With regard to transport , my report expresses concern about the inclusion of civil aviation in the European CO2 Emission Trading Scheme system .
It is important not to jeopardise the efforts made to overcome the ORs ' accessibility deficit .
Community actions must be a catalyst for a spirit of enterprise to develop centres of excellence , driven by sectors - such as waste management , renewable energies , energy self-sufficiency and biodiversity - that fully exploit the advantages and know-how of the ORs .
I welcome public consultation on the future of the EU 's strategy for the ORs , but I believe that although the themes selected - climate change , demographic change and migration management , agriculture and maritime policy - certainly cannot be ignored , they do not cover all the major concerns of our regions .
I regret , for example , that the scope of Article 299 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty , which is the cornerstone of the Union 's policy for assisting the ORs , has not been included on the agenda so as to give the debates the legal , institutional and political substance they merit .
The importance of public services for economic , social and territorial cohesion in the outermost regions , the question of state aid , the maintenance of differentiated tax regimes , the persistence of unemployment and inequalities , ways of overcoming the narrowness of local markets , integration into the European research environment , effective participation by the ORs in European policies to promote innovation and overcome the digital divide , and funding arrangements for cooperation projects with neighbouring countries are all , in my view , subjects that need to be addressed now .
In conclusion I would re-emphasise the aims of my report , namely to ensure the conditions for the economic development of the ORs and thus guarantee genuine prosperity for their populations , to strengthen their competitiveness and to convince these remote regions that the future of Europe also includes them .
Thank you in advance for your support in tomorrow 's vote .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first of all say that we appreciate this report very much .
This is a very professional report and I would like to thank Margie Sudre not only for the report but also for her presence and strong involvement in the Conference of Outermost Regions that we held last week in Brussels .
I would like also to extend my gratitude to the Regional Development Committee and also the Fisheries Committee , particularly its draftsman , Mr Guerreiro , for the contribution to the reflection on the future strategy for the outermost regions , and also to Mr Fernandes , Mr Marques and Mr Casaca .


I would like to extend my gratitude for the contribution to the public consultation that we launched last September .
This phase of consultation has just ended with the conference last week .
What came out from this conference very strongly is the challenge of double integration of the outermost regions , and also the idea of the outermost regions as test beds with pilot projects , especially in areas like renewable energy .
It was also very clear in the conference that outermost regions have a wealth of unique opportunities and that they represent a living force as well as a strength for the Union as a whole .
On the report itself , let me stress that I fully share the importance Parliament attaches to the need to preserve a strategy specifically adapted to the characteristics and the assets of the outermost regions , and we are ready , in the Commission , to widen the scope of the strategy to new challenges .
Clearly those identified by the Commission - climate change , demographic change and migration management , agriculture and the maritime policy - are not exclusive and we are open to other ideas .
I can also agree with Mme Sudre when she calls for an improvement in the coordination between the Regional Fund and the European Development Fund .
I also believe it important to further integrate the outermost regions into the European Research Area as well as promoting cooperation with neighbouring regions .
In this regard , I believe that the reformed cohesion policy has clearly helped to strengthen the position of the outermost regions under the cooperation objective .
The ' outermost region dimension ' , if I may call it so , has been safeguarded and intensified following the reform of many Community policies : not only the cohesion policy , but also agricultural and rural development , regional state aid frameworks , the European POSEI programmes or the EU maritime policy .
I strongly believe that these policy developments correspond well to the needs of the outermost regions .
With the September 2007 communication , we underlined the need to exploit all of the opportunities offered by the reforms of European policies during the period 2007-2013 , and from my different and numerous visits to the outermost regions I can see that many initiatives have been taken in that direction , although I believe that these initiatives should be further strengthened and developed .
Concerning the way in which the Commission conducted the Economic Partnership Agreement negotiations as well as the Emission Trading Scheme discussions , allow me to say that the outermost regions have been an integral part of the discussions from the very start and the Commission has systematically informed and also involved the representatives of the outermost regions in the discussions .
Having said this , let me also assure you that the Commission will continue to take account of the specific interests of the outermost regions in current , but also in future , negotiations of this nature .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries . - ( PT ) The opinion of the Committee on Fisheries , the only parliamentary committee to decide to draft an opinion , includes a whole series of proposals to benefit the outermost regions ' interests .
These include : considering the area corresponding to their exclusive economic zones as an exclusive access zone ; ensuring Community support for the renewal and modernisation of fishing fleets ; creating a Community programme to support small-scale inshore fishing ; providing Community support for scientific fisheries research and the protection and recovery of fish stocks ; introducing socio-economic measures to compensate fishermen for the impact of measures to conserve fishery resources , and reinforcing and continuing Community support such as POSEI - Fisheries .
Because we believe that these important Fisheries Committee proposals must be reflected in the resolution to be approved tomorrow in the plenary , we are re-tabling a set of eight amendments for which we seek your support .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the specific situation of the outermost regions most certainly deserves special attention by the European Union .
There is no doubt that the European strategy for the outermost regions has had some positive effects to date .
The reality is , however , that some structural problems remain , and these will require our attention in the future .
We have to bear in mind that not all the problems of the outermost regions can be solved , some of them being sui generis problems , stemming from the fact that with the exception of French Guyana we are dealing mostly with remote territories composed of islands and we cannot change their specific geographic and structural characteristics .
I would like to add a note of caution at this point against excessive centrally directed social engineering .
In relation to the issues we have been discussing concerning the outermost regions , it is even more imperative to consider implementing the principle of subsidiarity .
There is no doubt that the outermost regions require different conditions when it comes to the rules on public aid and the internal market .
This should also be taken into consideration in European legislation , which must help to preserve the specific characteristics of these regions and mitigate the limiting factors .
It is debatable , though , how effective the complicated European financial programmes can be in this instance .
In my opinion , national and regional aid properly applied in relation to local conditions is a much more effective form of aid to the outermost regions .
I believe that the European structural policy should instead be based on the principle that financial aid should be targeted primarily at the poorest regions , where it is needed the most , irrespective of whether it is an island , a mountain or a scarcely populated area .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating the Commissioner and the Commission on this initiative , which surely offers a new opportunity in response to the problems of the outermost regions and their people .
The opening of public consultation has fostered greater participation .
I believe a great deal has been contributed already , including the meeting the Commissioner referred to , which was very productive .
I would like to focus on the draft opinion , however , which is a balanced opinion that has allowed a consensus to be achieved .
It is an opinion that shows some complementarity with the perspectives highlighted by the Commission when it refers to climate change , etc .
I would like to refer first to the question of the Lisbon Strategy , which I believe is fundamental for providing a response to the outermost regions ' problems in this new phase , to the need to adapt all policies and programmes to this situation , and also to the question of guaranteed funding .
I would also like to say in conclusion that although the Committee on Fisheries ' opinion certainly focuses on the essential aspects , there are some details that could be highlighted .
The difficulty was to bring together a whole sector when the goal is a strategy for the outermost regions that encompasses all possible areas of development .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at a time when our planet has become a little village - so easy is it to move from one side of the world to the other - we need to grasp what an opportunity these outermost regions represent for the European Union .
As our rapporteur , Mrs Sudre , points out in various paragraphs of her report we possess tremendous assets in our outermost regions : in agriculture , fisheries , research , technology and tourism .
With a total of 25 million km2 we have the largest sea area in the world .
As the report says , therefore , we need to build on these assets so that our outermost regions can play a successful role in our shared future .
My second point concerns the particular situation of urban areas - I speak here as Chair of the Urban Intergroup and I see a number of my fellow members of the Intergroup here this evening - because it is in urban areas that the problem of unemployment is concentrated , unemployment at three times the mainland European level .
Migration is also focused on urban areas and it is there , too , that population changes have the greatest impact .
Commissioner , what you have here is an exceptional opportunity to impose an integrated approach , embracing not only the various European funds but also different policies and different government , regional and local projects .
If that integrated approach is not developed , we shall not be able to be effective in the outermost regions or to make best use of the assets they possess .
I thank you in advance , Commissioner , for using our European rules to ensure that the integrated approach will contribute to the success of all the measures that we put in place .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of the UEN Group I would like to thank Mrs Sudre for taking up this subject .
European solidarity requires us to take account of the special situation of the outermost regions .
It is our duty , indeed our moral obligation , to concern ourselves with the economic and social cohesion of these regions .
The territorial cohesion referred to in the Treaty of Lisbon - though not intended in a literal , geographical sense - must also have a dimension that includes the Union 's most distant regions .
What should be stressed is the need for closer partnership - meaning better access , greater competitiveness and the improvement of regional integration .
We must not forget that the targets of all these actions are the inhabitants of the overseas territories , for whom the important issues are sea and air transport , unemployment , tourism , fishing , a proper level of education and health care , and general broadband access to the internet .
Nor should we forget that these regions are unfortunately prone to natural disasters .
The outermost regions have their advantages , but they also have problems .
Mrs Sudre 's report brings them a lot closer to us .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) We consider the report to be positive , though it includes some points that we disagree with .
We support the adoption of proposals that we presented in the Regional Development Committee in favour of the outermost regions , an example of which is the argument that the specific characteristics of the outermost regions call for a strategy based on policies and measures that are not dependent on transitional criteria or circumstantial wealth trends , are adapted to the different needs of each of those regions and help to offer solutions to the permanent constraints which they face .
It stresses the importance of public services for economic , social and territorial cohesion in the outermost regions in such areas as air and sea transport , postal services , energy and communications , not forgetting broadband Internet access or the urgent adoption of measures aimed at combating endemic unemployment , poverty and unequal income distribution in these regions , which have some of the worst rates in the European Union .
We consider that some aspects could and should be clarified and reinforced , however .
Community support measures for the outermost regions , for example , must be permanent and must be adequately funded , given that the constraints which they face are also permanent .
In addition , to ensure that measures in favour of these regions and the clarification of their status are more coherent and effective , not only must their specific outermost nature be taken into account across the board in the various Community policies , but also an adequately funded Community programme providing support to these regions must be set up and must encompass all existing measures .
Hence our proposed amendments .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this good own-initiative report produced by Mrs Sudre pursues two basic aims , namely to evaluate the conclusions and recommendations contained in the communication from the Commission and to provide a basis - and I believe it provides an excellent basis - for discussion of the prospects for our outermost regions .
Even if the rapporteur takes the view that the Commission 's review paints an excessively rosy picture , or at least a partial picture , we should nevertheless be proud that European aid has allowed such advances to be made in our outermost regions .
On the one hand , that does not in any way imply a reduction of assistance to these regions , the provision of which is , of course , a legal obligation under the EC Treaty .
On the other hand , we know that nurturing the particular assets of the outermost regions is the only suitable way to ensure that these regions generate their own sustainable development .
As the rapporteur rightly summed it up , this is not only a matter of preserving , safeguarding and protecting but rather of attracting , generating appeal and continuing to cooperate closely .
The report rightly urges , for example , that the discussion on the future of the support strategy for the outermost regions should not only focus on challenges such as climate change , demographic change , migration management , agriculture and maritime policy but should also take account of the need to adopt positions in respect of other Community policies .
The new generation of European programmes must also mark the start of a necessary process of diversifying the economies of the outermost regions and must not be confined to merely maintaining the present state of development , which has largely been achieved with the aid of the EU .
In the light of these considerations we should give the report our unqualified support .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I reiterate the thanks to Mrs Sudre for her work on this report and for achieving a majority consensus in the Committee on Regional Development on the policy for the outermost regions .
The policy must have three fundamental facets : it must increase accessibility , improve competitiveness and strength regional integration .
The contribution of the Structural Funds to the development of these regions has been important and will continue to be very important in the future for maintaining the level of cohesion achieved and for reducing disparities further .
It is therefore necessary for the Commission to show greater flexibility .
It should facilitate the use of ERDF Funding for the outermost regions by ensuring that its scope is sufficiently wide for the Fund to be fully used .
Another fundamental challenge is improving accessibility and , for that reason , it is important that the outermost regions receive differential treatment with regard to transport .
The fourth Cohesion Fund report faces up to the new challenges and we certainly hope that the Commission takes into account that these challenges are also important in the outermost regions .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , an important issue that has not received sufficient attention from the Commission is support for those island regions in the EU that are not among those referred to in the Treaty but still have much in common with them .
Island Member States within the Union must be treated on equal terms with outermost regions .
This is necessary according to the principle of equal treatment , because island Member States and island regions of Member States to some degree face the same severe territorial and geographical disadvantages as outermost regions .
Small island Member States and island regions of Member States must therefore receive the same treatment as outermost regions ; they must be subject to the same preferential strategy as those regions .
For example , they must receive a separate state aid package so that they form a bridge in the EU with regions such as the Eastern Mediterranean .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , although Mrs Sudre 's report may seem irrelevant to many European countries , since very few of them have outermost regions as remote as , for example , the Azores , Madeira etc . , her approach has nevertheless caught my interest .
I found that the report could inspire a similar policy for countries with island regions , especially archipelagos and also mountainous areas , like my country , Greece .
The geocultural nature of these regions is a unique resource as well as a disadvantage .
I therefore congratulate Mrs Sudre on her work , as she has given me the impetus to table some proposals myself regarding these regions .
I propose , then , that measures should be taken to make use of the geocultural characteristics of islands and mountainous regions .
There must be a development strategy to maintain and strengthen the principle of territorial cohesion .
A system of statistical indicators should be developed to allow better evaluation of the differences between island and mainland territory .
There should also be greater flexibility in the application of European and national aid policies for productive activities on the islands .
The following issues should be addressed : equal access to the internal market and the establishment of a practical aid scheme for the islands ; the impact of climate change on the islands , especially the aggravation of existing problems such as drought ; easier transport connections between island and mountainous regions and the mainland .
Lastly , special priority should be given to securing the energy needs of the islands by developing and implementing power generation projects based on new technologies and renewable energy sources .
Broadband connections should be set up , and the viability of island and mountain tourism should be reinforced .
For all these reasons , I once again congratulate Mrs Sudre .
I express my wholehearted support for the report in the belief that at some point the Commission will prepare a similar report on the regions I have mentioned .
( ES ) Mr President , some of the speeches we have heard this afternoon do not seem to take into account that the reality is different in the outermost regions .
It is not that they are poor regions .
We are talking about small insular and very isolated territories located thousands of kilometres away from the territory of the European Union , populated by a total of four a half million people .
The European Union could abandon these territories to their fate , condemn their people to poverty and force them to emigrate to European Union countries , which would mean accepting another 4.5 million immigrants .
Fortunately , the European Commission understands the situation of these territories and created a special regime a long time ago .
The Commission is now consulting us .
Mrs Sudre has prepared a valuable report in response to this consultation , in which she emphasises the importance , for example , of maintaining the ORs Unit and makes very specific proposals to maintain public services , promote innovation and overcome the digital divide .
I believe that Parliament should approve Mrs Sudre 's report for the reasons she has put forward .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report on which the House will vote tomorrow rightly reminds us that the specificities of the outermost regions are also among their strengths .
Alongside the handicaps that hold them back , they also have undeniable advantages and we urgently need to build on those advantages so that the ORs can develop in a real and sustainable way in the future .
Bringing fresh impetus to our islands also implies growth : it implies putting high-quality agricultural production - which contributes to diversity of agricultural output at EU level - on a sustainable footing .
It implies promoting the rapid development of a very real tourist attraction based on the wealth of our various landscapes and our cultural heritage .
It also implies taking advantage of the geographical position of the ORs , particularly in the Caribbean and the Indian Ocean , encouraging closer cooperation with neighbouring third countries and developing our islands - precisely because they are islands - as centres of excellence for scientific research , notably in maritime studies , climatology and environmental studies .

The only way of achieving these aims , however , is within the specific regulatory framework of the current Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty , and the spirit of that article must inform the detailed application of European public policy , particularly in the energy and transport sectors but also in relation to international trade policies , where it is vital that the interests of the ORs are taken into account in the negotiation of Economic Partnership Agreements .
The outermost regions are genuinely and unfailingly proactive , but the corollary of that is a need to be treated fairly - which implies differentiation .
Let us not doubt that the Commission will take all this into account in preparing its approach .
( NL ) The outermost regions are in a special position .
Many of them are remote small islands , and I think Mrs Sudre has found a good balance by identifying their specific character and tailoring the instruments to them well .
As a Dutch MEP , I should like to report on developments in the Kingdom of the Netherlands .
We have three of the small islands , Sawa , St Maarten and Bonaire , that are going to change over to the other status and so will also become outermost regions .
However , I do not think that will happen so quickly that the inhabitants will be able to vote on it before the 2009 elections .
Under the new Lisbon Treaty , we can accept them more quickly .
We do not need to amend the Treaty to do so .
Perhaps Mrs Hübner can say whether the Commission is completely ready for these three islands with a total population of 19 000 to be accepted by us as a whole .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , besides congratulating our colleague Mrs Sudre on her excellent report , I would like to make three points on the European Union 's future strategy for the outermost regions .
The first point is to congratulate the European Commission for fostering participation in the debate on the record of European policy for the ORs and the future strategy to be applied .
I also applaud the on-line public consultation and last week 's major conference promoted by the European Commission on this issue .
The second point is to say that a European strategy for the ORs is as necessary in the future as it has been to date .
There is a risk of believing that the economic and social development achieved in the meantime by the ORs makes European action less necessary .
We must always be aware , however , that the very specific situation of the outermost regions is permanent and will continue to require a differentiated European response which is appropriate to that very specific situation .
The third and final point is to say how important it is for everything to be done to implement the Lisbon Strategy in the ORs too , its application in such regions being more problematic because of their very specific characteristics .
I would therefore recommend to Mrs Hübner that a study promoted by the European Commission be carried out with a view to identifying the difficulties the outermost regions face in implementing the Lisbon Strategy and specific ways of overcoming them .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased to commend the quality of Mrs Sudre 's report .
We cannot fail to acknowledge , 10 years after the Amsterdam Treaty came into force , that EU policy under Article 299 ( 2 ) has led to real progress .
Today , however , it is time to move into a new phase based on a switch of approach in relations between the EU and the outermost regions .
This will require the EU to take greater account of the advantages that the ORs possess , along the lines envisaged at last week 's seminar .
In my opinion , as well as making up lost ground , the new strategy should focus on development - on forms of development clearly determined by the concept of realising our potential .
This applies equally in relation to scientific research , marine resources , biodiversity , European social policy , climate change and the unrivalled contribution that the ORs make in terms of cultural diversity .
I have tabled a number of amendments accordingly and I hope they will achieve their aim .
Giving substance to the new approach means giving the ORs the means to become genuine partners for Europe and that is where we need a fresh perspective : to envisage a two-way partnership from which everyone will benefit .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , very briefly in reply to what Mr van Nistelrooij asked , yes , we have been working with the Dutch Government for the last year-and-a-half on this .
Fortunately the changes which were permitted by the Treaty have been introduced , so we hope that one day we will have the three new territories .
With regard to the comments made , let me first of all say that , in line with the request formulated by the European Council in December , the Commission will be producing a communication this autumn that will take the outermost region strategy forward with , I hope , decisiveness and pragmatism .
That is our approach to address both new challenges , but first of all to facilitate grasping all the opportunities .
Mme Sudre , I see your report as helping to build a bridge between the present and future strategies for the outermost regions and that is a very important role of this report .
I also very much believe that the right way forward is indeed first of all to build on the assets of the outermost regions , That was stressed by several Members .
Let me also mention in this context our future Green Paper on territorial cohesion , which will be an essential feature of the French presidency .
The outermost regions have a strong role to play in this process of preparing the territorial dimension of the cohesion policy because the outermost regions truly personify our efforts to bridge the territorial divides inside Europe .
That is why I would welcome their strong involvement in the public consultation related to the Green Paper on territorial cohesion .
On the last issue , let me simply reassure you that the Commission will continue to promote a coordinated and integrated approach and will seek to achieve synergies between different Community policies affecting the outermost regions .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , obviously I want to thank all the speakers who have contributed to the debate , and I would also like to reiterate my thanks to the Commission for its initiative last week on future strategy for the ORs .
I should like to reply to some of the points raised by my fellow Members , and I am grateful to them for their warm reception of this report .
In answer to Mr Guerreiro , the support that he wants to see for renewal and research in relation to fisheries and the increase in aid is all already covered by the European Fisheries Fund .
It already forms part of the policies to which the EU , and specifically the Commission and the Fisheries Committee , are committed , whereas this report is concerned with regional development policy .
That is why , while taking account of the tremendous importance of fisheries for our development , my report does not give it the extensive space that Mr Guerreiro would have wished .
Let me remind him that what we are talking about here is regional development .
Mr Medina Ortega has already replied to our Greek colleagues who called for the same policy to be applied to all islands , and has explained the difference that is created by distances of many thousands of kilometres from the continent of Europe .
However much progress we achieve , we will still be thousands of kilometres away .
And however well I understand the problems experienced by all island dwellers , we clearly cannot apply the same derogations and the same rules to islands that are only a few hours away by boat or a few minutes by plane .
This is certainly not a matter of failing to consider the situation of islands but - let me repeat - there is a huge difference between your islands , with their proximity to the continent , and ours that are so very distant .
Mr Guerreiro , you spoke a second time to urge that our approach should not be based on transient criteria .
Obviously there is nothing transient about our situation : that is quite permanent , but we are not asking for a permanent guarantee of aid at the same level in perpetuity , because our hope is to catch up with the average in the rest of the Community .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 20 May 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - This report gives a good overview of the problems that the Azores , the Canary Islands , Guadeloupe , French Guiana , Martinique , Réunion , Saint-Martin and Saint-Barthelemy are facing as geographically distant regions of the European Union , but it also points out the disparities in the treatment of different overseas territories of the Member States .
There are still several regions under the sovereignty of Member States that do not share the same status as the outermost regions .
For example the citizens of the British Virgin Islands or Greenland are citizens of the European Union , but European Parliamentary elections are not held in those regions , while the citizens of Aruba are citizens of the European Union who happen to be entitled to vote in the European Parliamentary elections .
But even more confusing is the fact that none of the aforementioned territories is actually a part of the European Union .
It is my firm belief that the European Union 's relationship with the Member States ' overseas territories and citizens of all those territories should become uniform , bearing in mind the equal treatment of the citizens of the European Union .
EU consumer policy strategy 2007-2013 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Lasse Lehtinen , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the EU Consumer Policy strategy 2007-2013 .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , the report before us has undergone a thorough reading in committee , for which I thank my colleagues and above all the shadow rapporteurs from the other political groups .
In a spirit of consensus we have noted the Commission 's laudable efforts to highlight consumer issues in all areas of policy .
This continent will not be able to compete in global markets unless it can compete in its own internal market .
The 27 national mini-markets must be combined to constitute the largest retail market in the world .
A viable internal market requires action to boost consumer confidence .
Strong and independent consumer organisations have an important role in this .
Among the options for increasing confidence there is one which has stood out more than others in our discussions and which also caused the only disagreements worth mentioning .
It is about the possibility of consumers having the tools to pursue compensation if something goes wrong .
The view is expressed in this report that it is indispensable for consumers to have a cross-border collective redress system in cases where there is a dispute .
Commissioner Kuneva has already promised to start considering what sort of system of collective redress might work in Europe .
At least there seems to be broad consensus among us in Europe on what sort of system it should not be .
It should not have any fundamental similarity with the American collective redress system , which mainly benefits lawyers , not consumers .
In Europe we have to aim for a system where claims for compensation are directly linked to actual damage caused .
This way , how justice is dispensed would not so much focus on the penalty but on obtaining justice for the consumer .
Collective redress systems would therefore not give consumers new rights , but would ensure that their present rights can be exploited to the full .
The conservatives as a group have been unwilling to take forward the idea of collective redress .
The reason suggested is that the Commission has already promised to start drafting proposals on it .
Parliament , however , is the political decision-maker elected by the people of Europe , and we must make its majority will evident .
We have both the authorisation and an obligation to think about new and detailed solutions to issues the public see as problematic and propose them to the Commission .
I have proposed that the Commission looks into whether it would be useful to establish a post of Consumer Ombudsman reporting to the Commission , who would specifically deal with cross-border cases .
This high official could act as a gatekeeper , a sort of selective authority , as is the case in national contexts when means of legal redress are being implemented .
Hopefully , the report and the compromises contained in it will receive the widest possible support .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank Parliament for supporting the objectives and actions of our Consumer Policy Strategy for the years 2007-2013 and of course for the great support and work of the rapporteur .
I welcome the view of Parliament on the necessity to transform the 27 national mini-markets into a pan-European retail market - the largest in the world .
To achieve this , we need to increase the confidence of consumers to shop across borders .
We often say that trust is the currency of the modern economy .
I believe that , through our endeavours and substantial efforts , helped by the set of our strategy , we could , step by step , achieve this goal .
In this context , I also very much appreciate the support given to the proposed framework directive on consumer contractual rights , which is the tool for achieving the goal .
I am particularly pleased with the agreement of Parliament on the need for targeted full harmonisation where bottlenecks to the functioning of the internal market are identified .
On the Consumer Markets Scoreboard , I am grateful for the welcome given by the European Parliament to this initiative and look forward to your full support later this year .
The Scoreboard is central to the aim of the strategy of better understanding how the internal market is working for our consumers - to measure the outcome of the internal market for consumers .
When the Scoreboard is fully developed , we will really be able to deliver better regulation and evidence-based policy-making .
Equally important , we will demonstrate to our citizens that we understand and can respond to their day-to-day concerns .
You raised the question of redress .
I would like to thank you for your support for the Consumer Policy Strategy 's focus on redress and enforcement .
Redress , together with enforcement , is a key part of this Strategy .
Like you , I strongly believe that , in order to make the internal market work , European consumers must be confident that they can enforce their rights and obtain redress across the whole European Union .
I also believe that a complementarity of means of redress - judicial and non-judicial , both individual and collective - would allow the most efficient and appropriate treatment of consumer disputes .
This would benefit both consumers and reputable businesses alike .
Personally , I think that collective redress - both judicial and non-judicial - could be an effective means for strengthening the redress framework that we have already set up for European consumers .
We have done this through the encouragement of ADR - alternative dispute resolution - mechanisms , the establishment of a European cross-border small claims procedure and the newly adopted Directive on Mediation .
Of course any future action in this area will need to be assessed carefully .
As you know , I have launched two studies aimed at further exploring the issue of collective redress .
The first one will examine the effectiveness and efficiency of existing collective redress mechanisms ; it will assess whether consumers suffer a detriment in those Member States where collective redress is not available and examine the existence of negative effects for the single market .
The second study will provide information on the problems faced by consumers in obtaining redress for mass claims and will analyse the economic consequences of such problems for consumers , competitors and the relevant market .
I plan to use the results of these studies and the information collected from stakeholders and Member States for preparing a communication to be adopted by the Commission by the end of 2008 .
The aim of this communication will be to consult publicly and widely on the options available in the field of consumer collective redress .
At the same time , I am evaluating how the Directive on Injunctions was implemented by the Member States and the impact that it has had on the enforcement of consumer rights in the EU .
My conclusions will be set out in a report that should also be adopted by the Commission at the end of this year .
Again , thank you to Parliament for sharing the vision of the new , market-based consumer policy - one where informed and empowered consumers confidently look for , and benefit from , the best offers in terms of price and quality in the largest retail market in the world .

Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - Mr President , I would like to welcome the Commission communication , as well as the report of Mr Lehtinen as both are overall very balanced pieces of work .
Moreover , they rightly bring out an important notion that must be addressed at EU level - consumer policy is and must be part of the internal market .
This leads me to what the Committee on Economic Affairs has rightly brought into the report : completing the internal market is in itself great consumer policy .
EU-wide competition brings prices down and increases quality and consumer choice .
The EU-wide access to consumers to these choices must be asserted .
In an internal market , consumers are drivers of the market economy and can , through their choices , protect their own interests .
Therefore , the consistent implementation of existing directives regarding the internal market is of paramount importance .
The Committee on Economic Affairs ' opinion correctly highlights two areas that are of particular importance in this respect .
First , financial services : a real internal market in banking , loans , insurance etc. is needed to empower European consumers .
This is especially pressing as democratic developments are making best possible investment services increasingly relevant to all .
Big hurdles remain to be overcome here .
Second , e-commerce .
This is linked to functioning financial markets and conditioned by the development of payment systems , but it is also important to practically all aspects of the internal market as the internet offers a real European marketplace .
So we must make sure that European e-commerce really functions and consumers have right choices there .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - Mr President , in the Committee on Legal Affairs we agree with you , Commissioner : let us get rid of these 27 mini-markets ; but , in order to do that , you need a much more common legal framework .
I think our starting point that would help us get there is if we saw all elements of the Commission who are involved with the internal market working also coherently together .
The one issue that has long interested us , and we felt that perhaps there was not sufficient mention of , was the contract law project and the common frame of reference .
We do not want to feel that this is being forgotten and everybody is moving on to the next thing which we support you in , in terms of collective redress , but let us also devote our efforts still towards the common frame of reference .
We would like to have seen more emphasis on ADR forms of redress , particularly in the on-line world which is something we , as a committee , have long supported .
With collective redress , yes , we are happy that you look at it and we go forward in that area , but please do not let us end up where we have with contract law , bedevilled with questions over legal base and other issues .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( SV ) Mr President , let me say a big thank you to the Commissioner , Meglena Kuneva , and rapporteur Lasse Lehtinen .
I welcome the strategy and am very glad that consumers are being treated as an important group to look after .
We know that we shall never get a flourishing internal market unless we have satisfied and secure consumers .
But I share the rapporteur 's view that the strategy calls for continuous follow-up if it is really to develop to the consumers ' advantage .
As rapporteur for the strategy in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , however , I am disappointed that the main reporting committee did not take account of more than one of our 13 amendments .
They contain many important and worthwhile proposals .
We wanted to see a clearer gender perspective .
Consumer policy is definitely not gender-neutral .
Gender should be taken into account just as children , the elderly and the disabled are taken into account .
I hope that this can be taken up again in the next review .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , my thanks to Mr Lehtinen and to the shadow rapporteurs for the good cooperation over the last few months .
This report introduces some very positive elements in the area of consumer policy moving forward .
Consumers can only exercise their rights if they are aware of those rights , and empowerment of consumers in the EU is a central element of this report , and this will be achieved through education and awareness campaigns .
Special focus will be given to equip consumers with the skills and tools needed to increase their confidence in the digital environment .
The report commends the Commission 's efforts to strengthen cooperation in the area of product safety and at international level , in particular with Chinese and US authorities .
Continued dialogue and information-sharing on product safety is in the interest of all parties and is central to building consumer confidence .
In relation to consumer redress , together with my PPE-DE colleagues I strongly support easy and effective access to redress for all consumers in the EU .
We know that non-judicial forms of redress are the preferred solution of most consumers as they serve consumers ' interests most rapidly at the lowest possible cost .
As I have stated since the outset of discussions , I do not support calls for legislative action to introduce an ill-thought-out system of collective redress in the EU .
The Commission is currently preparing various studies on existing systems of consumer redress in the Member States and rather than pre-empt the results of the Commission studies I , together with my PPE-DE colleagues , call for a strong role for Parliament and the Member States in assessing the results of the studies before deciding upon further action .
It is not in consumers ' interests to hastily introduce a system of collective redress which would be both costly and ineffective .
In all other respects I support the report .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , may I express my thanks to Mr Lehtinen for the really good draft report he has given us , which provides us with a very sound basis for our discussions .
I should like to highlight three very important points from this report .
The first is the need to ensure that a leading role is played by instruments which we already possess in the European Union for the promotion of safety and prevention .
This is why it is very important that the RAPEX system should be further improved so that it can serve the interests of consumers even more effectively .
The second very important point is that Solvit , which is such a key instrument , should be nurtured and improved .
There is still a very considerable information gap among consumers , too many of whom have never heard of Solvit and do not know that it could resolve a good few problems for them .
That is also very important .
I am also very gratified that the European Commission is to examine the EE symbol again .
Many people believe that the EE symbol is a safety mark , but unfortunately it is not .
We should ensure , together with you and Commissioner Verheugen , that the rules governing this symbol are formulated so as to enable us to assure the public in future that they can rely on the safety of products bearing the EE mark .
That is a very important aim .
The last and most important point , however , in the view of my group is the system of collective redress that we in the Socialist Group are advocating .
The entire statute book serves no purpose if consumers cannot assert their enshrined rights , be it because there is a cross-border dimension which makes the law very difficult to enforce or because there are many small claims for minor losses , although these can certainly suck people dry over time .
It is absolutely essential that we not only encourage the European Commission to examine and develop such a system but actually urge it to do so and to present us with an appropriate piece of draft legislation as soon as possible so that we can really give consumers due security and protection .
I very much regret that the PPE-DE Group has not seen fit to advocate this system with the vigour and commitment that are needed to give consumers and the public at large real confidence in the European Union and the internal market , for such confidence comes from knowing that they are properly protected when they go shopping in Europe .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , may I begin by congratulating Lasse Lehtinen on this good and balanced draft report .
We are in agreement on very many points .
One reason for this has been the very good preliminary work of the Commission in this case .
There are few contentious points .
Consumer strategy will be one of the main topics of discussion during the next stage in the development of the internal market .
At the heart of the three main challenges facing the European Union , namely growth , employment and the recognition and satisfaction of people 's needs , are 490 million consumers .
The internal market has the potential to become the world 's largest retail market .
This is why the ALDE Group supports the Commission 's targeted efforts to create one large retail market out of 27 mini-markets .
We also welcome the way in which the draft reinforces the horizontal element of consumer policy as well as its proposal for the appointment of what it calls consumer-liaison officers .
In this context I should make special mention of the proposed strengthening of the European Consumer Centres and the particular attention given to the needs of children and elderly people .
May I also say something on the subject of collective redress , with which we have a problem .
We have had little information and much dogma .
I believe it would be premature , Meglena , to say that you will have the solid backing of Parliament on this matter .
We have just heard from the PPE-DE Group that it will not back you .
I believe the PPE-DE is failing to recognise the real problems .
There is a scatter-gun type of damage that affects many consumers in more than one country .
It is legitimate for the Commission to give some thought to this whole matter and examine it in a study .
On the other hand we have PSE dogma , which craves this instrument at all costs as a political tool , regardless of the real problems - and the real problems are manifold .
There is , for example , the problem of the legal basis .
Where in the Treaty does it say that we here in the Commission and Parliament are entitled to interfere with the Member States ' codes of civil and criminal procedure ?
What did Diana Wallis just tell us on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs ?
The problem of contract law is still unresolved .
The question of opting in or opting out , the role of the Ombudsman - there are many problems to resolve .
It is simply not enough to say we do not want the US system .
The Americans also had the best of intentions when they first created their system .
It goes without saying that they did not intentionally create a bad system at the outset .
For these reasons we should maintain an agnostic , critical position .
We should wait for the study , take its findings seriously and then engage in an informed , non-dogmatic and responsible discussion , as befits this Parliament .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Mr Lehtinen 's report deals with the major issues of pro-quality strategy for the coming years .
That strategy is important for the citizens of the Union , and I want to stress some of the problems involved .
In the creation of national and EU law there should be greater input from consumer organisations , which are encountering difficulties in pursuing their activities and obtaining funding in certain countries .
The Union should provide more substantive and financial assistance to those organisations .
The collective redress systems applicable in certain countries should be used against dishonest market players , and a collective redress system should be introduced at European level .
European consumer centres in the individual countries , as well as consumer organisations and consumer rights spokesmen , should step up information and education activities aimed at special protection for the most vulnerable consumers .
Protection can be made more effective through the involvement of the Solvit and RAPEX consumer centres .
We support this report .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Thank you , Mr President .
Support for consumers ' rights is often weak and so needs to be strengthened .
I therefore thank the rapporteur and members of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , who have succeeded in strengthening support for those consumer groups which most need protection : children and the elderly .
Strong consumer support calls for active consumer organisations .
Individuals are not strong when they stand alone .
It is through these organisations that consumers gain strength and acquire more knowledge and information .
These organisations therefore need reliable and secure financing .
But the insecurity which currently prevails in purchases across national borders needs to be resolved by creating the possibility for group actions to be brought against firms which break the law .
The greatest problem for consumers today is that it is difficult to get a dispute between different countries heard because there are no instances to resolve such cross-border disputes .
The EU must first develop instances to resolve disputes , not create more EU legislation .
I think the proposal to appoint an EU consumer ombudsman is highly dubious .
Why introduce more services to be financed at EU level , thereby risking a cut in appropriations for consumers organisations ?
Consumers will not gain anything from that .
In conclusion , I regret that the amendments from the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality - as usual , I have to say - were voted down in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
They were worthy of a better fate .
Mr President , it is a pleasure to take the floor for the first time and within an area of responsibility in which I look forward to working .
It is of course positive that through this report the European Parliament is taking the initiative to secure the rights of consumers .
However , I fear that , bit by bit , this legislation will simply amount to patching things up .
There will be patches that cover up the fact that the EU is organised in such a way that consideration for the free mobility of goods , capital and services will always take precedence over consideration for consumers and other ' soft ' areas .
I believe that today 's debate reflects this .
I would like to give two very specific examples of ways in which we must secure the rights of consumers .
It is vital that we secure the consumer 's right to complain in their own country and in their own language , and it is vital that food products and other goods that could constitute a health risk can be subject to checks in the event of import into the individual countries .
The individual countries should be allowed to carry out checks and demand a higher standard than that laid down in EU regulations , out of consideration for the environment and the health of consumers .
The EU 's consumer health strategy must be based on the principle of caution instead of an ideological school of thought that merely serves to allow all goods to move completely freely across borders .
This can be done by securing the right to complain and contact legal bodies locally , as well as by allowing the import of goods to be stopped if there are health-related reasons for doing so .
( SK ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report rightly assesses the positive effect of the euro in terms of reducing the cost of financial operations .
Consumers have found it easier to compare prices in cross-border contracts and have also welcomed the increased retail potential in the internal market .
I agree that the new Member States should be encouraged to continue their reforms and that they should be able to adopt the euro as soon as they fulfil the Maastricht criteria , in order to take full advantage of a common currency in the internal market .
The European Parliament will soon have an opportunity to test this proposal in practice when it debates the enlargement of the euro zone to include the Slovak Republic .
Slovakia has , with considerable effort and well ahead of target , fulfilled the Maastricht convergence criteria .
I reject the attitude of some colleagues who are now hammering us with a vague and fuzzy counter-argument about the permanent sustainability of these criteria .
That could go on indefinitely .
Mr President , in the internal market consumers and providers , as well as goods and services , should be able to move freely .
Consumers must not be less protected in other Member States than at home if we want to ensure and enhance cross-border activities .
Therefore , I welcome the horizontal approach in the consumer policy and the better protection it will lead to .
It means empowered consumers and strong consumer protection as well as a business-friendly internal market legislation .
However , we are concerned about the hasty approach concerning collective redress .
It is too early for Parliament to take a position .
We need thorough studies of the existing systems in the Member States and an assessment of the need of a European collective redress system .
We do not have enough knowledge at this stage of the consequences in terms of risk abuse , higher costs for consumers and businesses and more regulation .
I do not believe that anyone supports the introduction of a European system in the EU knowing all the drawbacks and disproportionate consequences it would bring .
For now , we encourage other means of redress which are more rapid and at lower costs and leave the regulation to the Member States to be decided nationally .
Existing instruments and non-legislative tools can be used at EU level .
We call on the Commission to carry out the study and present its results to Parliament and the Member States .
Why go further than what is needed in order to achieve the objectives of the Treaty ?
Why take away the possibility of choice for Member States keeping different dispute-solving mechanisms ?
There are many questions to be answered .
There is no clear indication so far that an EU-collective redress system brings added value to the internal market and its consumers and businesses .
The EU should not legislate without strong reasons .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I want to begin by congratulating Lasse Lehtinen on the excellent work he has done and on his capacity for listening .
His report sets out to improve a Commission strategy that is already based on the principles of protecting and empowering consumers .
I support the horizontal approach advocated by the rapporteur as a means of reconciling the protection of consumers - and especially the most vulnerable consumers - with an efficient internal market .
Likewise , it is essential that consumer organisations should be given a greater role in preparing legislative proposals .
In relation to product safety , the Commission not only needs to pursue its market surveillance efforts ; it also needs to act quickly to establish principles for a CE marking system that will offer a genuine guarantee of quality , traceability and safety .
Lastly , it is essential to improve access to redress by proposing a European system of collective redress that will allow consumers to exercise their rights in full where there is proven harm , while at the same time avoiding the pitfalls of the US system .
Voting in favour of these things can only strengthen public confidence in a European market model that is both open and protective .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's consumer strategy encompasses various thematic areas , in which we very largely support its position .
We support you too , Mrs Kuneva , in your personal commitment to the completion of the single market and your particular focus on consumers and their role in the internal market .
There are various areas of common ground .
Reference has already been made to the aim of strengthening the European Consumer Centres and the Solvit system .
That aim enjoys cross-party support .
We also acknowledge the need for a horizontal approach to consumer policy but regret the weak emphasis on the law of contract .
We must take care that contract law does not cause our proposals to fray at the edges so that we end up with patchwork legislation .
This evening 's vote in committee showed that consumers trust the law if they are fairly sure that they know it .
If time limits vary from one jurisdiction to another , consumer confidence will wane quite considerably .
We therefore need the common reference framework , because we need uniform standards in order to build consumer confidence .
The same applies to collective redress .
We have heard that various groups have adopted diverse positions .
The position of the PPE-DE Group is quite clear : we concur with the analysis that there are certain weak points where consumer interests are less well protected , especially with regard to cross-border transactions .
We look in vain , however , for an analysis of the reasons why these weak points exist , and no one in the chamber this evening has offered any explanation .
We have been promised studies .
We shall read them very carefully , page by page .
If these studies only analyse the legal position , however , and not the differences between the Member States in terms of the enforcement of their own laws , these studies will bring us no further forward at the end of the day .
May I therefore say to you , Mrs Kuneva , that we are wide open to real progress and take a very constructive attitude to the enforcement of existing rights but that these consumer rights cannot be more effectively enforced unless they ultimately work properly in practice .
In Germany we have the Capital Investors ' Test Cases Act , under which numerous shareholders have brought a group action against Deutsche Telekom ; it has become evident in the course of these proceedings that the theory and practice of collective redress are often poles apart .
( RO ) It is obvious that consumers who are well-informed about their rights can reach a high level of satisfaction and defend their interests .
Nevertheless , besides knowledge , citizens also need an instrument available in order to request compensations when their rights are infringed .
For this reason , we believe that group actions are necessary and welcome in a form efficient for the consumer and balanced for the market .
Continuing and strengthening the process of the internal market supervision is just as necessary .
We believe the existent opinion barometer is very useful and will support its financing in the budget for 2009 as well , yet requesting more emphasis on recording and comparing the priced of goods and services traded in the 27 Member States .
Last but not least , we should not forget that the consumers ' rights should also function in the field of services , including the financial services and the services in the digital environment , where the degree of risk is much higher and it is much more difficult to prove the infringement of rights .
Mr President , I want to thank Lasse Lehtinen for a very comprehensive report , which contains an enormous amount of extremely significant ideas .
As the Commissioner said earlier , to enable consumers to become better informed and more confident and to exercise that critical choice , we want innovative and safe products and services .
All of those things will come from support for consumers and enhancing their rights .
I say this to Lasse particularly because I am disappointed that he has allowed all this good work to be overshadowed by one single issue .
The problem with this issue about collective redress is that our colleagues in the Socialist Group seem to have already jumped to a conclusion that they want some new European legislation .
I was delighted to hear you confirm , Commissioner , that you have two studies - not just one - looking at this issue in depth .
We on this side of the House want to await the report before we jump to conclusions , but it appears that our colleagues on the Socialist side think that this is already a great thing and that , because we do not support it , we are some anti-consumer .
You only have to read some of the press releases - the colourful releases , the red-coloured releases - that have come out on that side of the House .
I just want to reject emphatically the fact that this side of the House is against consumer rights because we are not committing an advance to a proposal for which we do not even have the information .
I say this to all our colleagues here : wrapping yourself in red tape and potentially adding great cost to consumers is not pro-consumer .
Let us wait and see the conclusions .
I say to Alexander Lambsdorff that he has allowed himself to be hijacked by this , but all he has to do tomorrow for us to unanimously support Lasse Lehtinen 's report , is to vote for our Amendments 5 and 6 , which keep the door firmly open .
We will wait for Mrs Kuneva 's report and we will look at it and study it with an open mind , but , in the mean time , we will continue to be the great champions for consumers in the internal markets , for their effective rights that will be delivered by the existing legislation we have at the moment .
( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lehtinen report quite rightly considers that the needs of consumer protection can be satisfied by legislation only if it is better and simpler , and that a more coherent legal framework for consumer rights is needed .
I therefore call upon the Commission and the Member States to provide adequate funding for strong and independent consumer organisations .
Such funding is absolutely essential for progress to be made in constructing a true internal market for consumers .
Collective redress , meanwhile , deserves the closest attention and my support , given the positive experience recorded in various Member States .
I would also like to say , as Mr Lehtinen stresses , that a strong consumer protection system will also benefit competitive producers and sellers , creating incentives for businesses to produce and sell more durable goods , resulting in more sustainable growth .
The report goes further than this , however , and I applaud Mr Lehtinen when he states that consumer protection should be an integral part of the planning and design of products and services .
Finally , I would like to say that I share his conclusion that effective and improved consumer protection is necessary in order to achieve a better functioning internal market .
I would like to thank him and say that I believe we now have the best conditions for a good strategic understanding with Mrs Kuneva in this area .
( PL ) Mr President , there is no need to stress the importance of customer satisfaction for businesses .
Each of us as a consumer knows that dishonest business practices - deliberately misleading information or unsatisfactory after-sales service - effectively makes us disinclined to purchase any more goods or services from the company concerned .
It is important , however , that consumers should always have the possibility of real choice , of changing the service provider or seller .
Without a doubt , such choice creates a competitive market in which it does not pay market players to discourage consumers .
In a competitive market the entrepreneur knows that he risks losing his market position , and with it his profits and prospects of further development .
I believe the European Union internal market has such potential .
I am pleased that the possibility of creating the internal market exists , that it exists thanks to consumers , and that that fact has been noticed .
Obviously , I am not saying we are already operating in such a market .
Consumers still lack the knowledge needed in order to seek out the most advantageous offers , and some entrepreneurs withhold that information from them .
Moreover , service providers themselves often take insufficient account of consumers ' interests .
It is therefore important to ensure that consumers ' rights are respected , that they have the right to full , intelligible , simple and easily comparable information , and that that right is respected by companies and law-makers .
It is no less important that consumers should be informed about their rights and made aware of the tools that exist to help them in taking decisions in a free market .
In this respect , consumer organisations have a large part to play .
Nor should we forget that the defence of consumers ' rights , and the possibility of effectively enforcing them , are immensely important for the proper functioning of the market .
As the rapporteur points out , however , defence of the consumer must not serve as an excuse for market protectionism .
Our task is to strike the right balance in consumer protection so as not to create a barrier to business development .
( SK ) I welcome the Commission 's report on the EU consumer policy strategy and I also appreciate your efforts , Commissioner Kuneva , to promote a consumer culture based on consumer awareness and better access to information .
I believe that strong and independent consumer organisations are the backbone of an effective consumer policy and I am happy that Mr Lehtinen 's report included the changes I proposed in article 7 , where Parliament calls on the Commission and the Member States to provide sufficient finance for consumer organisations .
This concerns primarily financial support for intensive training programs aimed at those working in consumer organisations .
Consumer organisations are best informed about consumers ' needs and should therefore be consulted on all areas of consumer policy that will affect consumers .
I fully support the two amendments proposed by my political group , the PPE-DE , to Article 40 of the report dealing with collective redress .
Only if such a need is identified by the impact study should the Commission propose a European framework , which would give all consumers in all the Member States easy access to various redress mechanisms in cross-border complaints .
( RO ) In the context of the European Union consumer protection strategy , I would like to mention the importance of quality of services and products .
If consumers are already used to resorting to consumer protection offices in relation to products , this does not happen when it comes to services .
Many times , consumers sign contracts for the supply of services without reading the contractual provisions carefully and if they do read them carefully they believe they cannot propose any amendments thereof .
In fact , they do not have the same power of negotiation the suppliers of services have , although some observations from consumers could improve the content of contracts and increase their confidence .
I would like to draw attention to the need to protect tourists and passengers as regards compliance with their rights which , unfortunately , many of them do not know and claim .
Special attention should be given to electronic services as well .
The consumers ' confidence in digital services is essential for the European Union 's competitiveness and , especially , for the development of economy based on knowledge .
In conclusion , I would like to mention the fact that we also have to speak about the quality of public services and , in this context , about consumer protection .
( RO ) First of all , I would like to congratulate Mr. Lehtinen for the consistent report .
Nevertheless , I would like to make an observation regarding Paragraph 35 of the report .
This paragraph refers to the creation of a European Consumer Ombudsman in the European Ombudsman 's office .
This proposal seems to be a very complicated and not very efficient procedure to me .
First of all , the creation of such a position requires financial resources .
We would have a redistribution of funds between the European consumer protection centres and the potential new Ombudsman .
Secondly , bureaucracy would increase at the level of the European Union .
Last but not least , we would have an overlapping of the newly-created Ombudsman 's tasks and the European consumer protection centres .
I don 't believe that a new instrument would bring more efficiency in solving the complaints filed by European consumers .
But I do think that an efficient and thorough implementation of the legislation would reduce the dissatisfaction related to the internal market operation .
In conclusion , I request the European Commission representatives to take into consideration Paragraph 7 , by which we request the allocation of adequate funds to the consumer organizations across the European Union .
( CS ) Mr President , globalisation of our market requires strong , clear and easily enforceable consumer rights and I am happy to see the Commission making very successful efforts in this area .
In my report last year I pointed out that consumer confidence in e-commerce would be enhanced by sample consumer contracts and by better mechanisms for dealing with complaints , as well as by the European trustmark and the consumer charter .
However , I do not think that a European Consumer Ombudsman will help us a great deal .
We need instead to increase financial support for the existing consumer organisations and supervisory bodies in the Member States , because they are the bodies that are increasingly identifying the unsafe products from Asia , namely toys , children 's shoes and sports equipment .
The citizens expect us to come up with a more successful means of dealing with cross-border complaints , as has already been said here many times .
That is further justification for harmonising the rules in the Member States .
However , collective redress is problematic ; it may be good for the lawyers , but it is often very costly for consumers or providers .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's intention to assess the results of the German or British model first and only then to consider the possible way forward , not being pushed into a blind alley by the Socialists .
I would like to express my appreciation of the work done by our rapporteur and that of the Commission on the reform of the consumer policy .

( DE ) Mr President , I intend to make my fellow Member Malcolm Harbour happy tomorrow by wearing my red suit to show him that the red corner really does know what it wants .
That , in fact , is the difference between what we on the Left are seeking and what those on the Right are up to , namely creating a big blue smokescreen to hide the fact that they do not actually want consumer protection at all but are committed first and foremost to the defence of industrial interests .
It is only right that this should be made clear for once .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I understood I have only two minutes , but I wish this talk could be much longer .
I very much hope that I will continue with all of you , whenever you have time and interest , to discuss together consumer issues .
I would be more than delighted , because I receive a lot of incentives - even in this late session .
I would like to make my political commitment , that I will continue to tackle the issues with sustainable development , working on CEE and GPSD ( the General Product Safety Directive ) and they how could they be complementary to each other .
Of course I will continue with the digital guide , which was one of the very first talks which I had with Ms Roithová .
I am , of course , working together with my fellow commissioners ; this portfolio is becoming more and more wide-ranging and evolving other portfolios , but I believe that this is part of the beauty of this portfolio .
So , there are many things .
Let me agree with all of you in saying that if we would like to have a complete internal market , we need to stress the rights of consumers .
This is really the only way to fulfil and to square the second phase of the internal market .
I believe that if we are making good progress with our scoreboard , this scoreboard will be part of the internal market 's bigger picture , and then we will have already quite a full understanding of how the European internal market is going on .
I was specially touched by Mrs Dahl - I am sorry that she is no longer in the plenary - who said that this was the first time that she had taken the floor .
But , referring to the so-called race to the bottom , if we have common rules everywhere in the European Union and not just protecting , in the best way , the national consumer , I think that we should not pick the winners , except one : if the winner is the consumer .
We started , years ago , making a good environment for business , and this was the right thing .
But if you want to develop European business , business needs consumers , and we cannot deny that consumers need the same tackling of bottlenecks , so that they can feel comfortable everywhere , as a Swede living in Brussels , for example - we need to have the same rights , we need to have the same rights when we are shopping and enjoying e-commerce and other distance selling .
Let me focus for a while on collective redress .
I carefully listened to all of you .
Let me mention that , in our 10 benchmarks , which we distributed , discussed and received more than 300 opinions about , half of these collective redress benchmarks were related not to having punitive damages compensated and not to being an expensive procedure .
So at least five of these benchmarks are related and address the issue of not having additional costs .
I believe that the best thing is to open our minds and not to make dogma , and this is my plea for support in this aspect .
So I would also like to tell you that what we are preparing is communication : this is why we do not have a study on economic , social and environmental impact , as is done for all our legislative proposals .
But we are doing something much more in preparation , and this is to have two really very thorough studies , comparative studies .
Let me invite you : before the end of the month we will have three big stakeholders ' conferences : with businesses , with consumers and with academics , and our services will provide four places in the workshops for European Parliament representatives .
All the outcomes of these three events will be absolutely public , put on our websites and communicated in the best manner , and of course I am around and always open to continue to discuss your hopes and your fears .
I would like to end by thanking you and saying that maybe for the first time , almost nobody mentioned that Europe is going to do a class action .
I believe that this is a positive sign .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank all my colleagues who spoke here tonight and , of course , Commissioner Kuneva for her constructive attitude that we have become familiar with since she came into office .
I have a couple of remarks .
Mrs Kauppi mentioned financial services .
The growing area of cross-border banking , insurance sales and wealth management which has some very sophisticated instruments is a growing problem .
The rules still confuse consumers even at a national level .
So I think that in this area we need a cross-border collective redress system as well , because it will make financial institutions more responsible and careful when they explain the rights and risks to the customer .
We all know the sad figures that tell us how citizens in Member States are afraid of buying goods and services across borders , which is completely due to a lack of confidence .
But I trust that , when we proceed in the good mood in which we have discussed this report among ourselves and with the Commission , we can only succeed in building more confidence among European consumers .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 20 May 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
, in writing . - We welcome the ongoing efforts to further incorporate the level of consumers ' awareness as the necessary basis for the effective implementation of the existing consumer protection legal framework , especially with regard to the most vulnerable groups of the population .
Not only is there a need for a more comprehensive legal framework for consumers ' rights , but also we ought genuinely to take into consideration consumers ' interests when completing the internal market standardisation .
It is obvious that a stronger , unique consumer protection system effective all over the Union is in the interest of all citizens .
The completion of the internal market is an opportunity to implement harmonisation measures so as to target the problems faced by consumers in their everyday life .
Specific attention should therefore be given to sectors related to the new digital environment .
A good consumer is a consumer aware of his or her rights and how rightfully to enforce them .
We ought to develop in the Community a genuine consumer culture as part of our education system and to systematically involve consumer organizations in the consultations and the dialogue with industry .
We welcome therefore the call to establish a special European Consumer Ombudsman in the European Ombudsman 's office on a country-by-country basis .
in writing . - ( FR ) I warmly welcome Mr Lehtinen 's report , which puts consumer protection at the heart of efforts to complete the internal market .
The report points out that a high level of protection for all consumers in the European Union can be achieved only through a horizontal approach - in other words with the help of sector-based directives aimed at harmonising national laws - and it also underscores the need to strengthen confidence among those same consumers .
That depends particularly on ensuring the safety of all products in circulation and the security of all transactions both in the realm of cross-border trade in services and in electronic commerce .
I am also pleased that the report proposes research into the implementation at European level of rapid and effective means of redress for consumers .
The establishment of non-judicial systems of dispute resolution would be one means of meeting expectations in this regard , as would the adaptation of certain forms of redress such as collective action - which already exist in certain Member States - to the Community legal context .
At the same time , I believe it would be useful to explore in greater depth , and in the light of different national experiences , the advantages and the limitations of such arrangements .
, in writing . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to see that the European Commission has made the protection of Europe 's consumers one of its priorities with its proposed EU Consumer Policy strategy for 2007-2013 .
I should also like to thank my Finnish Socialist colleague Lasse Lehtinen for his excellent work and the significant contributions he makes in his report .
I welcome his vision of a horizontal approach at European level , for it is essential that the interests of consumers should be taken into account in all the Union 's policies .
At the same time I support his wish to give consumer associations a greater role in drafting European rules , and his proposal to improve protection for the most vulnerable consumers , particularly young and elderly people , through more information campaigns aimed specifically at them .
I also strongly support the introduction of a European system of collective redress that would enable consumers in different Member States to take their complaints jointly to the courts and seek redress , while avoiding the pitfalls of the US model .
So I hope that , despite opposition on the conservative side , this House will vote in favour of a European ' class action ' system .
, in writing . - ( FI ) I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Lehtinen , for the work he has done in compiling this report .
One of the most important objectives of the consumer policy strategy proposed by the Commission is to make consumer protection the focus of the EU internal market .
I would like to stress that this is the very means by which we will be able to establish the best possible conditions for our consumers , and take an important step closer to attaining the objectives of the European Union .
How can we achieve this ?
Consumers must have access to accurate information on which to base their decisions .
An informed consumer is also a more active consumer !
An internal market which is working well must provide the EU 's citizens with good options as well as reasonable prices and the opportunity to purchase high-quality goods and services .
Another important issue is class actions , which cannot be brought in Estonia , unlike some of the countries which are our neighbours .
I do not believe , however , that this has been to the benefit of our consumers .
Quite the reverse .
It is important to learn from the experiences of others : claims for damages must be related to the actual harm suffered .
Similarly it is important for consumers to be able to rely on their rights ; they should not have to waive them because they do not have the resources to take the providers of goods or services in other countries to court .
Our clear wording protects the consumers ' interests in that regard and I believe that the need for class actions has become a key cross-border issue .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 10.30 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Employment Policy Guidelines for Member States ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Van Lancker , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States PART V - C6-0031 / 2008 - .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's December 2007 Strategic Report has sent a very positive message , which received the support of the European Council at its spring meeting in March 2008 .
The results of the Lisbon Strategy , in its 2005 renewed form , are already visible now at the end of the first three-year cycle .
Economic growth and employment growth are impressive .
Many indicators point to the fact that the structural reforms have started to produce results .
Although all the Member States have been implementing reforms since 2005 , some are doing better than others .
A degree of fatigue in this area has become noticeable during the last year .
However , Europe must not stop or slow down the pace .
On the contrary , it is necessary to continue with reform implementation , preferably with even more gusto .
This is the idea behind the Commission 's proposal on maintaining the key Integrated Guidelines - including the key employment guidelines - in their existing form until 2010 .
The Commission strongly believes that these key guidelines provide a proper framework for the present-day tasks of the European labour market , and that they serve their purpose .
The European Council endorsed this at its spring meeting by opting for a general approach based on stability .
Member States must be given the opportunity to finish the reforms they have begun , and they should also be given a timeframe within which the results of the reforms should show .
The Commission also found that it was necessary to propose changes , with emphasis on certain important tasks that would be tackled in the near fu climate change , energy , social dimension and flexicurity .
The Commission also expressed its wish to put more stress on the need for greater inclusion and more stringent implementation .
As a result , the agreed goals and reference levels were included in the wording of the key guidelines .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Please allow me first and foremost to thank the Members with whom I have been able to collaborate on this report for their excellent cooperation .
It is my belief that a few too many amendments have been made to details in the report , but nevertheless , Commissioner , the message must be clear : this European Parliament will not accept ' business as usual ' on the European Employment Strategy .
It is true that a great deal of work has yet to be done in the Member States in order to apply the guidelines in practice , but it is also true that the guidelines must be adapted in order to remedy a number of material shortcomings .
I should like to mention three essentials .
First of all , the Employment Strategy must be given a much stronger social dimension .
There are still too many groups in society that do not share in the benefits of growth and jobs .
Disabled people , migrants and semi- and unskilled workers are still all too often left to their fate , whilst we need everyone in society and everyone in the labour market .
For that reason , the Employment Strategy must also promote active social integration in order to combat poverty and social exclusion by offering a decent income and quality services together with an active policy of job-search assistance and training .
Secondly : the quality of the work .
Clearly , more jobs have been created , but for that reason they have not always been better jobs .
Too many people remain tied against their will to precarious contracts , temporary jobs , involuntary part-time work or jobs that often guarantee them only an insufficient income .
For that reason , the emphasis must be laid more upon the quality of jobs , on opportunities to progress into permanent jobs with a reliable income .
The training efforts must be drastically increased and , above all , all workers , regardless of employment status , must be granted social rights .
Flexibility is not the only thing required in the labour market ; the workers also need more security .
Thirdly : the gender perspective .
Women have made a huge advance in the labour market , yet they are still far from achieving equal opportunities .
The wage gap is still unacceptably wide .
Women do not have the same access to training , nor the same opportunities to establish a business .
Those who want to return to work after a career break find it increasingly difficult .
Overcoming difficulties in order to reconcile a career and family life too often remains problem for women only , and they also often feel the consequences on their income during their retirement .
It is for this reason that the Employment Strategy must devote particular attention to the gender perspective , in order to eliminate all inequalities between men and women .
Finally , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the commitment of the Member States and the European Union to solid social legislation will make or break the Employment Strategy as a method .
I hope , therefore , that all the Member States of the European Union will transpose and apply the European legislation consistently , and I also hope , Commissioner , that the Commission will soon - within a few months , maybe even within a few weeks - present us with an ambitious social agenda .
I hope that both the June meeting of the Council and the Commissioner and Commission will listen to our message .
Incidentally , it is regrettable , Mr President , that not a single representative of the Council Presidency is here , because this message is in fact primarily targeted at the June Council meeting , which must take definitive decisions on the Employment Strategy .
I hope that someone will manage to convey Parliament 's message to them by then .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , first I would like to express my thanks to the rapporteur , Anne Van Lancker , and to the members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for the high standard of consultation we engaged in together to come up with this text , which sums up our shared convictions and the way we would like to see the Employment Guidelines change .
Growth in jobs in Europe , in accordance with the Lisbon strategy , should from now on be pursued taking account of three major recent or current changes .
These are the globalisation of the economy , which forces Europe to be incisive from an economic point of view and from the point of view of developing employment ; flexicurity , which is absolutely necessary for the development of our companies and therefore of employment ; and , of course the construction of a social Europe .
To achieve this , we introduced three particular highlights into this update of the Employment Guidelines .
On the one hand , there is the very necessary fight to stop people leaving education systems without any qualifications .
Leaving education without qualifications means not being equipped for integration into a job and therefore not having the resources for social integration .
That is our first duty and we really need to work hard at it .
The second point we need to be very concerned about is maintaining and developing lifelong learning , which is the only way of guaranteeing ongoing employability and mobility of employees .
The third point concerns validation of acquired experience , which really enables employees to progress their careers , and also enables companies to adapt effectively to new requirements .
We reached agreement on all these points , and I therefore thank the members of the PPE-DE Group for their support in today 's vote .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , when Anne Van Lancker began working on the European Parliament 's response , she planned to concentrate on a few important points , since we knew that both the Commission and the Council would propose that the guidelines should not be amended at all .
Our tactic was to concentrate on a small number of points in the hope that they might listen to at least some of what we had to say .
It was not to be .
Although the basic approach is the same , we now have masses of amendments instead of just a few .
I think that it would have been better to concentrate on what Mrs Van Lancker said - that we clearly integrate the social dimension , a policy for all those who are outside the labour market and have no share in prosperity .
Despite a favourable employment trend , we note that a great many of the new jobs are insecure and do not provide a living .
The employment offers no security .
And the discussion we have had on flexicurity should be reflected more clearly in the guidelines since it has been debated for several years .
The same applies to the equality issues .
The fact that the Council is not here , I think regrettably , is because the Council will not listen to anything Parliament has to say .
They will do exactly as they have previously decided .
I think that we in the European Parliament must give serious consideration in the next three-year review to changing our tactic and the way we work so that Parliament has a real influence on how the guidelines are to look in the future .
Congratulations to the rapporteur , Mrs Van Lancker , on preparing this significant report .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur for her helpful cooperation and understanding in the acceptance of amendments .
I consider this document to have the right balance and I hope it will find the support of the majority in tomorrow 's vote .
I wish to draw your attention to the fact that the Commission Communication to the Council contains an extremely welcome proposal that would encourage the development of the market and increase employment .
This is the freedom of knowledge , which would be added to the four fundamental freedoms - the free movement of goods , services , persons and capital .
This fifth freedom should help speed up the EU 's transition to a modern , creative knowledge economy .
It would in turn strengthen the knowledge triangle of scientific research , education and innovation within the EU .
The initiative proposed by the Commission is no doubt a very good one .
However , no one would argue against the importance of the original four freedoms in increasing employment .
Nevertheless , it happens that some Member States fail to adhere to EU policy and even breach the legal norms .
In pursuing protective policy , they prevent the free movement of capital and persons and jeopardise the development not only of their own countries , but of the EU as a whole .
In my view , the free movement of services will not guarantee the freedom of development of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Let us not forget Winston Churchill 's observation that if you destroy a free market , you create a black market .
The Commission and the Member States should realise that we can achieve much more together than by going our separate ways .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we in the group of the Greens / European Free Alliance warmly welcome Mrs Van Lancker 's report because it would be fatal if the Council were to announce full-bodied reforms in employment policy guidelines for 2008 and then say : actually , we don 't want a reform !
Commissioner , you are absolutely right when you say that reform fatigue seems to have occurred at the Commission and also particularly in the Council .
The Van Lancker report , however , clearly sets the right priorities .
I should particularly like to emphasise the setting of new priorities in social integration .
It is vital that the message goes out from here that we cannot forget the people outside and that they are important to us .
Secondly , we Greens have made a considerable contribution to ensuring that this Parliament report has a substantial gender mainstreaming dimension - consistently - and that family policy is not completely sold out as gender mainstreaming policy .
Gender mainstreaming is broader and concerns women - not men and women , as is the case in family policy .
We Greens , however , will continue to take a discerning look at the flexicurity sector until social protection is guaranteed .
I should once again like to point out that we need reform and not stalemate .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the common employment policy for Member States is undergoing a test .
It is increasingly throwing up employment growth programmes for various age groups , taking account of their specific needs and potential and the threat of problems with finding work .
Under the Lisbon Strategy , these programmes above all envisage investment in people and in their education , and better chances in the job market .
A rise in employment by 3.6 million people in 2007 and an anticipated rise in employment by 4.5 million in 2008-2009 is the perceptible result of this policy .
This means that promoting an approach to work that matches the human life cycle , concern for young people not completing their education and for adapting work conditions to family needs , and especially to parental duties , eliminating discrimination in the workplace , particularly in the scope of access to training and other forms of skill refinement , and gradually restricting occupational activity among older people should in future constitute the basis for action in this sphere .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I too join the ranks of those who wish to thank the rapporteur for her work , for the report that stresses the importance of one of the pillars of the European Community , namely the European social model .
I welcome the fact that the report accentuates issues such as enhancing social integration , combating poverty and emphasising social inclusion in employment policies .
The rapporteur also rightly accentuates the need to promote gender equality at work .
These positive aspects notwithstanding , the way our political group sees it , the draft resolution puts more emphasis on the principle of flexibility than on true provision of good job opportunities and the right to quality work .
I sympathise with the rapporteur .
It is difficult to find a compromise solution between these two options .
I regret that the committee adopted only one of the many motions tabled by our political group , and under these circumstances I have to say that in spite of all the compromise solutions that were adopted we will not be able to support the final report .
In spite of that , I must say that I was honoured to work with the rapporteur .
The future , the outcome of the flexibility concept , the new social experience and the citizens of the European Union will all decide , in the end , which of us is closer to the truth in searching for , and implementing , the social Europe project .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the conclusion of this strategic report on the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs is that the Lisbon Strategy is working .
However , the rapporteur draws attention to the fact that the Strategy for Jobs is not delivering for all citizens .
Six million young people in the EU leave school early and 16 % of the total EU population are poor or at risk of poverty .
This is a key challenge but , unfortunately , in the list of people that are at risk we have again lost the opportunity to include carers .
Carers are the largest workforce in Europe .
They are not people out of work but people working harder than many people who are in the labour force .
When I brought up the issue of carers in committee , I was told that carers - people caring for our older people , people with disabilities and children - are people on career breaks .
To call caring a ' career break ' is to show ignorance of what carers do and the value of what they do .
Please , Commissioner , bring carers into focus and support them .
Carers are the key to how we manage our ageing European population in terms of meeting the needs of our older citizens and stabilising our birth rates .
So make carers a priority .
Hopefully in this Parliament we will also specifically look at the issue of carers .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , while we are pleased about the 6.5 million new jobs that have been created in the last two years , we should not remain silent about the fact that 4 out of 10 employees have in the meantime been living in precarious employment relationships .
In many countries temporary employment agencies are rising in rank to become the largest employers .
Increasing globalisation and the relocation of production to countries with lower wages brings massive job losses .
Temporary jobs can only partly compensate for this .
Meanwhile , 78 million Europeans have to live on the poverty line with temporary work , 1-euro jobs and mini-jobs .
You cannot , however , feed a family on a McJob .
Even the erstwhile employment guarantor , a good education , is rarely any help nowadays .
Gross wages have fallen by almost 5 % within three years in Germany , for instance , whereas the cost of living has risen massively since the introduction of the euro .
While we can be pleased about a net increase in employment figures in the light of these facts , it is in my view a mockery for every individual among the millions of unemployed and anyone who , despite doing honest work , has to live in poverty .
( DE ) Mr President , because of globalisation our living and working conditions are changing so rapidly that many citizens are losing track of things .
They feel swamped and insecure .
The guidelines of the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs need to be clearly visible to them : competitive jobs , equal opportunities and social cohesion .
The flexicurity concept is still not sufficiently understood .
Not only do employees have to become more flexible in their own interests in order to improve their employability , but enterprises also have to become more flexible by developing new marketing strategies and innovative products and capturing market niches , among other things .
At the same time , employees need efficient social security systems to ensure that they are integrated rather than excluded .
Their work should be rewarded appropriately according to the sector and region by agreements between the social partners , not by government intervention .
The aim of European employment policy is both to provide more people with jobs and to create higher quality jobs .
At the same time there has to be investment in education and training in order to ensure that the concept of lifelong learning is genuinely sustained and includes underperformers .
It must be made clear that both the ESF as well as the European Regional Development Fund and the new Globalisation adjustment Fund must directly benefit those threatened or affected by unemployment .
They should be better prepared for change and be able to enter new spheres of work .
We shall also be measured by whether we have managed to keep older employees in work processes for longer , instead of shunting them into early retirement .
They are highly motivated , able to work under pressure and have know-how aplenty .
Best practices should demonstrate how young and old cooperate through teamwork and how both sides benefit .
The guidelines for employment policy in this very good report will be accepted above all if the subsidiarity principle is consistently maintained .
Mrs Van Lancker is right : the Member States have to prove that they are taking part in this , and then confidence in our social market model will increase .
( RO ) I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mrs. Van Lancker , for her work and emphasize the importance of this report .
Special attention should be given to the fact that , at present , 78 million citizens of the European Union are poor or exposed to the risk of poverty , and 6 million young people leave school .
We , as European socialists , want to provide equal chances to all citizens for a decent living , for strengthening social cohesion .
The implementation of these guidelines will contribute to the increase in the number of safer and better paid jobs , to guaranteeing adequate social protection by access to quality social services , promoting active social integration for all the European Union citizens for the purpose of fighting poverty and social exclusion .
In this context , I would like to emphasize the care we should provide to the disabled and elderly people for access to the labour market , as well as for eliminating all discrimination between women and men in relation to pay .
I believe this report is an important instrument for achieving the new Lisbon Strategy objectives and will contribute to strengthening the social dimension of the Lisbon Treaty also ratified by Romania .
I will support and vote on this report .
( ET ) Mr President , Commissioner , colleagues , the guidelines for economic growth and employment for the next three years will be debated at the Spring European Summit .
The Lisbon Agenda has started to bear fruit .
This is a good thing , although we have probably focused too little on social inclusion in its activity .
The Lisbon Agenda has indeed created new jobs , although not always the best kind .
It is not enough to set courageous targets - education is needed , as is tailoring of school systems and increases in their capabilities , making them respond to the needs of the knowledge-based economy and society .
It is very important to promote a family-friendly approach to work .
The Lisbon Agenda requires a strengthening of social measures .
Attention should not be placed just on flexibility of labour relations , but on protected flexibility .
Only a balance between flexibility and protection can improve employment and social protection .
We must work to ensure that positive developments in economic , employment and social policy complement each other .
Allow me also to congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work .
( DE ) Mr President , the Commission refers to the fact that as a result of employment policies agreed with the Member States in the last two years , 6.5 million jobs have been created .
This sounds good , particularly for those who want to adapt the European Union increasingly to global competition , but it is not as good for those who have taken these jobs but for the most part can barely make a living from them .
The report on poverty published in Germany yesterday has also clearly shown that more and more employees need benefits on top of their earned income in order not to slide into poverty and that the disparity between those on high incomes and those who draw as good as no income is becoming ever larger .
It is therefore urgently necessary for the European Union 's employment strategy to become much more strongly and practically involved in combating social exclusion and poverty , creating good jobs , increasing income and providing social protection for the employed .
This practical involvement , however , is not consciously forthcoming , for whatever reasons .
The European Union should ultimately be focusing its attention on the concept of good jobs , an idea that the EU 's Employment Ministers were propagating even a year ago in order to move a step further forward here .
The flexicurity concept is not sufficient in this context .
Mr President , if the Lisbon Strategy is beginning to work , why has part-time work risen from 16.2 % to 18.1 % over the last few years ?
Why has the share of people with involuntary fixed-term contracts and no long-term security reached over 6.5 % ?
The rapporteur admits that EU unemployment reached 8.9 % in 2005 .
It is due to fall to 7.1 % this year , but will it ?
In the UK , unemployment is only about 5.8 % .
Combating unemployment does not need a policy .
It needs a shot in the arm .
Talking of which , was the hypodermic system invented by a commission or a parliament or a committee ?
No , it was not .
Someone had a bright idea , and good ideas always spread .
For good ideas , read best practice , and best practices are for sharing .
Look at the UK 's superior employment figures noted just now .
They are better because our best practices include maintaining our opt-outs from the useless Working Time Directive and not taking the euro but continuing to trade worldwide outside the EU more than any other Member State .
There is my shot in the arm .
Will you take it ?
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to begin my speech with an observation that I take pleasure and satisfaction in relating .
The renewed Lisbon Strategy is beginning to show results , and what is particularly pleasing is that in the European Union there is a steady increase in the number of people who are in work .
At this point , however , I must take issue to a certain extent with the opinion of the rapporteur , Mrs Van Lancker , that the quality of the newly created jobs might arouse disquiet .
Of course , we should do all we can to ensure that the jobs on offer in the European Union are of the highest quality , but I feel that any work is better than unemployment , which is degrading and sustains a feeling that one has no personal worth .
This is particularly the case with young people , among whom the level of unemployment continues to be high , as a result of which their future should become a priority task in the next few years .
One effective instrument for increasing the availability of jobs , which is particularly important for young Europeans , is the concept of combining flexibility and security in the job market , referred to as ' flexicurity ' .
There is no single universal model of flexicurity and so this concept should be put into effect taking account of the specific circumstances and traditions that prevail in the different Member States .
This is in fact the direction proposed in the amendments put forward by my political group .
There are , however , two elements in this concept that are as good as universal , and at the same time , as I see it , crucial .
The first of these is investment in education , and especially in a high level of continuing education , which enables employees to adjust their skills to rapidly changing economic and job market trends .
Secondly , we have a bolder use of ' non-standard ' forms of employment , which particularly enable young people preparing to launch themselves into their working lives both to obtain practical skills and to cover the costs of their vocational education .
( CS ) First of all , I would like to express my admiration for Mrs Anne Van Lancker , who did not collapse under the weight of amendments and did not allow her report to be watered down .
I would probably be even more critical because I am of the opinion that the renewed Lisbon Strategy contributes very little .
The unemployment rate is not falling significantly ; the jobs created are not high-quality jobs ; we tolerate people in the EU Member States suffering from in-work poverty .
All this means that something is clearly not right here .
Not even the Green Paper gives answers to the questions we are asked by workers and trade unions .
All we have to do , though , is to look up the relevant International Labour Organisation Conventions .
We should remember that , with few exceptions , almost all the Member States have ratified the most important of them .
The unease with which European trade unions have received the latest judgments of the European Court of Justice in the Viking - Laval - Rüffert cases is understandable .
My advice is to offer fewer pages and more respect for what has been achieved in the past decades , especially in the developed countries of the European Union .
( SV ) Mr President , this report is imbued with the spirit of the values which should govern a free labour market .
But there is one big drawback : it is wrong to draw up such rules at EU level .
It will then become part of the EU 's common regulatory system , the acquis communautaire - it will be enshrined in Holy Writ .
The possibility of future reforms will disappear throughout Europe .
If , in the 1970s , Germany and France had forced through a common employment policy for the Community , based on the political concepts which prevailed at the time , Europe 's economy would now be in decline .
The current buzzword , flexicurity , recurs constantly in the report .
That is because no common employment policy was formulated , which in turn is why Denmark was able to develop something which now looks very promising .
The report would benefit by being reduced to a single sentence : ' The European Parliament recommends that the Member States take a look at the Danish flexicurity model in order to see whether they have something to learn from it . '
Period .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the figures on employment trends are in fact very positive and we would have to go back to the 1980s to find similar values .
Nevertheless , we need to be aware that not all European regions have shown equally encouraging results ; the news on the quality of employment is not the best either .
I am aware that , when talking about social policy there is always the tendency to set priorities , and this is no easy task - the temptation is to regard everything as a priority .
Experience shows , though , that when everything is a priority the result is that nothing is a priority .
I should therefore like to encourage all of us to try to ensure that we are able to include the defining of roles , responsibilities and clear and quantifiable objectives in these social issues , specifically in terms of employment policy .
As a contribution , I would say that for me there is one very clear priority bound up with putting a halt to early school leaving , which nowadays affects 15 % of young people between the ages of 18 and 24 .
That is , more than 6 million young people .
The early school leaving scenario is particularly serious in view of the expected demographic evolution in Europe , which by 2030 will have 18 million fewer children and young people and 52 % more people aged over 65 .
I find it unacceptable that this precious , shrinking population of young people , upon which social security systems depend , should not be well educated and prepared , to the highest level , to deal successfully with the new labour market challenges .
We all know that the least educated are the most vulnerable to unemployment and social exclusion within the information society and obviously run the risk of finding themselves socially excluded .
Like our rapporteur , Mrs Van Lancker , whom I congratulate , I firmly believe that the social dimension of the Lisbon Strategy must be strengthened particularly through a greater emphasis on the issue of inclusion .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that the main virtues of the work that has been done are the basic consensus on the diagnosis of the situation and the treatments that need to be applied at national level in order to achieve the employment objectives of the Lisbon Strategy .
The Union needs to be extremely strong economically in order to make political progress without renouncing the social model that is in its genes .
The best social policy is to allow people to integrate and make progress through employment .
These eight guidelines give us the roadmap for the reforms that need to be tackled by 2010 , and are more than sufficient for launching national reform programmes .
However , there are some very decisive elements on which we need to work in a particular way .
The first is achieving a level of mobility that opens up employment opportunities , essentially for young people .
In order to do this , it is absolutely vital that we guarantee an effective system of equivalence of qualifications , not only in terms of degrees and diplomas , but in terms of training for employees throughout their working lives .
The second is modernising the employment rules in order to move towards gradual and flexible retirement .
This would avoid the decline in employment income and future situations of poverty .
The third is to improve the linguistic competence of the population in general , because globalisation has its rules , ladies and gentlemen .
Whoever adapts , wins .
The rest lose .
If we want greater productivity , quality jobs and greater skills , we need to continue to drive forward the reforms mentioned in the Lisbon Strategy .
It is true that there have been achievements , but if the outstanding reforms are neglected , everything will collapse .
That is why the implementation through dialogue of initiatives such as ' flexicurity ' is essential .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lisbon Strategy has achieved the objective of increasing employment in Europe , but not everyone has benefited : the path for young people , women and marginal social groups remains difficult .
The quality of employment has not improved either : the number of fixed-term contracts has increased and greater flexibility has not been matched by job security .
This is why the social dimension of the Lisbon Strategy must be strengthened , supporting lifelong learning and skills recognition .
Welfare systems that provide income support and facilitate mobility within the job market must be defined , with the proper shock absorbers , and the work / life balance goals must be achieved .
The draft resolution is a step in this direction , which is why we are supporting it .
( PL ) Mr President , I agree with the statement that the revived Lisbon Strategy has brought a greater number of jobs , but not necessarily better-quality jobs .
The need to combat poverty and social exclusion should always be taken into account in any EU strategy .
I do not , however , share the view that adopting common social standards at EU level will be a panacea for our problems .
Employment and social policy falls within the scope of Member States ' rights , and all actions by the EU in this sphere must be compliant with the principle of subsidiarity .
Establishing and introducing strategies based on specific models such as flexicurity will differ at national level .
I would like to emphasise the danger that accompanies a one-dimensional approach on this matter , while at the same time favouring the creation of a platform at EU level for the purpose of exchanging information and best practice .
It is my view that no specific employment policy strategy will bring complete success without the total levelling of all existing barriers to the free flow of labour as a sure means of stimulating economic growth and promoting employment .
( RO ) I congratulate Anne Van Lancker for the report .
Personally , I am worried about the quality of jobs .
We have 78 million people at the limit of the poverty threshold also because Member States have inequalities in relation to the pay for employees .
I know what discrimination problems many Romanians working legally in other European Union Member States are dealing with and that they are forced to accept work below their qualification and lower salaries than their colleagues , citizens of the given countries .
Unfortunately , at the European Union level , we have no mechanism for assessing the quality of jobs and we need one .
I strongly believe that the principle of the correct pay is an incentive for the supply of quality services and I am completely against the existent tendencies to underpay the employees and the free movement of labour should not be restricted in any way in the European Union .
( CS ) In reality , there are only two ways to solve the unemployment issue : one is for the people to go where the work is , and the other is for the work to go where the people are .
I think that the latter option is more sensible because none of the means used in option one ( shared work , flexible contractual arrangements , more flexible working hours , etc . ) has brought the desired results .
In my opinion , option two offers more potential and is quite suitable for the European Union .
One of the possibilities is the creation of a European public sector so that the European Union begins to function as an entity that creates job opportunities .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to applaud the remarkable job done by my colleague Mrs Morin , who has spoken up for the positions of our political group .
At the risk of going off on a tangent , I would like to ask about the role of the social partners , which seem conspicuous by their absence from this report .
We are working according to Article 128 , which means we are going to make recommendations to the Member States , but I believe the time has come to move towards greater action .
Commissioner , what are your feelings about the application of Article 139 of the Treaty , which provides for precisely this possibility , that of the social partners creating Community level employment law ?
How can we have an employment policy without coordination of social law ?
I think that in application of Article 138 , Commissioner , it is up to you to promote the social partners ; we need to involve them in the creation of proper European social legislation .
( LT ) The first stage of implementation of the objectives of the renewed Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs has already yielded considerable results : in 2007 3.5 billion posts were created in the EU and the level of unemployment in the period 2005-2007 dropped by 1.6 % .
However , this is just one side of the story .
In the EU today as many as 14 million working people are living in poverty .
In addition , the number of people forced to work under temporary contracts or part time has constantly increased .
Young people in the EU are facing very serious problems too - around 6 million young people leave school early and the employment rate among young people is less than half that in the EU in general .
I would like to point out that the speed and efficiency of implementation of the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs differs greatly in the various Member States .
I urge the Commission to ensure the consistent implementation of the European Employment Strategy and lifelong learning objectives set out in the EU Youth Programme , the EU Gender Equality Agreement and the EU Disability Action Plan 2006-2007 .
( EL ) Mr President , may I now draw attention to two services that need to be strengthened throughout Europe .
One of them is the advice , information and guidance given to young people and employees of every age to enable them to find suitable employment , education and lifelong learning .
The other service that should be strengthened throughout Europe in order to promote dignified working conditions is the labour inspectorate .
Labour inspectorates will be able to deal with unregistered labour , which is the scourge of legitimate employment .
Employment as well as entrepreneurship and cooperation with the social partners represent perhaps our best hope in the years up to 2010 .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the current economic situation in the European Union is improving .
We are seeing a rise in GDP , new jobs are appearing , the level of employment is rising and the level of unemployment is falling .
To keep this process going , we need to strengthen social integration , and especially , firstly , to help young people in particular - those just entering the labour market - to find work .
Secondly , we should make it easier for people in difficult material circumstances to find work ; and thirdly , we should give the long-term unemployed a chance .
These are areas in which more effective support and action on the part of the European Union are needed .
It is important to adapt the education and training system so that it meets the requirements of the Lisbon Strategy and facilitates economic development , which will in turn have the effect of creating more jobs .
( DE ) Mr President , I believe that small- and medium-sized enterprises in particular play a major role in employment .
After all , two thirds of our employees work in small- and medium-sized enterprises , which generate 50 % of gross national income .
Therefore , in drawing up our strategies , we should be focusing on promoting continuing vocational training in small- and medium-sized enterprises and creating new opportunities for writing off emerging costs and ensuring that higher net wages will ultimately become possible for our employees .
Ultimately , we should also create the infrastructure to enable our employees to enjoy job security .
The European Union could provide a best practice model here .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , strict Parliament rules do not allow me to reply to your speeches in detail .
However , allow me to thank you for the substantial debate , which analysed many aspects of the labour market and of the European Employment Strategy , and allow me to talk about just a few fundamental issues .
Firstly , the European Employment Strategy has brought tangible results .
The current statistics on unemployment and employment are much better than they have been since the 1980s , which is a clear success .
In your debate you often expressed your worries concerning quality jobs .
I want to point out that the concept of more jobs and more quality jobs is a part of the Lisbon Strategy for growth and employment .
What is the result ?
Of the millions of new jobs , more than half are full-time jobs and there can be no question marks over their quality .
Many of the remaining jobs are part-time jobs or fixed-term jobs .
In my opinion , the hypothesis that none of the fixed-term and part-time jobs is a high-quality job does not hold water .
It is not tenable .
Many of these jobs are quality jobs .
However , there is no doubt that some of these jobs are not quality jobs and this is one of the areas that we must sort out .
My personal view is that the problem of the working poor , that is , the people who continue to be poor despite having a job , is very worrying and we have to pay more attention to it .
According to the available data , the working poor account for approximately 8 % of the working population , which is a considerable amount .
We are talking about millions of people and this is a very pressing issue .
Another issue you debated is the link between employment policies and social inclusion .
Let me point out that Guideline No 19 puts emphasis on an inclusive labour market and on promoting the inclusion of disadvantaged people in the labour market .
This is because the Commission recommended in the Strategy that substantial changes should not be made to these Guidelines .
This is because they have proved to be successful and because it has become clear that in order to ensure good governance , a better balance between European and national level ( indeed , most Member States expressed such views ) , it would be best not to expand the Guidelines .
On the other hand , it is clear that the text is not cast in stone , that it will continue to develop and that the topics you mentioned are undoubtedly the topics that will require an appropriate response in accordance with future developments .
I would like to answer another question concerning the application of Article 139 of the Treaty .
Paradoxically , the collective agreement in the maritime sector will be signed today , and it has already been decided to introduce this collective agreement into European legislation through Article 139 .
In other words , this is a concrete step showing that this article has not been neglected .
By the way , I see the maritime sector agreement as an extremely important step forward because this is a very complex and highly international sector , and the social partners have managed to achieve a significant amount .
Of course there were other topics in the debate : the issue of education , the significant number of early school leavers , lifelong learning .
All these topics are important and to a certain extent will be included in the new social agenda .
Regarding inclusion , I would like to draw your attention to the Commission communication on active inclusion , which is one of the documents outlining the Commission 's strategy in this area .
Let me stress that although the labour market is the basis for active inclusion , it does not extend to all areas where the application of a coherent inclusion policy is needed .
Since there are clearly many people who are outside the labour market for natural reasons , such as pensioners or people who find themselves in various unusual circumstances , the inclusion policy must cover more than just the labour market .
The European labour market strategy clearly has to take this aspect into account .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you once more for the debate , which , in my opinion , covered most of the important topics concerning the European labour market .
I think that they make a significant contribution to the process of finding a better and more effective balance between the European Employment Strategy and the activities of the individual Member States .
As I said before , there were many very interesting comments made in the course of the debate but Parliament 's rules make it impossible for me to respond to all of them , which is why I responded to only a few .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) First and foremost , I should like to thank my fellow Members most warmly for their contribution to this debate .
I think it is clear that many of you have placed emphasis upon equal opportunities , social inclusion and the quality of work , and I consider that very important .
I am sorry if I have disappointed some of you by not having included even more of your amendments , but I truly wanted to avoid this report becoming a Christmas tree laden with too much tinsel and too many baubles .
One more thing , in response to a comment made by Mr Andersson , Chair of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I sincerely hope that the submission of this report is not in vain , because , although Article 128 of the Treaty grants this Parliament the right to be consulted , in practice this right is at risk of being undermined .
I realise , Commissioner , that it is important for the Council to be able to take a decision early in the year , so that the National Reform Plans can be developed with the social partners .
It strikes me as essential , therefore , that , if Parliament is to be able to continue playing its role , the European Commission suggest proposals earlier in the year , so that the three institutions can fully exercise their role in the process , as provided for in the Treaty .
Once more , I should like to thank all my fellow Members , and let us hope that the Council is still keeping its ear to the ground .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) According to the latest European Commission reports , 16 % of EU citizens are threatened by poverty , and in 8 % of such cases this is despite full-time employment .
Poverty threatens 13 % of adult Poles , including those in full time employment .

Ladies and gentlemen , the region of Małopolska , which I represent in the European Parliament , has the lowest level of unemployment in Poland , currently standing at 8 % ; this does not guarantee a secure standard of living , however , as galloping food and energy prices are pushing many families to the brink of poverty .
In the neighbouring Świętokrzyskie province , which I also represent in the EP , the situation is verging on the dramatic , with double the unemployment seen in Małopolska .
Taking just these two provinces as an example , we can observe a growing level of social inequality .
As Mrs Van Lancker correctly comments in her report on employment guidelines , in the European Union we are faced with a situation in which more than 14 million working people are living in poverty .
This number could rise very rapidly if we do not modify the Lisbon Strategy to create more and better-quality jobs in the EU .
This problem concerns the new Member States in particular , where differences in the affluence of citizens are greatest compared to the rest of the Member States .
in writing . - ( PL ) Growth and employment are key elements in the Lisbon Strategy .
The building of a competitive and innovative Europe is linked to changes in the labour market .
Our companies need workers who are capable of responding to new challenges and the demand for change .
Of course , I agree that employment should provide stability , security and assurance with regard to what tomorrow will bring .
At the same time , relations between the employer and the employee should be sufficiently flexible to allow entrepreneurs to make the changes with which they are faced owing to the market situation .
This is why it is so important for entrepreneurs and employees to ensure that they upgrade their abilities , enhance their skills and improve professionally .
This is in the interests of businesses , which will acquire skilled and highly motivated employees .
It is also in the interests of the employees themselves , who , because of their greater competence , will acquire a stronger position at work and , in the event of a need for change , the assurance that , thanks to their skills , they will not have any problems finding their feet in the labour market .
Finally , I would like to draw attention to the element of mobility in the European market .
As we know , many Member States are still maintaining restrictions on the employment of citizens from the new Member States .
This is despite warning from representatives of the business world that there is a shortage of labour in many sectors of the economy .
As long as restrictions in the European labour market remain in place , the freedom of movement of employees and freedom of movement of services in Europe will only go half-way towards determining the success of our economies .
, in writing . - ( RO ) The revised Lisbon Strategy has led to positive results .
Nevertheless , we should examine those fields where it is still necessary to increase the number of actions taken at Community level in order to achieve the employment objective .
I refer particularly to the problems young people meet during their qualification and entry on the labour market .
6 million young people across the European Union leave the educational system before they turn 18 .
The fact that , out of the total number of unemployed persons in the European Union , over 40 % are young people is just as serious .
Moreover , most of the young people who manage to enter the labour market benefit of less favourable employment conditions , such as part-time , limited employment or employment based on a contract of supply of services .
By the legislative guidelines for the employment policy , we have to provide more solutions regarding the programmes and funds the European Union establishes for supporting the action of Member States in this field .
, in writing . - ( HU ) The Employment Directive provided the Member States of the enlarged European Union with long-term guidelines , and with goals and instruments for enhancing competitiveness and increasing employment in the second cycle of implementation of the Lisbon Strategy .
It has since become clear that an economy cannot be competitive and efficient in a world that has to live with competition , and cannot advance more rapidly than the rest , if it has lost its way in the social desert and is attempting to achieve this while surrounded by people at risk of social exclusion .
A life of dignity requires decent work ; this in turn requires a potential labour force that is appropriately qualified and capable of updating its skills , a labour force that is healthy and protected from discrimination .
In 2006 , the acknowledged needs of the new Member States made it necessary to revise the directive .
This time the emphasis was placed on people facing particular disadvantages in the labour market , the hopeless labour market situation of older women , the isolation of specific languages , and issues relating to the employment of Roma people .
Over the past two years , the number of jobs has risen , employment ratios have improved , and the turbulent employment indicators have also settled down .
The increase in jobs of the classic sort - full-time , contractually protected employment in a workplace - has been relatively slow , while there has been a massive increase in part-time , seasonal work and work carried out on the basis of supply contracts .
In this changed situation , we do not dispute that the era of dogmatic labour legislation is over .
Extensive and intensive economic development needs flexible legislative provisions that prevent relativism in labour law and the devaluation of social partnership and collective bargaining agreements .
Progress made in equal opportunities and non-discrimination in the EU ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Lynne , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on progress made in equal opportunities and non-discrimination in the EU ( the transposition of Directives 2000 / 43 / EC and 2000 / 78 / EC ) .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank the other groups for their cooperation , particularly some of the shadows .
I believe that working together we have achieved a good report .
I have looked in this report at the transposition and implementation of the current directives , in other words the Employment Directive and the Race Directive .
I have concentrated more on the Employment Directive , because race was covered by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs in a very good report last year .
Transposition and implementation is patchy across the EU , especially with the Employment Directive , although there are problems with the Race Directive as well .
There is also a lack of information given to citizens about possible remedies in case of discrimination .
The Commission , Member States , trade unions , as well as governmental and non-governmental stakeholders , must do all in their power to improve awareness of rights under these directives and Member States must adequately resource independent bodies to promote equality and encourage Member States to ensure the remit of those bodies covers all forms of discrimination .
Too often the individual victims of discrimination are the ones who are left to challenge discrimination on their own , without the back-up of advocacy support or indeed the legal wherewithal to take legal proceedings , and that has to change .
Member States should ensure that victims of discrimination are automatically assured and assisted in legal proceedings .
Although I welcome the statistics that the Commission has already gathered on discrimination , I believe we need more data and a common standard for collecting that data .
I welcome the Commission 's interest in multiple discrimination and that is one of the reasons why I call in my report for comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation .
We must get away from the piecemeal approach .
There can be no hierarchy of discrimination .
A new directive must cover discrimination and access to goods and services on all grounds that have not been covered as yet under Article 13 legislation .
It should cover disability , age , religion or belief and sexual orientation .
Race and gender are already covered , as is employment .
I regret that although Commissioner Špidla has committed himself to this and the Commission made the commitment to a horizontal directive in its work programme for 2008 - and I commend Commissioner Špidla particularly for this - there appears to be some backtracking on this within the Commission .
Can the Commission tell us at what stage are the impact assessments , what they cover , and when they will be released ?
As I understand it , they are now saying that they might only bring forward legislation on disability and nothing else .
That is not acceptable , hence our amendment .
I have campaigned for years for Article 13 legislation on grounds of disability and on grounds of age , but I am now convinced that we must not leave anyone behind .
Anti-discrimination and human rights are the basis of the European Union and every EU citizen must be treated equally .
I urge you to vote for my report and more importantly for a comprehensive directive on anti-discrimination so we can give a signal to those in the Commission who do not agree with this , and the Member States , that we are committed as a Parliament at least to ending discrimination once and for all , and end the ridiculous idea that it is alright to discriminate against any one section of our society .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr Chairman , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank Mrs Lynne for her detailed and topical report .
The Commission fully agrees with its content .
The Commission supports unequivocally the calls for the complete transposition of Directives 2000 / 43 / EC and 2000 / 78 / EC .
As you know , the Commission has initiated a number of legal proceedings involving some Member States because of non-compliance with legislation , and it will not hesitate to make use of its competences to ensure that EU legislation is rigorously complied with in the future , and to achieve a fast and systematic improvement in cases where this legislation has not yet been implemented .
The Commission also acknowledges that monitoring of the implementation of both Directives must be improved .
Therefore , the Commission is currently working on programmes to improve the recording of cases of discrimination .
The truly important issue is the real impact on individuals , not just an abstract image of how things might work .
The report also rightly underlines the fundamental role of the institutions in supporting equal treatment : they play a key role in monitoring , providing support for victims and improving awareness of rights .
I would like to stress the crucial importance of the non-governmental sector in this area .
The Commission supports an expansion of the role of the institutions and the role of the non-governmental sector in such a way that would cover discrimination on grounds other than ethnic origin and gender .
As stated in the Commission 's Work Programme for 2008 , I intend to table an amendment based on Article 13 of the EC Treaty , which would extend the existing protection against discrimination to areas outside the labour market .
This will be included in the broader programme for opportunities , attitudes and solidarity that is due to be adopted at the end of June .
Lively political discussions are taking place about the need for further anti-discrimination legislation at EU level .
Let us be clear : these discussions are not about whether or not to combat discrimination but rather about how to do it in the most effective manner .
Considering the political sensitivity of this issue and the far from forthcoming attitude of some Member States , the ground must be prepared very carefully .
During the seminar of 29 April , held ahead of the launch of the renewed social agenda , we agreed that we needed more in-depth analyses before making a decision on the best course of action .
Whatever the Commission 's decision in the next few weeks , it will be a decision based on a detailed analysis .
It will take into account all aspects of multiple discrimination and the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
Most importantly , it will be designed to bring real benefits to those who need it .
In conclusion , I would like to mention that as a follow-up to the European Year of Equal Opportunities , the Commission plans to present a communication adopting concrete measures to improve protection against discrimination in the European Union .
Together with this communication , the Commission will also publish a report on how EU policies contribute to improving the situation of the Roma people .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Lynne , from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs as well as on behalf of my political group , for her excellent work and this excellent report .
Unfortunately , discrimination still remains one of the most significant and widespread human rights problems in the European Union .
As to anti-discrimination directives already in force , I would like to stress that they provide for only minimum standards .
It is a shameful situation that a number of Member States have not transposed and implemented even those minimum standards .
We think the European Commission should use the infringement procedure against such Member States more actively .
Everyone in the Union must be sure that he or she cannot be discriminated against and that he or she has effective legal tools in order to fight against discrimination .
The Member States and the Commission should also actively support awareness-raising and training for combating discrimination .
Another problem , as we have just heard today , makes me even more anxious .
It is that we really need a comprehensive legal framework for combating discrimination .
As far as I understood from the statement of the Commissioner , we cannot be sure just now that the work programme declared by the Commission for 2008 , which we have welcomed very much , with the proposal for a directive implementing the principle of equal treatment outside employment on all grounds , will provide this .
For me it would be a real shock if the Commission excluded some grounds from the scope of protection .
It would mean that we can easily give up our values and , as soon as the Year of Equal Opportunities is over , we again feel free to treat Europeans differently .
We cannot allow this .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , opposing discrimination is a fundamental human value ; in this regard there is no difference of opinion among us .
The European People 's Party attaches particular importance to anti-discrimination policy .
It is our belief that Member States have an incontrovertible and unavoidable responsibility to ensure that not a single citizen of the European Union faces discrimination .
The Group is also aware that not all problems , unfortunately , can be resolved by means of legislation .
In order gradually to put an end to discrimination , we need an appropriate political culture , we need tolerance in daily life , in the workplace , in public life , in communications , from national to local level , and we need the whole of civil society to pull together .
As practice has shown , implementing the European directives on discrimination is no easy task .
Half of the Member States have not managed to transpose the directives adequately into their national legislation or apply them appropriately .
It is a fact that a real gap exists in European legislation between Article 13 of the EC Treaty and the existing directives .
This means that not all ' protected ' groups , in other words those referred to in Article 13 , are guaranteed equal rights under European law with regard to access to goods and services .
To bridge this gap , however , the European People 's Party does not believe the solution lies in adopting a comprehensive directive that would be difficult to implement and inefficient .
Instead , it feels that a European directive is needed as a matter of urgency to help in a non-hierarchical manner to end discrimination against the 84 million disabled people who live in Europe , so that people living with a disability can enjoy the same rights throughout the EU .
Bearing in mind the fact that the average lifespan of the population is increasing and age-related chronic illness often results in damage to a person 's health , the number of people living with a disability is set to increase in future .
We are convinced that this approach will provide more effective , practical help to people living with a disability .
The Group would therefore support an initiative of the European Commission with this aim .
Thank you .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Mrs Lynne 's excellent report is based on the responsibility that derives from the presence in our midst of the phenomenon of negative discrimination .
Not only has it not disappeared from the Europe of Excellence ; according to the Eurobarometer survey it is on the increase , and Europe 's citizens can sense this .
I would also like to add that enlargement has brought with it a rise in new forms of discrimination threat , such as those facing multiply disadvantaged people ; discrimination against the Roma is becoming increasingly violent nowadays .
The majority of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs voted in favour of adopting a horizontal directive .
We all remember the traces of mistrust in Parliament towards the newly formed Commission , a mistrust that became the majority opinion due to one nominee 's avowed views on discrimination .
The Commission at that time promised that it would take action on the basis of the authority conferred on it under Article 13 of the EC Treaty to introduce legislation against all forms of discrimination and establish a legal basis for dealing with infringements .
It is also a matter of urgency for the Commission to assess the transposition of existing European Union legislation by Member States , and also to initiate infringement procedures for non-transposition of the existing directives .
As far as the Socialist Group in the European Parliament is concerned , it is unacceptable for any sort of hierarchy to be established , whether in the EC Treaty or in the prohibitions relating to discrimination that are to be listed in the amendment to the Lisbon Treaty .
The question of who suffers the most - people living with a disability , gay people or older people - is not one we are prepared to address .
As far as we are concerned , the proposal in Mrs Lynne 's report is a potential legal solution ; in other words we await a general , horizontal directive from the Commission , although of course this does not rule out , indeed will make necessary , the formulation of specific provisions for different sectors and other cases .
It is my belief that this is also in accord with the views of European citizens who are , or may become , victims of discrimination .
Thank you very much .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Lynne , your work and your commitment on this key dossier have been remarkable .
I was one of the first people from our group to witness this within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and I thank you warmly .
A protective law only works if it is effectively applied .
That is why , Mrs Lynne , I share your concern about the poor implementation of directives prohibiting discrimination in certain Member States .
These situations are unacceptable and should be the subject of forceful , deliberate action by the Commission .
No indulgence can be tolerated in this area .
A protective law is also worthless unless it can actually be used by those it is designed to protect .
That is why I believe , as you do , that we need to make sure that the victims of discrimination do indeed have access to information and to the means for defending themselves .
That is the responsibility of the Member States , and there again , negligence should not be tolerated .
However , although your report represents a key step , this is mainly because of the comprehensive approach to discrimination you speak up for .
I unreservedly support your request for a comprehensive directive to combat all forms of discrimination .
Like you , I am convinced that a unified approach is essential , taking account of all grounds for discrimination .
Article 13 is not a call for lack of action or for uncoordinated action , but an invitation to act .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , put away your fears and theoretical debates .
Proposing a comprehensive directive is a necessity and is plain common sense .
There is a large majority of us here that believes this and is asking you , Commissioner , to listen .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , we too welcome the Lynne report and fully support the commitment to a comprehensive directive and see this as part of the cultural shift that Mrs Bauer referred to .
But we can hear the eggshells cracking as the Commission tries to edge forward on this and we urge the Commission to be really brave and really lead on this issue .
For us we think it is important to have comprehensive legislation .
For example , it would remove some of the loopholes by which racists and xenophobes try and exploit religious discrimination in order to cover their racist attitudes .
It is important that we get rid of some of those arbitrary cut-off points , for screening and health care for example , on grounds of age rather than evidence-based .
And we can fully support the rapporteur in her desire for a proactive approach in people being made aware of their rights and being able to access them .
Through the need for effective legal aid and strong independent bodies .
We therefore welcome this report and support it in its current form .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I congratulate Mrs Lynne on a very hands-on report on this important subject .
I am , however , a little taken aback at the language in which it is expressed , which reminds me a little of the language of totalitarianism .
Had I not known that the rapporteur was a member of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Demonstrate for Europe , I would have thought that this report had been drawn up by someone from the Communist side .
In my view it is dangerous to go into detail , as has been done here , and to spell out which types of discrimination should not be allowed , and how we should behave ; there should simply be no discrimination .
Mankind established all of its orders and prohibitions in the Ten Commandments , and they are spelled out there in succinct form : thou shalt not kill , thou shalt not commit adultery .
We should just say : thou shalt not discriminate , and leave the rest to the sensitivity and competence of human groups and Member States .
I do , however , consider this report acceptable , assuming that Amendment 7 by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is accepted .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , Liz Lynnes 's report highlights the need for a comprehensive , legislative framework which would prevent discrimination outside of the workplace and which would include a wide range of subjects .
Millions of people are discriminated against - the elderly as well as other groups - everyday in the European Union as they try to access health , education and transport services or try to buy insurance or apply for a loan .
These same groups had difficulties as regards employment before the introduction of stronger legislation at the European level .
Effective legislation at European Union level changed employers ' attitudes .
It was a European directive which forced Member States to try to end discrimination in employment - although there is still a lot work to be done yet .
Comprehensive legislation must be undertaken at a European level in order to strengthen people 's rights in terms of goods and services .
I would like to praise the rapporteur for her report and I would like to ask my fellow members to vote against amendments which weaken the protection of human rights .
Mr President , for the past nine years I have sat in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs alongside my most distinguished UK West Midlands colleague , the current rapporteur Elizabeth Lynne .
Almost without exception we have found ourselves in agreement on pretty well every issue without any need to negotiate compromise amendments because we already had a close meeting of minds .
I suppose to any rule there has to be an exception and to my intense surprise , this report is just that .
It is frankly most disappointing that in our view political posturing seems to have got in the way of addressing the real problem .
May I say straight away , before some others on the left get up to their usual distortions , that all of us on the centre-right abhor discrimination in all its forms .
All of us on the centre-right want to find practical ways of helping to stamp it out , and indeed would support , in principle , a specific directive to help people with disabilities as currently being considered by the Commission .
But we are very clear that a ' comprehensive and broad ' EU directive against discrimination which is essentially an open-ended invitation to the Commission to produce yet more ' one-size fits all ' EU legislation in what is a very sensitive area will do little to address current difficulties and could even be counterproductive .
We have tabled our own amendments to reinforce this point .
Whilst some aspects of ongoing discrimination may indeed still be a problem , to suggest that more general EU legislation is somehow a solution is , in our view , way off the mark .
Existing EU laws on discrimination continue to prove difficult to implement in practice .
There needs to be better implementation of existing laws and better understanding of the problems in implementation before we go down the road of yet more EU directives .
As one UK organisation put it most succinctly last week , most discrimination is not going to be solved by extra legislation .
Time would be much better spent on multicultural , multifaith events that change perceptions .
We agree with this .
May I thank the Commission for his thoughtful opening remarks and say how much we look forward to the Commission response in due course .
Mr President , I think Philip Bushill-Matthews ' criticism underlines just how good Elizabeth Lynne 's report is !
I think she is to be congratulated .
She has done a very good job of underlining the poor level of implementation and transposition of the two directives adopted back in the year 2000 on risk and discrimination in employment .
But back then , Commissioner , you and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs here recognised that discrimination does not stop at the office or factory wall .
We recognised then the need to act more broadly to introduce a horizontal directive to combat all forms of discrimination throughout the whole of society .
You publicly stated that you supported that idea ; your President , President Barroso , publicly committed himself to such a horizontal directive .
We are therefore very disturbed to hear that back-pedalling is going on inside the Commission , reconsideration , perhaps a focus only on disability .
I am hearing that three possible options are being considered in the Commission at the moment : the horizontal directive , which is still alive ; secondly , a specific directive on disability or , the third possibility , a directive on disability and one other form of discrimination .
Where the logic is in that final option I just do not know .
We need a strong advocate right now , Commissioner , for that horizontal directive that you committed yourself to .
As Elizabeth Lynne said , there can be no hierarchy of forms of discrimination within the European Union .
All European Union citizens are equal and need to be dealt with as such .
We cannot tolerate any discrimination on any grounds against any section of our Community .
I heard it said at a meeting last week in Brussels , and you hinted at it yourself today , Commissioner , and Philip Bushill-Matthews did so just now , that we should not act because infringement proceedings have been launched against a number of Member States for failure to comply with the earlier directives .
We cannot take that line of argument .
We cannot allow Member States to force us to act at the speed of the slowest in terms of implementation and then enforcement .
You , Commissioner , have the right of initiative .
You need to exercise that right .
We need to act rigorously .
You need to act rigorously to ensure full compliance and not allow Member States to enter into a conspiracy that would cause us to move at the speed of the slowest .
We also need to focus clear attention on the need for remedies and enforcement , strong remedies to make sure that Member States do indeed comply fully with those directives agreed back in the year 2000 .
I fully commend Elizabeth Lynne 's report .
I would like to pause for a moment to welcome , on behalf of all of us here in Parliament , the various visitor groups in the gallery .
Let us continue with the debate .
Mr President , in 2004 , this European Commission got the green light of the European Parliament only upon the solemn promise to be the champion of fundamental rights .
But paying lip-service to equality is not good enough .
EU citizens must get the legal instruments to defend their rights in court .
Now , the European Commission is frantically looking for excuses to avoid a general ban on discrimination , such as that more study is needed - as if we cannot all see that there is discrimination all around - or that there is no consensus in the Council - well , that never stopped the European Commission from pushing its proposals in other areas such as energy policy .
And let us not forget that discrimination is already forbidden on the basis of the Treaties , but if we do not legislate the courts will do it for us .
So I expect the European Commission to take its own responsibility and stand for the rights of European citizens , because if the horizontal directive must fail , then let it fail in Council and not in the Commission .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs in ' t Veld has said it clearly and I can only point out once again : we need the framework directive in order to grant everyone the same protection against discrimination .
It is not acceptable that homosexuals or the elderly , for example , are allowed fewer human rights than people from a migrant background .
We must end this situation as a matter of real urgency .
Moreover , I can but remind you once again that Mr Barroso himself promised here - when he was canvassing for Parliament 's approval of the Commission - to launch this framework directive .
As a German I have to say that I find the conduct of the German Government cynical .
There is a law in Germany that protects all attributes equally , but the government is leading a campaign here at European level against the framework directive without any plausible reasons .
In my view this is sheer populism at the expense of human rights .
( NL ) Mr President , the fight against discrimination , whether on the basis of religion , gender or disability , is one of the pillars on which the European stands .
That policy is laid down in all of our Treaties and in legislation .
With regard to the fight against direct or indirect discrimination on the basis of gender , that policy has proved a complete success in the European Union .
We can now test the situation against the directives and treaties and subsequently establish that , despite having the most complex legislative process in the world , the policy is not functioning well .
You then have a choice of two courses .
The course of the opposition is for us to introduce a new , broadly based strategy and solve the problems in that way .
I do not think that it can be done this way .
This was evidenced by the legislation of 2000 , under which infringement procedures were instituted against 10 Member States , including the Netherlands , owing to lack of clarity in the functioning of certain provisions in their legislation on equal treatment .
New , broadly based legislation will not help either , therefore , meaning that it will all continue to be just talk .
We should therefore increasingly focus upon mentality and on action programmes , and ensure that discrimination , even indirect discrimination , no longer takes place .
We must ensure that implementation improves , and then we shall also have to find a solution to the problems that can be formulated clearly , namely those of persons with disabilities .
I wholeheartedly endorse the plea of Mrs Bauer and that of a number of Members from our group , therefore , and hope that our splendid legislative framework is now actually going to be put into practice . Thank you very much .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mrs Lynne for her report ; it comes just at the right time .
A word to all Members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats : wage discrimination against women has been included in the Treaty for the last 40 years , yet , nothing has essentially changed .
If you in the PPE-DE Group wish to abide by your rejection of a horizontal directive , it is very clear to me that your values and principles relate to fine words and celebrations in the European Union .
You do not want equal treatment at all !
You accept discrimination against gays and lesbians , for example .
You want this to be a political culture .
No , that will not do for me !
Equal opportunities encompass all the criteria of Article 13 , and multiple discrimination ultimately has to be included , too .
Anti-discrimination policy can only be credible if it itself does not discriminate further .
There has been a flood of proceedings and actions in the European Union .
This was all propaganda aimed at avoiding certain minimum standards .
The Member States that have stopped short of this just have to make haste .
Infringement procedures have been initiated , even against my own country , Germany .
I now appeal to the Commission , to each individual Commissioner , to state clearly that they are in favour of a clear horizontal directive and putting paid to a hierarchic arrangement of human rights in the European Union .
We have to implement our EU policy in accordance with the Treaty .
Article 13 is part of the Treaty and must therefore encompass all this , as stated in the Lynne report .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mrs Lynne for her work .
Parliament is about to call again for a horizontal directive .
It will be the ninth time , Commissioner Špidla , that it has done this .
Since Parliament is requesting exactly this step for the ninth time , we would have expected greater clarity in the Chamber from the Commission today , partly because this represents a commitment from President Barroso , and partly because we believe in the impact assessment process which is under way .
Frankly , this idea of some Members from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats opposing a horizontal directive is incomprehensible .
In the past , the left was justifiably criticised for wanting to divide society into corporations and corporate representation .
It seems , however , that this is just what you are trying to do now : the disabled , yes , because this is more politically correct ; other forms of discrimination , no , let us wait .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten is not here , but the left is also sometimes fond of saying that it takes more than laws to change attitudes .
This time around , we are hearing it from members of the PPE-DE Group .
Let us talk about individual rights and about how we must not play one corporation , one minority off against another , but ensure non-discrimination for all citizens .
This makes sense , and this is what we are asking you to do .
Quite frankly we do not need measures biased more towards one category than another .
EU citizens do not need this .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are all agreed on one thing : we are against any form of discrimination .
I should like to clarify this right at the outset .
However , there are different approaches to reaching this objective .
I am of the opinion that protection against discrimination cannot conclusively be better regulated at European level than at national level .
Here , too , we are expected to comply with the principle of subsidiarity .
Many areas of life are currently regulated by EU anti-discrimination regulations .
Four anti-discrimination directives have been adopted in recent years : the Race Directive , the Employment Directive , the Equal Treatment Directive and the Gender Directive .
A multitude of infringement proceedings are currently in progress against Member States on account of problems in transposing the Treaty .
Strictly speaking , they are even now in progress against 20 countries , that is three quarters of the EU Member States .
It appears there is considerable legal uncertainty here .
A new , broad and over-simplifying approach in the form of a framework directive is the wrong response to the legal uncertainties that exist here .
The current problems first have to be examined before the Commission proposes new directives .
Otherwise , the result otherwise will be more bureaucracy , more costs to citizens and less legal clarity , which benefits no one , particularly not the fight against discrimination .
For this reason I , like my group , am against the articles in the Lynne report that call for a framework directive , a horizontal directive .
If the other groups assert themselves , however , and the demand for a framework directive persists , I see myself being forced to vote against the report , not because I am against protecting against discrimination , but because a framework directive at European level is the wrong way , in my opinion .
In the field of disability , all Member States as well as the European Community have signed the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities .
Here we must and shall fulfil our obligations .
We shall not , however , help anyone by adopting yet another unclear and wishy-washy framework directive .
Mr President , when I was this Parliament 's co-rapporteur for the Race Directive in 2000 , the then Portuguese Presidency promised us there would be no hierarchy of discrimination and that further legislation would follow .
On 26 October 2004 President Barroso promised in this Parliament and during this Commission 's term of office a framework directive on - I quote - ' all forms of discrimination ' .
That promise was repeated in their annual policy strategy for 2008 .
Now is the time to deliver .
I would say that it is no excuse that Member States in some cases deliberately drag their feet on implementation of employment non-discrimination , but it is an excuse , and the Commission must not allow the slowest to dictate the speed of the rest .
Two weeks ago I met with Federal Minister Zypries in Germany and Minister Follett in Britain .
They are willing to talk .
Give them something to talk about !
I am proud that we collected 1.3 million signatures for disability legislation .
But as this Parliament 's president of the Disability Intergroup , I place on record my support for a horizontal directive .
You will not divide and rule .
Finally , it is no good for the Conservatives to say that they abhor discrimination on the grounds of religion , age or sexual orientation , but then to vote against legislation on these grounds , denying equal rights to Europeans , gay , young and old and to religious minorities .
And Business Europe should be ashamed of saying in its submission to the Commission consultation dated 12 October 2007 , I quote : ' Business Europe believes there is no evidence of discrimination on any of the grounds covered by Article 13 ' .
The Commission 's own Business Test Panel showed 89 % of the 293 companies surveyed said they wanted EU legislation for equal protection .
They want it ; Parliament will vote for it ; Europe needs it .
( Applause from the centre and left )
( DE ) Mr President , I thank Mrs Lynne for spending time on the subject of anti-discrimination and I am completely on her side up to a certain point .
However , dear Mrs Lynne , Mrs Schroedter , Mrs Gröner and Mrs in ' t Veld , you mean well , but you are not doing yourselves any favours in the end if you are now calling for another directive against discrimination that goes beyond what we already have in Europe .
I say this quite deliberately and quite bluntly here as a homosexual : you are not doing the people you want to protect any favours .
There will ultimately be a far-reaching anti-discrimination regulation against the people whom you want to protect here .
How can this be ?
If we extend anti-discrimination to access to goods and services and to a shifting of the burden of proof , we will create a climate of concealed discrimination .
Very few employers will be openly willing to discuss discrimination .
Job applicants who represent a potential risk , perhaps because of their passport photograph , will no longer be contacted by the employer in case of doubt .
We are not doing people any favours in the end .
We ought instead to be worrying about the fact that the anti-discrimination directive we have today is being changed and watching to see how it pans out .
If we generate a tangled mass of bureaucracy and lawsuits as well as legal uncertainty , the acceptance of anti-discrimination regulations will decline among people in the European Union .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have so much time that I hope I can use it properly , accustomed as I am to speaking for only a minute .
I heard my colleague Mr Bushill-Matthews say that he always finds himself in agreement with Mrs Lynne , and that to any rule there has to be an exception , but that this time his position is completely different .
I must say to my dear friend Mr Bushill-Matthews that we too always find ourselves in agreement , but this time , without wishing to betray our traditional convergence on all decisions , I have to say that you are faced with an exception , because I am absolutely in favour of the proposal for a horizontal directive referred to the Commission by Mrs Lynne .
How could I not be in favour when for the past 40 years I have seen citizens in Italy , where I live , being discriminated against on the grounds of their age , elderly people being deprived of their rights simply because they are elderly ?
I am particularly referring to the fact that there is a law in Italy which says that the disabled , if they are young , are entitled to benefits , whereas if they are elderly , and have the same disabilities , they are not entitled to these benefits .
I do not see how we can wait for years before we have the legal possibility , as Mrs in 't Veld explained , of using the courts to enforce respect for the rights that Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam grants to all citizens of the European Union .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , European unity is based not only on the economy but also on many important values .
These values include the inviolability of human dignity , liberty , responsibility , solidarity , diversity , and the observance of the principle of freedom from discrimination .
They also include tolerance and mutual respect .
Alongside the statements of policy , it is important that these principles should be laid down in law in such a way as to ensure that distinctions can no longer be made on a discriminatory basis , and that people are comprehensively protected .
The European project will only be viable if we are able to ensure that disadvantaged groups in society are able to exercise their rights .
Comprehensive integration of these groups is in our common interest , and we must take appropriate measures to ensure that it happens .
It is thus in the interests of every Member State to ensure that all of the provisions of EC Directives 2000 / 43 and 2000 / 78 are transposed accurately and effectively in their entirety and implemented appropriately in practice , so that the transposition of the directives into national law will genuinely benefit disadvantaged groups .
The legislation is only of value if it is also implemented in practice .
Monitoring implementation of the legislation is an especially important task , and one that needs to be given particular attention at both Member State and Community level .
We need to devise inspection mechanisms that will enable us to conduct impact studies .
We must involve non-governmental organisations that can provide concrete feedback , and engage in social dialogue with them .
I am convinced that Mr Barroso believed what he said in 2004 , at the start of his term in office .
May he continue to do so .
Mr President , I wish to comment on two aspects of this excellent report by Elizabeth Lynne .
I fully support the call to Member States and other relevant actors to collect , compile and publish comprehensive , accurate , comparable , reliable and separate statistics on discrimination and then to publish these statistics in a way that is easily understood by the public .
In that way , I believe citizens can see for themselves the need for change .
I fully support the call for a comprehensive , wide-ranging directive .
This is an area where the EU can achieve strategic change when the legislation is implemented .
Finally , with reference to the Lisbon Treaty , I was very pleased to hear the comments of the Slovenian presidency last week on the 2008 work programme with regard to their response for the ' One Million Signatures for Disability ' campaign .
This indicates that the presidency , and hopefully the Commission , are listening to the citizens and taking their concerns on board .
This is a very hopeful sign for the Citizens ' Initiative as contained in the Lisbon Treaty , but again I wish to put on record my strong support for a comprehensive directive .
There can be no hierarchy of discrimination .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I endorse the work accomplished by Mrs Lynne .
I must say that this debate comes at an interesting time for Europe .
I would like the Commission and yourself , Commissioner , to have the full awareness that you seem to be lacking at the moment .
This issue does not just concern progress made in equal opportunities and non-discrimination in terms of employment and working conditions ; the central issue is the need for a horizontal directive on equal treatment which covers all grounds for discrimination .
A climate of intolerance and hostility is emerging in Europe .
This is already giving rise to ethnic discrimination - just look at immigration and the Roma .
Heaven help us if we turn a blind eye .
This is why there is an urgent need for a comprehensive directive covering all discrimination in order to complete the anti-discrimination package under Article 13 of the Treaty .
It will also help to improve the level of cross-cultural encounters in Europe ; such encounters improve the quality of culture and are cogent , and are urgently needed now .
This is why I say to you , Commissioner , and to the Commission , show a bit more political courage , because so far there has been absolutely none !
( PL ) Mr President , employment is one of the main factors in social integration .
Nevertheless , unemployment among numerous groups , especially women , disabled people , ethnic minorities , migrants , the elderly and young people entering the labour market , remains at an unacceptably high level .
The fact that in some Member States substantial defects may be seen in the transposition and implementation of Directives 2000 / 43 / EC and 2000 / 78 / EC , and a lack of information aimed at EU citizens concerning the possibility of taking legal steps in the event of discrimination , are cause for concern .
It is important for the governments of the Member States to take down the barriers arising from discrimination in labour market recruitment processes as soon as possible .
Public agencies have a key role to play in promoting equality and non-discrimination , since , pursuant to Article 13 of the EC Treaty , Member States should ensure full , proper and effective transposition and appropriate implementation of these directives , so that the battle against discrimination in the European Union is of the nature of actions that are coordinated and compliant with a consolidated approach to combating discrimination .
( BG ) Mr. President , distinguished colleagues , the adoption and implementation of comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation in the European Union Member States is a tangible achievement and it is indicative of how sensitive a society is respecting the principles of equal treatment of all citizens , regardless of their ethnic origin , faith , gender , age , health or financial condition .
I support the appeal which Mrs. Lynne makes in her report to adopt a comprehensive directive free of any hierarchy of anti-discrimination principles .
We should , however , take note that in Europe discrimination against individuals who belong to ethnic or religious minorities remains the most frequent form of infringement against their fundamental right to be treated equally like the rest of the citizens from majority groups .
In certain Member States hatred speech , islamophobia and other forms of xenophobia , fueled by stereotypes , prejudice and cliches from the past drive a latent discrimination attitude toward ethnic or religious minorities .
That is why the European Parliament shown make a point of drawing the attention of the Commission and the Member States ....
( Metin Kazak was interrupted by the President )
( DE ) Mr President , we are all very much in agreement that every conceivable measure has to be taken against discrimination .
Therefore , the European Parliament has also repeatedly declared itself in favour of adopting a new directive .
There are already four such directives and one is virtually complete at draft stage .
This means we are covering a very broad spectrum in anti-discrimination measures .
These measures will now finally be implemented .
There are 28 infringement proceedings , which means the appeal is going out to the Member States ultimately to implement what has been decided here in this House .
I am against taking a second step immediately before the first has been taken , namely adopting another new directive with a wealth of new barriers where equality authorities are being demanded .
This again means more bureaucracy .
The fact that NGOs must by law be included in all legislation does not get us any further forward with consultation etc .
If we advocate anti-discrimination , then we have to argue in favour of implementing what is currently the law once and for all in the Member States .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to comment on unacceptable discrimination against pregnant women , especially in view of the demographic collapse in Europe .
Despite legal prohibitions , employers are demanding that young women applying for jobs present medical confirmation that they are not pregnant .
If they fail to produce such a certificate , their chances of obtaining work vanish .
This is a difficult but necessary field of action for the work inspectorate .
Families with many children also experience discrimination .
The average income per person in such families is usually significantly lower than in the families of single mothers .
On the other hand , family benefits and social assistance are usually less in their case , and taxes are higher .
Normally , when people speak of discrimination , they do not address these problems .
( RO ) Waiting for a horizontal directive , we can see that we have a European and a national legislation against discrimination , numerous political commitments , as well as specific institutional mechanisms .
Despite this optimistic appearance , the degree of transposition , the implementation and the efficiency of adopted measures are still very low in many Member States .
For achieving equality between men and women , a correctly paid job is essential .
Thus , we propose that the Commission initiate an integrated plan of positive actions for the labour market in order to reduce the artificial gender division on the labour market and the structural pay gaps that still exist between the branches deemed feminine and those deemed masculine .
In this plan , introducing the gender dimension into the drafting of the European , national and local budgets represents an essential instrument for reducing structural gaps and implementing the principle of equal pay for equal work .
Mr President , when the rapporteur spoke she said that every EU citizen must be treated equally .
Sadly , the rapporteur herself seems not to believe that .
If she did , then this report would cry out against the fact that this EU , through a derogation , authorises discrimination on religious grounds in my constituency of Northern Ireland ; specifically discrimination against Protestants who want to join the Police Service in Northern Ireland .
Yes , in this EU there is express religious discrimination , sanctioned in that way .
So when I listen to the high-sounding affirmations against discrimination I think of many young Protestant constituents who wanted to join the police , scored higher than Roman Catholic applicants , but who saw those people appointed over their heads because discrimination is statutory , provided for in legislation .
So , until we get horizontal application against discrimination ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ET ) Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , equality in the eyes of the law and protection against discrimination is everyone 's human right - that much is asserted in the constitutions of our Member States , all of the Member States .
Nevertheless our citizens are not exempt from discrimination .
For example , generic equality of rights in employment is regulated under Community law ; we have , however , placed a lesser emphasis on compliance with its implementation .
How else can we explain Eurostat 's annual public studies which show large discrepancies between men 's and women 's pay in the Member States ?
In my home country , Estonia , the gap is 27 % to women 's disadvantage .
This is where it stood over ten years ago , and where it still stands today .
Ensuring protection of this right is just as important as judicial regulation of the matter .
We must deal with this point and if necessary institute legal proceedings for violation .
What our citizens need is legal certainty .
Mr President , my congratulations to Mrs Lynne on this directive because , in the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , which aims to promote mutual understanding and celebrate Europe 's diversity , I am shocked and dismayed at the levels of existing discrimination - not just in race but in disabilities , gender , sexual orientation and ageing .
Discrimination is not just a problem in the labour market but also in housing , education , public and private services and even in religious matters .
I am particularly concerned about the difference in levels of integration of minorities within various Member States as indicated by the Migrant Policy Index .
This shows the failure of the implementation and enforcement of the minimum standards in anti-discrimination that we have sought to make EU-wide .
I call upon the Commission to take up this matter , not just with the Member States , but also to take stronger action within the EU institutions .
Finally , prior to the European elections , I would like to ask how this House is trying to set an example to the rest of Europe on anti-discrimination .
Still only 30 % of the MEPs are women and only 9 MEPs are non-white .
( DE ) Mr President , what is effective against discrimination and supports the protection of people with disabilities ?
Awareness-raising campaigns , information , action , but not the centralising of legal issues through new EU legislation .
A paper tiger instead of a comprehensive horizontal directive perhaps ?
It is important to implement the four existing directives .
Only in Germany have training courses that were required as part of the general Equality Act cost over EUR 1.7 billion a year .
I think the Civil Rights Act is right .
It provides regulations for firms with 15 employees or more and a high administrative and financial cost is avoided - an SME protection clause is appropriate .
Moreover , I think it is important that our doubts , which Mrs Lynne was unfortunately still not able to dispel because she has not taken our amendments into account , are becoming clear : we cannot vote in favour of this report , which states that public money should be used to support victims of discrimination .
Mrs Lynne should have listened to us here , but unfortunately she did not do so .
( CS ) I would like to mention two issues .
The first one is transport .
Approximately one third of the EU population suffer from mobility problems .
In order to give people equal opportunities regarding access to information , work and so on , significant efforts are needed to introduce a barrier-free transport standard .
The other issue concerns mentally handicapped people .
I think it would be useful to review the White Paper on mental health protection , because a vast number of people in the European Union suffer from stress , which also represents a disadvantage for people adapting to situations on the labour market .
On a point of order , Mr President , I recognise that I have not been called to speak , but what Mr Allister said about discrimination against Protestants in the police force in Northern Ireland is totally untrue .
The force is 90 % a Protestant organisation ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the debate showed the significance of combating discrimination .
The first issue on which practically everyone agreed is the need for more effective implementation of the legislation in all the Member States .
As the debate showed , the Commission is very rigorous in this regard and does not hesitate to initiate infraction proceedings against those countries that have not implemented the legislation in full .
However , simple numerical statistics do not give the full picture since these numbers include various types of infraction proceedings , from technical and organisational proceedings to those dealing with the scope of protection .
At any rate , I can safely say that all countries with which we are engaged in a debate are ready , and that there can be no doubt about their willingness to fully implement the anti-discrimination Directives .
The next issue is the question of further progress with regard to legislation .
I stated clearly that the Commission has reached the final stage in deciding on what conclusive action to take .
This stage will end by June this year and we will present the relevant proposals .
The debate now taking place in Parliament is certainly an important source in the decision-making process .
Allow me also to touch on two speeches that contrasted with the more general debate by introducing a slightly unusual argument .
One of them was the information that an anti-discrimination course in the Federal Republic of Germany cost EUR 1.7 billion .
I do not contest this figure .
I think that it might be quite interesting to compare it with the cost of tax legislation courses , for example .
We might find out that similar transitional costs usually accompany legislative changes .
In other words , purely financial arguments cannot give the full picture .
The other speech concerned the issue of policing in Northern Ireland .
I can only say that , according to the information available to me , the Police Service of Northern Ireland has launched positive action to deal with the problem mentioned by Mr Allister .
Ladies and gentlemen , the time allocated to us does not make it possible to continue this in-depth and very interesting debate .
Suffice to say that we have entered an important decision-making phase and that your debate is part of this decision-making process .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I should like to thank colleagues very much for their remarks .
I am delighted that we appear to have the support of the majority of this House for a comprehensive directive .
I hope the vote later today will prove that .
I would also like to pay tribute again to Commissioner Špidla because I know it was his actual initiative to bring forward a comprehensive directive and call for the comprehensive directive within the work programme .
I am only sorry that his view does not seem to be winning the argument with the rest of the Commission .
And let us hope that , by passing the call for a comprehensive directive , we will give more power to him to actually argue the case .
I did ask Commissioner Špidla for the impact assessments to be released .
I know they have been done already .
I am a little fearful since I have heard reports that there have been different impact assessments and those are being changed slightly as we speak to favour one view in the Commission rather than another .
I would like some sort of clarification on that to see if the rumours that I have heard are true .
I am very pleased that other Members have supported your call within the work programme for that comprehensive directive .
Specific issues relating to all the areas - disability , age , religion or belief , and sexual orientation - can , I believe , be covered in one comprehensive directive .
Education is not the way forward .
We have tried that .
For those Members who have been talking about education : it does not work .
We are talking as well about access to goods and services , not about employment .
I know that all of the German delegations have problems with that because the employment directive has been gold-plated by the German Government .
So leave that one aside .
There are different Member States who have different problems : disability , age , sexual orientation , religion or belief .
Some Member States cover some of them , others cover others and that is why it is important to get it right and have a comprehensive directive and not leave anyone behind .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) I would like to voice my appreciation of the work carried out by the rapporteur on a subject that I consider to be of enormous importance for the development of fairer and more effective European anti-discrimination policies .
The principle of non-discrimination is in fact one of the core values that has always formed the basis for European integration and must therefore be properly protected , so that European citizens , particularly those in the most disadvantaged categories , such as disabled people , are effectively protected against any form of discrimination .
Non-discrimination is fundamental in employment , but is necessary and preferable in any sector of public life ( such as education or social services ) because it can greatly aid social inclusion and development of the potential of all European citizens .
I would like to conclude by voicing my support for the swift adoption of a complete and effective framework directive on non-discrimination , enabling Member States to join forces in this area and to adopt coherent and effective policies aimed at allowing citizens to feel truly protected by clear and comprehensive legislation at a European and national level .
in writing . - ( PL ) As a member of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , I entirely support Mrs Lynne 's report .
I have no doubt that the international law in force and our own EU adjudications are - from a formal aspect - desirable and good solutions .
I therefore regret that their entry into force is continually coming up against numerous obstacles , even in our Europe , which would appear to be more democratic and less discriminatory .
It is astounding that we might need to call on EU Member States to treat the provisions of Directive 2000 / 78 / EC with full respect and to carry out constant and systematic monitoring of progress in the elimination of all forms of discrimination from political , social and economic life .
This is of particular importance for the citizens of my country , Poland , who , enjoying the benefits of the common market and freedom of personal movement , live and work in many EU countries .
I am very sorry to have to say that there is increasing evidence of discrimination against my fellow countrymen solely on the grounds of their nationality .
Disturbing information of this kind is increasingly coming to light from Germany , Great Britain and Ireland .
It would be a paradox if the European Parliament were to become so heavily and effectively involved in combating manifestations of discrimination in the world yet were unable to cope with respect for human rights at home - that is , in the EU Member States .
All EU citizens surely deserve equal and non-discriminatory treatment !
, in writing . - ( FI ) The matter here is equal opportunities and non-discrimination in the European Union .
Equal opportunities and non-discrimination at work are basic principles of employment , and the Member States should not have any problems complying with them .
According to Mrs Lynne 's report , however , the directives are not being implemented effectively or correctly .
The problem is a serious one because , as Mrs Lynne 's report states , combating discrimination and human rights are priorities in the EU under Article 13 of the EC Treaty .
An example case in Finland concerned a woman who was not eligible to receive unemployment security after she had finished caring for her disabled son .
It is wrong that care work done at home is not properly appreciated and that the rules allow this sort of discrimination .
With this case in mind , I support point 36 in Mrs Lynne 's report , which says that the scope of the principles of equality and non-discrimination should be broad and extend to social security .
I am also in favour of Mrs Lynne 's call for the European Parliament to recommend the Member States to put more resources into and empower institutions which work to promote these principles .
I also support her call for the status of NGOs to be firmed up , so that they too can address existing problems in the Member States more effectively and efficiently .
in writing . - ( HU ) It is certainly relevant that Mrs Lynne 's report on equal opportunities is on the agenda for debate today .
Just recently , on 17 May , we expressed our solidarity with transsexual , bisexual and gay people .
On special days or occasions it is often the case that people look back at the past .
Unfortunately , as the report shows , we still have a great deal to do as regards equal opportunities .
Unemployment is still unacceptably high among women , migrants , people living with a disability , ethnic minorities , and those with very specific or unrecognised skills .
In the field of employment , I therefore recommend introducing a European equal opportunities monitoring system that could provide support in the form of tax advantages and / or PR opportunities for employers that give prominence to creating equal opportunities .
It would also set up a ' blacklist ' of employers failing to meet the criteria at all .
This would have a motivating effect on companies while at the same time giving job seekers new perspectives and clarity .
Unfortunately , extremist and populist politics continue to spread in central and eastern Europe , but sometimes the picture we get from western Europe is a sad one too .
Negative discrimination against Roma people is on the increase , and extremist forces are demolishing Roma dwellings .
It is here that the great need for a European Roma Strategy , as proposed by the socialists , and the need for urgent action at European level are most apparent .
Legislation in the Member States provides differing levels of protection against discrimination .
There is often no uniform method of implementing the legislation , with the result that implementation is unsatisfactory .
Efforts to implement the legislation need to be coordinated , taking into account the horizontal perspective of the European Union , national and local authorities , and ensuring general compliance .
Prior to adopting legislation , it would also be important to carry out the social impact study and annual evaluation of implementation by Member States .
in writing . - ( ET ) Non-discrimination and human rights are basic values of the European Union .
They form the foundation on which we seek to build a common future and there can be no compromise in their regard .
That much is clearly stated in Article 13 , which must serve as a guide on any issues relating to European citizens .
Protection against discrimination on grounds of age , sexual orientation , religious belief or disability is absent today in areas such as social welfare , goods and services , health care and education .
Unfortunately there is no EU legislation in those areas .
If non-discrimination and human rights are of prime importance to us , then there can be no doubt that we need a single , horizontal directive which puts an end to the hierarchy of rights .
To the situation in which discrimination is outlawed in one area but allowed in another .
To the situation in which race and disability are substantially more protected than the other areas set out in Article 13 .
In the light of this report I call on the Commission not to back down from its promise and to draft a comprehensive directive to combat discrimination under Article 13 of the EC Treaty .
In an unprecedented move , many European non-profit-making bodies have spoken in favour of a horizontal directive to provide this protection ; similarly there are several umbrella organisations active in various fields in Brussels such as the European Women 's Lobby , AGE and several others .
A horizontal directive on non-discrimination covering social welfare , goods and services , health care and education is the only way to promote human rights protection in the European Union .
There is more than enough evidence of discrimination in all fields .
The Commission must not close its eyes and recreate a hierarchy between rights in the European Union .
, in writing . - ( HU ) As President of the Intergroup for National Minorities , I welcome Mrs Lynne 's report , which takes stock of what has already been achieved with regard to freedom from discrimination , and outlines what needs to be done .
Community legislation on freedom from discrimination is especially important because protecting the individual is not enough .
People do not suffer discrimination as individuals , but as members of a group : for example , because they belong to an ethnic minority , because they are old , because they are women , because they have a disability , because they belong to a sexual minority , or because they are Roma .
For this reason , the only way of effectively protecting individuals belonging to the various minority groups is by protecting the whole group .
The report rightly points out that the two existing directives only lay down minimum requirements , and so we need to take matters further towards developing a Community-level policy against negative discrimination and a horizontal anti-discrimination directive .
Likewise very important is the item in the report calling on the Commission to work towards establishing a common , EU-wide definition of the term ' positive action ' .
The report also draws particular attention to the need for specific social protection for minority communities , and especially the Roma community .
In this context I would like to remind you of Article 25 of the Ždanoka report , also on this topic , which points out the importance of participation by traditional national minorities in policy-making .
According to this article , national minorities need a framework policy standard enabling them to participate effectively in decision-making processes concerning their identity by means of various forms of self-government or autonomy .
An Integrated Maritime Policy for the European Union ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Piecyk , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on an integrated maritime policy for the European Union .
Madam President , I am pleased that you are in the chair for a second time for a debate on maritime policy .
You were also there a year ago .
Commissioner , let us start with the good news .
This evening the first European Maritime Day event will be taking place in St James 's Church in Lübeck .
This church houses the international memorial for civil maritime navigation .
Commissioner Barrot opened it last year .
Captains will be discussing their living and working conditions there this evening .
The pastors have been relying upon the Presidents of Parliament , the Council and the Commission to actually declare 20 May European Maritime Day this afternoon .
This is a reason to rejoice and it should cause Europe to pay more attention to its seas .
Only those who believe that a day such as this is also in fact maritime policy are indeed mistaken ; a Maritime Day such as this should not degenerate into mere symbolism .
That means it must be part of a political framework .
Policy is required - for social matters , maritime safety and climate protection .
Let us take living and working conditions on board ships : it is an evil anachronism that a whole range of social and employment protection regulations do not apply to seafarers .
This has to change and the Commission also sees that it has to change .
We await their initiatives here .
The International Labour Organization adopted the Maritime Labour Convention in 2006 .
Three States have so far ratified it : the Bahamas , Liberia and the Marshall Islands .
Where do Europeans actually stand here ?
If the Council wants to improve navigational and maritime safety , it simply has to do one thing : finally adopt the Erika III package .
It is a bit much that the Council is dealing with this issue of maritime safety in such a dilatory manner .
In the meantime , more than 12 months have elapsed since first reading in Parliament and so far we still do not have single united standpoint .
The Erika and Prestige disasters should in fact be sufficient warning and reminder to take action at long last .
The climate protection package , put forward by Commission President Barroso in January refers to the possibility of perhaps including maritime transport in emissions trading .
This is too lax ; it is not enough .
In my view maritime policy has to achieve at least four things regarding climate protection : inclusion of maritime transport in emissions trading - now , not whenever ; a radical reduction in pollutant emissions - CO2 , SO2 and NOX ; and use of regenerative energies such as wind and solar energy .
In the ports there has to be an end to ships ' engines producing their own energy to the detriment of people and nature .
Conversely , we also need to supply energy from land , so ships in port must be connected up to a power outlet .
In the North Sea and Baltic Sea we have dozens of old munitions from past wars .
Formidable hazards arise from these .
We therefore need a plan of action to identify and remove this old , harmful waste .
In recent months we have learnt that pirates have carried out attacks on Europeans and European ships off the African coast .
We therefore need clear international regulations and a support system on the high seas and we must protect not only the coasts from the seas , but also the seas from the coasts .
The greatest hazard for the seas still comes from the land : 80 % of all emissions of pollutants are caused by agriculture or industry .
In order to find a remedy , European law must ultimately be applied and enforced here , too .
When we declare 20 May European Maritime Day after the vote this afternoon , I hope that we will be able to say on 20 May next year : we have achieved a great deal in the meantime .
You see how it was a precision landing .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I find it quite appropriate that we are holding the debate during the first celebration of European Maritime Day .
It is , after all , a Member of Parliament , Ms Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , who first suggested the idea to President Barroso in the context of preparations for the Green Paper on a future maritime policy for the European Union .
It is also thanks to Parliament , and , in particular , President Pöttering , who will be hosting the signing of a joint tripartite declaration , establishing European Maritime Day , later today .
This celebration demonstrates how far we have come in developing , not only the integrated maritime policy , but a new vision for Europe 's oceans and seas .
It also shows how involved all European institutions have been every step of the way .
In fact , the Parliament has been a key player in developing the new integrated maritime policy both by organising a number of conferences where fruitful discussion and searching debate has been held , and by producing reports which guide us in our work and provide specific direction for the implementation of maritime policy .
Let me express my grateful and heartfelt thanks and appreciation to rapporteur Willi Piecyk for having coordinated the keen interest of the various committees and for having produced this impressive report .
Let me also thank the different committee rapporteurs and the many other distinguished Members of Parliament who have been particularly involved , throughout the last two years , in building the Parliament 's contribution to this emerging European policy .
To these , I apologise for not being able to refer to them by name as I wished .
Allow me , if you will , to turn to the report itself .
While the report does not include any new proposals , it nevertheless concentrates on certain demands made in Parliament in July 2007 which assisted us in determining the way forward , and will inspire us now for the continued implementation of the maritime policy .
On some of the sectoral issues , the Commission welcomes the continued emphasis placed by Parliament on the environmental dimension of maritime policy , and on the challenges of climate change in particular , and looks forward to the adoption of a strategy for adaptation to climate change in 2008 which will address these concerns .
The Commission also welcomes the recognition by the European Parliament of the importance of maritime transport to the European economy and Parliament 's support for a common maritime transport area , for the development of the motorways of the sea and short sea shipping : all projects which the Commission is pushing forward .
In terms of research , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's support for the development of a comprehensive marine research strategy which will be a cornerstone of maritime policy , and should be ready for adoption by mid-2008 .
The Commission welcomes the positive attitude of the report towards the need to ensure sustainability in the field of fisheries .
We have taken a number of steps in this direction since the adoption of the ' Blue Paper ' such as the adoption of a communication on the ecosystem approach in April 2008 , and two proposals on discards , which will be ready by the end of this year .
In addition to specific mention of issues including the environment , maritime transport , research and innovation , social aspects , fisheries and energy , the Commission welcomes the particular importance attributed to the regional aspect of maritime policy through the exceptional maritime dimension conferred on the EU by its vast coastline , its islands and its outermost regions , and fully concurs with the view that maritime policy should take into account the various specific features of the Member States and maritime regions , including coastal regions , islands and outermost regions .
Honourable Members , we are still in the early stages of the implementation of maritime policy , but with the continued assistance of Parliament , we will strive for increased measures in that implementation .
In conclusion , may I once again congratulate the European Parliament and the concerned rapporteurs for their excellent work .
We look forward to continuing our close dialogue with you in the months ahead in the interest of implementing the integrated maritime policy for the Union , and also count on your support to engage , in particular , the European maritime regions during Maritime Day 2009 .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we congratulate the European Commission on its communication on an integrated maritime policy for the European Union and on the proposal for an action plan establishing the first steps aimed at implementing that policy .
There have certainly been some backward steps between the Green Paper and the current Blue Book , in particular as regards sea-use planning , coastal protection , the European flag and the European Representative to the International Maritime Organization , but progress has unquestionably been made , specifically on the social dimension , investment , innovation and maritime clusters and maritime transport .
The overall balance is positive .
Whilst respecting the principle of subsidiarity , we must now put into practice an effective integrated maritime policy that ensures that there is coordination between the various sectoral policies , that produces the expected synergies and real added value .
Only in this way can the policy be a significant instrument to face the challenges of sustainable development , competitiveness and economic and social cohesion in Europe .
Above all , the Committee on Regional Development hopes that the integrated maritime policy will have a very positive impact on the development and protection of the EU 's coastal regions , islands and outermost regions .
I shall be very brief , but I would like to highlight the value of incorporating the proposals made by the Committee on Fisheries , which stress that the key objective of the integrated maritime policy for the European Union in the field of fisheries should be to promote the modernisation and sustainable development of the industry , safeguarding its socio-economic viability and the sustainability of resources and guaranteeing food sovereignty and food security , the supply of fish to the public , job preservation and improved living conditions for fishermen .
The proposals also stress that creating more and better seafaring jobs , particularly in the fishing industry , also depends on guaranteeing a fair and adequate income for people working in the industry .
There is also a need for mechanisms to compensate fishermen who are affected by stock recovery plans , and to boost support for scientific fisheries research in the various Member States , particularly under the Seventh Framework Programme , and Community support for adequate means of assistance and rescue for crews .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my group would first of all like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Piecyk .
He has been initiating discussions very well for over a year now and has outlined the challenges .
Many thanks , Mr Piecyk !
We , too , unanimously support the report .
However , we regret , Commissioner , that the action plan contains too few practical measures .
Mr Piecyk has already pointed out that the entire set of environmental problems remains unresolved .
There are no practical measures and it is unclear what contribution the players - ship-owners , for example - are making towards combating climate change and how they can exist in the competition that they have to bear globally .
This extends from measures such as the reduction of sulphur and nitrogen oxides at sea to measures in the ports , such as the use of land energy .
I am in all honesty a little disappointed .
When the Commission says that it will be putting forward proposals on this in the autumn , we shall no longer be able to implement these in this parliamentary term .
Perhaps you will be able to add a little more butter to the fish , as the people of Hamburg say , and then have a bit more drive .
The second point concerns the issue of marine monitoring .
I believe we do not simply need improved cooperation between the national coastguards .
We not only need to strengthen FRONTEX - which address illegal immigration - but we also need a European coastguard .
This has been one of our concerns for years , that all activities , whether they be fishing activities , customs work or police work , are being centralised in the Member States and a powerful European coastguard is being introduced for this .
Mr Commissioner , will the Commission be putting forward a proposal on the coast guard in this parliamentary term or not ?
One final point , which is new , is the amendments on pirates .
We have to provide better protection for our fishing and merchant shipping fleets in international waters and we therefore need European as well as global action .
The freedom of the seas should not become the freedom of the pirates .

on behalf of the PSE group . - ( RO ) I congratulate our colleague Mr. Piecyk , whom I appreciate very much and I am glad that we are discussing his report today , when the Tripartite Declaration establishing the European Maritime Day to be celebrated every year on May 20th is signed .
An integrated maritime policy of the Union should ensure synergy between sectors with special economic importance such as : the shipbuilding industry , maritime and fluvial transport , harbour activity , fishing activity , energy , tourism , environmental protection and maritime heritage protection .
As of 1 January 2007 , the Union borders the Black Sea and the Union should promote its common maritime policy in this region as well .
There are coordinators for the TEN-T projects for inland water transport and for transport on maritime corridors .
The expansion of the TEN-T network refers to maritime corridors .
Unfortunately , the demands for projects that the Commission has launched for the European maritime corridors do not refer to the Black Sea region as well .
I request the Commission to draw up studies and projects for the Black Sea region , which has to become a strategic region of the TEN network .
I also request the Commission to draft a plan of concrete actions for the protection of delta and estuary areas and here I particularly refer to the Danube Delta .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would also like to congratulate Mr Piecyk on an excellent report .
It is important that we are having a discussion at this symbolic moment , but my desire is above all to draw attention to the practical aspects of this report .
Really it is a major anachronism that , among other European policies that we are implementing within our Community , maritime affairs have so far been set to one side and are not covered by a Community-wide policy .
What I wish to point out is that this is not an individual sphere ; this is a sphere with very extensive dimensions , as indicated in this report .
It has an economic dimension ; there are large numbers of people who make their living from the sea and who work there .
It has a very strong social dimension , which we must bear in mind when we talk of restructuring this industry , and when we talk of what to do with those people who make their living at sea and from the sea .
Our discussion has a very important environmental dimension , which is particularly emphasised in this report , and I would like to thank the rapporteur for that too .
There is also a very important regional dimension ; we must not forget that regions that take their living from the sea , and that lie next to the sea , constitute a very substantial part of our Community .
I would also like to stress a point that has arisen in this discussion , which is that we always treat our work and our discussion as a sort of contents list and prompt for the Commission .
We outline certain answers , we pose questions and we sketch out our doubts , whereas our expectations in relation to the Commission are in fact very great and we expect answers to come as quickly as possible , with specific solutions .
I would also like to point out that for very many countries this is a priority matter , with as much importance as other European policies , such as agricultural policy .
Madam President , attempts to get the shipping industry away from the old-fashioned notion that the sea wipes away all tracks have so far failed .
No , the sea remembers as well as the soil and the air , as well as plants and animals and the human body , and the shipping industry 's contribution to pollution remains enormous .
Imagine if we could get the major shipping nations to make the IMO an active player in the battle to save the global environment instead of using the IMO to put the brakes on good initiatives , as is currently the case .
This report by Mr Piecyk is an excellent addition to our previous achievements in Parliament , but I hope that we can strengthen it further by gaining support for our proposed amendment , so that shipping will undoubtedly be included in the CO2 quota trading scheme .
We already have aviation included .
The only logical and defensible approach is for shipping to also contribute .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , support Amendment 1 to have the Maritime Emission Trading Scheme included in the report .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I would first like to congratulate Willi Piecyk on his report .
I come from an island and I understand very well the importance of maritime research and progress .
I think today 's report gives us a great advantage in achieving this .
We are not very satisfied with the Common Maritime Policy in Ireland but there is more than that at stake .
Some time ago , we visited my area in the company of the Fisheries Committee and we saw the wonderful work that is being done by the Maritime Institute in Oranmore in county Galway .
Together with other institutes like the Maritime Institute we will be able to promote the necessary research throughout Europe so that the blue revolution we speak so much about can come to fruition and support our plan .
I shall speak only briefly to point out that any initiative on maritime policy must respect Member States ' sovereignty as regards their territorial waters and exclusive economic zones .
I would point out that Article 5 of the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic lays down that the State may not alienate any part of the Portuguese territory or of the sovereign rights it exercises over it - and that includes rights to adjacent sea beds .
Furthermore , it is essential to improve the working conditions of seafarers , guaranteeing jobs , respect for the principle of equal pay for equal work , a reduction in working time and no application of the multi-skilling requirement , and resisting any renewed attempt to liberalise port services at EU level , in particular as regards intra-Community shipping ; the ' sound financial basis ' for the maritime policy should not be built at the expense of the European Fisheries Fund and the common fisheries policy , but should be based on the principle that new priorities will require new financial resources .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , congratulations are due to Mr Piecyk for his excellent report on the Integrated Maritime Policy , and also to my colleague Mr Jarzembowski for his pertinent remarks .
Madam President , this report has the great merit of incorporating the various different aspects of this policy : environmental , economic , social and safety aspects .
In particular , I am referring to the problems associated with illegal immigration , terrorism and smuggling , which occur along the full 320 000 kilometres of European coastline .
The Member States with coastline need to step up the surveillance and control of their seas .
Cooperation between them and the countries from which these illegal activities originate absolutely must be implemented as quickly as possible .
It is also true that scientific discoveries , the considerable progress of technology , globalisation , climate change and maritime pollution are changing considerably Europe 's relationship with the seas and oceans , with all the problems and challenges this brings .
However , I am disappointed that the text proposed to us does not cover policy on ports and fisheries in more detail . These are two particularly sensitive dossiers , as we know .
In France , professional fishermen are blockading the Atlantic , Channel and Mediterranean ports in reaction of course to the sudden rise in diesel prices and the quotas policy imposed by Brussels .
The sector is in crisis structurally as much as economically .
Fishing bosses no longer want to invest in their boats so the fleet is ageing .
The average age of French fishing vessels is 25 years .
Fewer and fewer people are going into a career in fishing because of the constraints on the profession .
Madam President , an integrated maritime policy has to take these sectoral considerations and problems into account and quickly reverse the trend that is leading to the slow and painful death of the fishing sector .

( PT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Piecyk , anyone passing in front of the Berlaymont building at the moment will see a huge hoarding bearing the phrase ' An Ocean of Opportunity ' , in reference to the European Maritime Day ( which is today ) and to European maritime policy .
The European Commission is quite right and I too believe that the investment we are resolved to make in the sea could provide an excellent opportunity to use that vast resource in a responsible and competitive manner .
Unfortunately the world is awash with lost opportunities , with shipwrecked good ideas .
That must not be the fate of the European maritime policy .
We cannot , or rather , we must not lack the will or the capacity to carry the policy through , as Mr Jarzembowski quite rightly pointed out .
The energy of our belief in the potential of this initiative must not be expended on halfway measures or the mere mouthing of generous-sounding ideas which are basically much less ambitious than we would like .
Our road to success will entail : decisive investment in blue technologies ; promoting a network of maritime clusters to develop best practices and the most advanced technologies ; making the most of the sea in the fight against climate change and in using it as a source of renewable energy ; promoting maritime transport and coastal tourism ; acknowledging the maritime regions , in particular the outermost regions and their importance in security and protection against illegal immigration , trafficking , smuggling and terrorist threats .
We must also , of course , ensure that we have a strategic and integrated vision and sustainable financing for these policies .
I therefore now appeal directly to the Commission and to my fellow Members to say that the ambition shown cannot be less than the ambition to build another European centre of interest based on an integrated maritime policy .
This water , Commissioner , will not flow under this bridge again .
I just wonder whether the European Commission and this Parliament will be able to rise to their own challenge .
( FR ) Madam President , one of the aims of the first European Maritime Day we are celebrating today is to buff up the image of the maritime occupations by restoring their future prospects .
In addition to the improvement of working and employment conditions for these occupations and the redefinition of career plans , a number of structural conditions also need to be met .
Today , throughout France , desperate fishermen are blockading ports because they no longer believe they have a future .
In addition to the fishing restrictions aimed at protecting fish stocks - the principle of which I am not querying , though I do wonder about its fairness - rising fuel prices are now also threatening them with bankruptcy .
This is already a problem in France but it is likely to spread to other parts of Europe in the near future too .
The European Union can and must act in this area by supporting restructuring and encouraging the introduction of cleaner-burning , more fuel-efficient vessels .
As a matter of urgency , it must also help companies affected by this economic crisis to stay afloat .
I highlight this last point because we cannot let the first European Maritime Day coincide in the minds of citizens with the death of an entire trade .
( DA ) Mr President , Mr Piecyk 's report points out that there must be more concrete action on the table when we are talking about maritime policy , and I strongly agree .
Nowhere is such an active maritime policy more necessary than in the Baltic .
It is the EU 's most polluted maritime area with extensive pollution from the land , as well as from ships . Added to this there is the dumped ammunition from past wars .
There must be a cleaner environment in the Baltic , and we would also like to see strong economic development in the area , together with a move towards coastal shipping traffic relieving road traffic .
A solution must then be found to limit the emissions of ships that does not hinder the development of coastal shipping .
I believe that the way forward lies in methodological freedom to achieve the political goals for emissions combined with financial instruments .
I hope that in its Baltic strategy the Commission will strengthen work to improve the environment and learn from the pilot projects that Parliament included in this year 's budget .
Madam President , I represent Scotland , one of Europe 's primary maritime nations .
The EU has some 68 000 km of coastline ; Scotland has some 11 000 km of that .
So , in terms of maritime interests , Scotland is at the heart of Europe .
We have much to gain and much to contribute to a maritime strategy and policy .
We have waters rich in minerals , energy and biological resources and we are ideally located as a maritime hub for Europe and the wider world .
Maritime nations will have their own priorities in terms of strategy and policy for the resource which is their sea .
Any EU policy should assist maritime nations in achieving their objectives such as by funding research , by facilitating development of new routes for transporting goods and passengers , supporting energy interconnectors , improving safety on vessels and energy efficiency .
Can I quote from Article 34 of the Piecyk report , which says ' the integrated maritime policy for the European Union should be developed in such a way as to avoid failings in the CFP such as over-centralisation ' ?
In other words : add value and not take over as an excuse of competence .
( EL ) Madam President , the Commission communication on maritime policy for the European Union aims to ensure the profitability of ship-owners and of the monopoly groups active in the sector .
What can be said about the proposals for an integrated maritime policy ?
Firstly , they promote new privileges , and changes in the Community and commercial legislation international framework .
Apart from anything else , they divisively create social problems for workers in the shipping industry and residents of island regions .
Secondly , maritime policy is being lumped together with transport and related sectors .
Thirdly , sweeping changes are being introduced in training and labour relations in order to replace the workforce with cheaper labour .
The workload is being intensified as are the risks to human life and the environment .
Fourthly , ports are being sold off to business group monopolies .
Fifthly , the mechanisms of repression are being strengthened under the pretext of combating terrorism .
Sixthly , flags of convenience are symbols of competitiveness and the EU 's anti-labour maritime policy .
It is not for nothing that 68 % of the capacity of the Greek-owned fleet and 85 % of Germany 's shipping capacity are under foreign flags , although they are actually based in EU countries .
Madam President , my constituency of South-East England includes over half the coastline of the English Channel , a name that that stretch of water has held for centuries .
Yet the latest maps on the Arc Manche region change the name of the English Channel to the ' Greater North Sea ' and call the Bristol Channel the ' Celtic Sea ' .
On whose authority have nautical miles suddenly become kilometres on those maps ?
Now , you may think that these things are little things , but not where I come from .
The Commission has failed completely to understand the impact of such gratuitous and absurd nonsense on an island nation , and they are hurrying the day when the UK walks away from the EU and takes its GBP 1.5 million-an-hour club subscription with it .
Mr President , we now have Maritime Day , we have an integrated maritime policy , we have DG MARE .
We have certainly come a long way and I think we owe the congratulations of this House to the Commissioner , but also to Willi Piecyk , for the hard work and efforts that they have all contributed towards achieving this objective .
Europe 's maritime interests affect the lives and occupations of millions of our citizens .
90 % of our external trade and 40 % of our internal trade passes through our European ports .
Globalisation means that this is bound to grow .
If you take into account all of our coastal and outermost regions , we have got over 320 000 km of coastline , home to a third of our EU total population .
Marine-based industries and services and the other activities of these coastal regions account for 40 % of our GDP .
But we rely on our maritime resources for more than trade : our seas are a source of food , energy , minerals and recreation .
The sea is also an important climate regulator and we have already seen the results of climate change on fish stocks .
At a time of growing demand for healthy marine protein , fish stocks continue to decline .
We now have to rely on imports from outside the EU for more than 50 % of the fish we consume .
Critics always try to blame the fishermen for over-exploitation of our marine resources , but global warming , environmental pollution and many other factors have also played a part .
If we are to realise the full potential of Europe 's maritime interests and to realise the vision of clean , healthy , safe , productive and biologically diverse oceans and seas , then we have to implement a management plan that aims for sustainability in every area , and the way to do that is devolve more management responsibility to our regional advisory councils .

( PT ) First I should like to congratulate the Commissioner and the Commission for the proposal presented and the methodology adopted and to congratulate Mr Piecyk on his splendid work and openness in the preparation of this excellent report .
As a native of an old maritime nation , Portugal , and of an insular and outermost region , Madeira , I strongly support this report because it guarantees , among other fundamental aspects , appropriate recognition for the outermost regions in the effective implementation of maritime policy due to their position and their extensive experience , including in the areas of innovation , research , the environment , etc .
Secondly , in the interests of improved management and sustainable exploitation of marine resources and appropriate combating of climate change , enhancement of coastal areas , support for environmentally friendly forms of maritime transport and an effective port policy , support for marine research , promotion of social rights in line with previously agreed international requirements , lifelong learning and support for tourism , which is one of the fundamental activities in this maritime policy .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to acknowledge the work of Mr Piecyk .
Mr Piecyk , we have come to expect very good reports from you , and this one is no exception .
Many thanks !
My constituency is Szczecin , in Western Pomerania .
We have a port , a shipyard , shipowners , fishermen and a maritime administration .
First of all , I welcome the declaration establishing a European Maritime Day .
Secondly , as a result of this report , the shipyard workers of Szczecin and Gdynia , and also of Malta and other countries , will be pinning great hopes on the new maritime policy .
The shipyard industry is a global industry .
Our shipyards must function under conditions comparable to those throughout the world , where our competitors are working .
What we need , then - and here I am addressing you , Commissioner - is a prudent policy and sagacious concern for European shipyards .
( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I , as a European citizen of Galicia , a maritime region par excellence , am very proud of the excellent work done by the rapporteur , my friend Willi Piecyk , and I thank him along with the other political groups for supporting my amendments on the upsurge of the phenomenon of maritime piracy , which is sadly once again in the news following the two recent hijackings .
It is right that our concern should be set out in the resolution , because we are facing a serious international security problem that needs to be dealt with .
Over the last 10 years 3 200 sailors have been kidnapped , 500 have been injured and 160 killed in this type of attack .
We are asking for something very simple : a mechanism that will enable a warship from any Community country in international waters to provide assistance to Community vessels , whether fishing or merchant vessels .
We are also asking for Europe to support the initiative in the United Nations aimed at expanding maritime law .
Ladies and gentlemen , Happy European Maritime Day !

( PT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , following the 2006 Green Paper , the action plan now under consideration in Mr Piecyk 's excellent report has seen the addition of a series of measures to be taken in the context of the European Integrated Maritime Policy .
We must therefore work on an overall vision not only as regards the seas as such , but also as regards the strong relationship with the coastal areas and all things connected therewith : employment , environmental issues , regional development , economic development , investing in marine research and excellence , that is , in a whole series of sectoral policies that , if we tackle them together now , will make it possible to achieve greater cohesion and success in policies put into practice and therefore to attain greater social , economic and environmental sustainability , which is absolutely crucial .
For that very reason this report stresses the need for research and innovation to play a central role in boosting regional development potential to support all those activities concerned and affected , either directly or indirectly , by maritime policy .
The alternatives for mobility on the seas and the challenge of wave power are some of the promises already being developed and they will certainly bring great expectations as regards future economic solutions and naturally are sustainable and deserve to be supported .

( PT ) Madam President , I should like to add my congratulations to those of my fellow Members who have already quite rightly congratulated our rapporteur , Mr Piecyk , and who have praised the work already done by the European Commission .
It is already four years since the present Commission made what was perhaps one of the principal political promises it has made ; it is appropriate to point out that very significant steps are about to be taken and the Commission is therefore to be congratulated .
I should , however , like to stress the point on the ecosystem approach to maritime policy .
Such an approach seems to me to be vital and , since I noted that the most recent Commission communication was rather reticent about full implementation in view of the problems that presents for various European seas , I should like to point out that we need to look at the outermost regions in view of their own specific characteristics .
There are no problems with a fully integrated approach there and I would challenge the Commission to do that as soon as possible .
( PL ) Maritime transport and ports and shipyards are rather forgotten sectors , although they have considerable growth potential .
A suitable conception is required for the development of competitive and safe maritime transport , ports and related sectors that would guarantee a high level of maritime safety .
Haulage by sea is a far more energy-efficient means of transport than road haulage .
Let us therefore give shipyards a chance to develop , including those in Gdynia , Gdańsk and Szczecin .
Let us remember that 90 % of the EU 's external trade and almost 40 % of its internal trade passes through ports .
Europe has been linked to the sea since the dawn of its existence .
It had to be that way , since our coastline is 70 000 kilometres long , or three times the length of Africa 's coastline .
For years the sea provided for our forefathers and was a source of considerable income .
The situation remains the same today .
Only an integrated and coordinated approach and appropriate action will enable us to benefit from the potential that our seas have to offer .
Madam President , in my intervention I would like to emphasise two aspects which I consider very important .
The first is the River Danube , which , through its connection to both ends of the continent , links the North Sea with the Black Sea .
Its potential is far from being exploited partly because the situation in the former Yugoslavia - situated in a central position of the river - has been blocking any initiative .
But with the prospect of a final solution so close it will be difficult to justify the lack of a comprehensive initiative to transform the Danube into the very waterway of the continent , bringing further economic development to its shores all along its course .
The second aspect is mainly political .
The maritime approaches to the Union are shared with countries which are not Member States .
Therefore the EU has to see to it that its neighbourhood policy and its instruments are so designed as to further the aims of an ambitious target of an integrated comprehensive maritime strategy .
( BG ) Marine space is definitely the area where the most integrated policies are applied in real terms .
The seas provide the environment for a multi-directional communication among countries , people , activities and policies .
In Bulgaria , we say , " The sea brings together all things distant . ”
I stress that the Black Sea , as an eastern border , and the Black Sea Region should enjoy equal treatment with all other marine policies .
Contemporary development poses serious challenges before marine countries , and not only before them .
On the one hand , there is the need to protect the environment , water , coastal areas , biodiversity , the employment opportunities of people , and on the other hand , there is the challenge to use marine resources in the interest of the development of society and the people .
There are many vital components in this policy .
I draw your attention to the need for strict oversight of marine transportation and of all energy projects involving the crossing of seas and to ensure sustainability and renewable marine resources .
Madam President , I am pleased today that we can see the importance of a joined-up approach to maritime policy .
The links between shipping , climate change and tackling pollution are essential if we are to preserve the common resource of our seas and oceans .
However , I hope that next year we can make more of 20 May and I think there is an opportunity next year with the 2009 European elections for every candidate in those elections to use 20 May to highlight the importance of our seas and oceans and coastal communities .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , honourable Members , the engaging debate and the range of interesting points you raised clearly demonstrate the commitment of this Parliament to move forward the agenda of the integrated maritime policy for the Union .
I assure you that the Commission fully shares this commitment .
Many speakers raised the point that we have not gone far enough in our proposals and that we could and should have been even more ambitious .
I take these comments as a sign of your real conviction that this policy is one that will be a success and will make a significant difference to the millions of European Union citizens and stakeholders that are affected by our oceans .
Let me reiterate that this is only the beginning of a whole process and that at this stage our primary focus is to ensure that we have the tools in place in the short term to be able to develop and direct the process in the right direction .
This is therefore the main thrust of the action plan adopted by the Commission last October .
On the issue of financing , I agree with Mr Queiró that financing is a key issue that will have an impact on the success of this policy .
Thus far we have mobilised financing from savings made in policy areas such as fisheries .
This was not to the detriment of fisheries programmes but due to savings and unused money .
The issue of future funding of the integrated maritime policy will be a crucial one in the discussions and in the future financial perspectives .
Let me now turn to a few specific points that have been raised and on which I would like to give an immediate comment .
I would like , however , to assure you that we will give full consideration to all the points that have been mentioned during the course of this debate .
With regard to emissions by ships I would like to recall the very significant agreement that has just been reached within IMO on SOx and on NOx .
I would like now to have more focus on CO2 and we should do so first within the IMO and , if this fails , we would have the obligation to act ourselves .
On the point that was raised by Mr Jarzembowski concerning the European coastguard , to whom I paid particular attention , I would like to underline that this is a very sensitive matter .
However , I foresee the development of a coordinated mechanism of national coastguards or of surveillance systems .
With regard to the fuel price increases , let me reiterate that this is certainly not due to any measures taken by Brussels , but it is an international problem and it is a new reality .
We are doing our utmost to find appropriate solutions to help the sectoral structure and to face up to this reality .
We have just reached agreement in fact with France in this regard and I am sure that details of this agreement will be made public in the coming days .
On the issue of piracy , of course the Commission is deeply concerned that incidents are on the increase .
We see a need and an opportunity for mutual assistance and support among the EU membership to face this threat and await further direction from the Council and from the Member States themselves on this .
I also agree with those who have made calls for more regional approaches and we will be working in this direction .
Our project on surveillance in the western Mediterranean is based on such a regional approach and we hope it can serve as an example to be extended to other regions .
In fact we will be looking at the maritime policy for the Baltic and Black Seas , which has been referred to by a number of speakers this morning , as we have just started to do with regard to the Mediterranean .
I do not have time to outline the actions already taken or envisaged in the short term on fisheries like IEU , the structural fishing practices , the ecosystem approach , discards , port strategy , maritime transport , marine maritime research , the marine environment , energy , governance , surveillance or the social exclusion of seafarers , all of which we are dealing with .
However , I can assure you that the Commission 's commitment to push forward this new policy hand in hand with Parliament in particular and with the Member States and stakeholders is guaranteed .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Written statements ( Article 142 )
I totally agree with the statement that Europe 's seas should be ' the cleanest in the world , with ... the most profitable economy , the best research and technology , the most modern and cleanest shipping ... and the most innovative ideas ' .
We have to recognise , however , that in order to achieve these aims , the Commission 's Action Plan for Integrated Maritime Policy should be much more ambitious .
On the other hand it is clear that the Action Plan contains ' too few practical measures ' , and that we have to admit that European maritime policy is not prepared for the consequences of climate change , particularly the rise in sea levels and the increased risk of flooding of ports and coastal regions .
The Members States must do their utmost to ensure that European maritime policy makes an important contribution to reducing greenhouse gas emissions .
Moreover , land-based pollution of the seas constitutes a significant proportion of overall maritime pollution .
I conclude that , in order to prepare , the Commission be asked to put forward an action plan to reduce land-based pollution .
For their part , the Member States are called on to act promptly to transpose the legislation in this field into national law .
in writing . - We in Europe must do our best to ensure that an effective maritime policy is in place which protects and pays sufficient attention to maritime issues .
The report highlights areas of success , but it also points out shortcomings .
In my eyes , key issues to be addressed in order to ensure such an improvement are a more coordinated cooperation and a strengthening of regional authorities and coastal communities .
These local actors have to be incorporated into any new strategy since they are the ones who are in charge of the actual implementation of any such strategies .
Through the method of increased cooperation between different coastal entities , more must be done to improve environmental protection of local ecosystems .
Additionally , in order to avoid environmental harm caused by ship accidents such as the crash of oil tankers in the Black Sea a few months ago , I would like to see clear guidelines on seafaring in European and nearby maritime waters .
This means that increased cooperation with seafaring third countries is necessary .
If necessary , the European Union should be ready to assist these countries with fulfilling the hopefully soon to be established stricter guidelines .
We would all profit from such an approach .
, in writing . - ( PL ) Not all EU Member States have access to the sea , but an appreciation of the significance of exploitation of the sea is universal .
The maritime industry , maritime services and activities located in coastal areas are estimated to contribute 40 % of the total GDP of the Community of 27 .
This is the reason why further practical steps to put into effect an integrated EU maritime policy are expected , steps that follow the European Commission 's Green Paper .
We are seeing efforts to make better use of the potential of coastal shipping , thus relieving overland routes ; sadly , my country 's contribution to this is negligible .
It does seem , though , that economic problems are being pushed into the background by environmental and climatic priorities .
This is a trend that is characteristic of all EU policies .
The difficulty , however , is to make one chime with another .
The rising dispute over protected areas in the Baltic is just one illustration of the tensions between the economic interests of the fishing industry and aspects of protection of natural resources .
From the Polish viewpoint - that is , that of a country ' working its way up ' - finding a balance between economics and the environment is essential .
The link between the report under examination and the first European Maritime Day celebration is pleasing .
It would , however , be of greater importance to fit out a common maritime policy with financial and legislative tools , to ensure that formal celebrations are not all we end up with .
1 .
Comparability of vocational training qualifications between the Member States (
2 .
Simplifying procedures for listing and publishing information in the veterinary and zootechnical fields (
3 .
The return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the territory of a Member State ( codified version ) (
4 .
Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (
5 .
Community Tobacco Fund (
6 .
The Evaluation of the PEACE Programme (
7 .
Meat and livestock statistics (
- Before the vote :
8 .
Employment Policy Guidelines for Member States (
9 .
2009 budget : Parliament 's estimates (
10 .
Trade in raw materials and commodities (
11 .
Outermost regions (
12 .
EU consumer policy strategy 2007-2013 (
- Before the vote on Amendment 3 :
rapporteur . - Mr President , in Amendment 3 I have been told that there is some confusion over the French text .
The words ' as appropriate ' have not been properly translated into French .
I would just like to ask if this could be checked afterwards by experts .
That will be done .
13 .
Progress made in equal opportunities and non-discrimination in the EU (
- Before the vote :
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , our group had intended to ask for three additional roll calls but , for whatever reason , they got lost in transit .
I would like , through you , Mr President - I have checked with the secretariat that it was in order to ask today - to have these three instated .
They are on : paragraph 2 , Amendment 4D ; paragraph 6 of the original text ; and finally , after paragraph 36 , our Amendment 12 .
I hope you will appreciate that this is a very sensitive dossier and we would like to be able to place on record not just what we are against , but also what we are in favour of .
( The President established that there were no objections to this amendment )
- Before the vote on Amendment 5 :
Mr President , we have been speaking about countries which have not adequately implemented or transposed the Anti-Discrimination Directive but there is one country which has not implemented it at all and therefore I would propose the following oral amendment : ' Calls on the Czech Government to effectively transpose the Employment Directive and for the Czech Parliament to overrule the veto of the Czech President ' .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
- Before the vote on Amendments 1 , 16 and 17 :
Mr President , very briefly , I of course support your discretion in interpreting the Rules , but it seems very strange for the PPE-DE Group to want to introduce roll-call votes at the last moment after the deadline has expired because they say that they want to positively explain their case , when their amendments seek to delete - to delete - paragraphs from this report .
I think that they are trying to cover up the cracks in their own group rather than actually say anything positive in combating discrimination .
Mr Howitt , it is probably the case that the vote referred to was filed too late , but I did ask you , and in this respect you were too late in asking to speak .
If you had asked straight away , perhaps we would have voted differently .
14 .
An Integrated Maritime Policy for the European Union (
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the votes : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( PL ) Mr President , there are a number of controversies surrounding the production and consumption of tobacco .
We must be aware that the fact of tobacco growing in the EU really has no impact on the level of consumption of tobacco products by our citizens .
Were we to restrict or cease tobacco production in Europe , this would not result in a fall in the number of cigarettes smoked .
Imported tobacco would be used .
I fully support the development of a public information programme to publicise the dangers of smoking , and this should be paid for by cigarette manufacturers and tobacco producers .
( CS ) I support information campaigns on the harmful effects of tobacco and the European Parliament resolution on a long-term plan to finance these campaigns with EUR 80 million , deducted from the subsidies to European tobacco growers .
This will mean that no burden will be placed on the EU budget .
Although the level of raw tobacco production in Europe is marginal , barely 4 % of world production , we are the world 's leading importer of raw tobacco and for most of our requirements we rely on the supply from third countries where tobacco is produced locally under conditions that are less closely regulated than those applicable to European tobacco .
However , I object to subsidising tobacco production in Europe , and not only as a matter of general principle : the public funds allocated for this area could be used elsewhere and in a better way .
( EL ) Mr President , we , the PASOK Group in the European Parliament , have voted in favour of Mr Berlato 's report .
We believe the public should continue to be informed on matters relating to tobacco and tobacco products .
There should be a similar policy with self-financed funds to inform the public on health matters relating to other products such as meat and fats .
Furthermore , in regions such as Greece , where tobacco production has been drastically reduced , we cannot see why subsidies should not continue in their present form until 2013 .

Mr President , first of all I have to apologise to the House ; as shadow rapporteur , I was unable to be here yesterday evening because my flight was not on time .
So I apologise for that .
Mr President , much has been written about the Northern Ireland peace process and this is another non-legislative report .
The question is , did it do any good ?
Yes it did .
It meant that many small groups in Northern Ireland , especially women 's groups , were able to get off the ground and were able to provide for their areas .
Was it fair in distribution ?
The answer is , no , it was not .
At the beginning PEACE I was certainly not fair ; PEACE II was better , and I certainly look forward to PEACE III being another improvement .
Unionist communities are not getting their fair share .
Greater care must be taken to ensure that the cross-border bodies that are in place respect the balance in the region .
There is no point in their existence if they do not .
A glaring example of this is ICBAN , a cross-border body which in my opinion should not receive any more funding until they rectify the position .
I would like to pay tribute , Mr President , to the many people since the beginning of the PEACE programme who have given their time voluntarily to work for the greater good of all , and I trust that Northern Ireland will go forward and prosper .
The people deserve no less , and I warn against the sinister forces that are still around in the region .

( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this report mainly for two reasons : firstly , because this report quite emphatically demands that the Member States finally implement the Lisbon Strategy and therefore measures on employment policy as well , and secondly , because it demands that good and affordable childcare arrangements finally be set up in the Member States .
This is a very important precondition for compatibility between family life and work .
This is particularly in the interest of single mothers because employment opportunities are thereby created and poverty can be combated .
These are therefore positive strategies that are needed in order to translate the appropriate employment policy measures into reality .
( PL ) Mr President , employment is an indicator of how we are progressing .
It is , however , difficult not to perceive certain defects in the sphere of social and territorial cohesion .
In the EU , considered as a sphere of wellbeing , there are still almost 80 million people , that is 16 % of all EU citizens , who are living in or threatened by poverty .
Many jobs are of low quality and there is no help to get young people into work or to extend the working life of many experienced employees , or to employ disabled people .
We must bear in mind that it is regions that are most backward in development terms that have to contend with the greatest problems .
High unemployment , low involvement of older and disabled people in employment , a high proportion of people remaining out of work for longer than 12 months , women finding it harder than men in the job market - these are just some of the problems they have to face .
In Poland this situation arises in the ' Eastern Wall ' regions .
The situation in the Czech Republic is worth commending : there they have made the lowering of barriers to employee movements one of the priorities of the forthcoming Presidency .
( NL ) The report by Mrs Van Lancker actually reads like a type of catalogue of good intentions and wishes .
Improved and better-paid access to the labour market for women , disabled persons and immigrants is always said in one breath , even though it concerns three very different groups .
An increase by five years in the average retirement age in the EU by 2010 , perfect childcare facilities , barely any school leavers without a job , a job for people who have been unemployed for four years , and so on .
That is all well and good , but it is not Christmas Day .
This is a Parliament ; not a Christmas pageant .
Mrs Van Lancker should know better .
We both live in a country in which , unfortunately , 10 million people in both parts of the country are simply crying out for a fundamentally different approach to the employment issue in the two parts of the country .
We no longer require uniformity at European level ; on the contrary , we require the possibility for the Member States and regions to take the specific measures that are required at local level both quickly and effectively . Thank you .
( NL ) This is an initial report on Parliament 's estimates of revenue and expenditure and , in actual fact , is teeming with the complacency of this institution , whereas the opposite should be the case in this initial report .
Everybody knows that money is thrown around in this institution .
The two places of work cost a tremendous amount of money , without actually offering true added value .
Each year always heralds enormous increases in the operating costs of this institution , this time camouflaged as it were as a necessary consequence of the Treaty of Lisbon , which to my knowledge has not even been adopted yet .
Then , of course , there is the new Statute for Members , a concoction by Eurofanatics , intended to cut even more firmly through the bond between Members of Parliament and the people who they represent , which will of course all cost a great deal , will it not ?
It is for all of these reasons , and many more , that I have voted against this report with conviction .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , regarding the report by Mrs Sudre , with my Group 's support I tabled a number of amendments as part of a compromise .
These amendments have been partially fulfilled . I would like to thank the Committee .
The amendments concerned recognition of the added value of the outermost regions in the fields of space , renewable energies , energy self-sufficiency and biodiversity , the importance of public service for the development of the ORs , acknowledgement of the lack of integration of the ORs into the European Research Area , recognition of the benefit of the NET-BIOME programme , and the ORs ' ability to make a significant contribution to established international priorities .
On the other hand , I am disappointed that this report has not fully integrated the social and cultural chapter for comprehensive development and that support and recognition of the regional languages of the ORs , funding of research into slavery and colonialism , and the defence of the rights of the native peoples of Guyana were not kept .
I am also disappointed that the report makes no significant commitment to strengthen research capability so that it matches potential .
I am disappointed that my proposal for regulation of postal and telecommunications pricing between the national territories and the ORs was not upheld .
As part of my assessment , I am disappointed that my request for a social and environmental impact study of the CMO in sugar and bananas was rejected .
However , I voted in favour of this report , which certainly provides valuable information and results for the ORs .
( CS ) I would like to follow up on the politically charged debate we had yesterday .
I did not support the Socialists ' proposal relating to collective redress because the responsible thing , in my opinion , is to wait for the results of the impact studies in order to assess the effectiveness of collective redress , in particular as regards the costs incurred by consumers .
Therefore , today I want to protest against improper comments during our debate yesterday by my fellow Member Mrs Gebhardt , who gives voters the impression that only the Socialists protect consumer interests , unlike the democrats who protect the interests of industry .
Such manipulative political rhetoric and demagogy bear no relation to reality and I object to them .
( NL ) I have voted with great conviction against the Lynne report because , in my opinion , it goes much further than countless reports approved by this Parliament in the past that , in themselves , are highly questionable .
Parliament is now once again throwing its doors wide open to a type of all-encompassing European anti-discrimination policy , which leaves barely a single social domain untouched .
I have said it before in this institution and I shall say it again : the fight against discrimination , if it is necessary , is a fight that falls within the exclusive competence of the Member States , and Europe must not assume the role of police officer or thought police in this regard .
Indeed , anyone who reads the Lynne report closely will come to the conclusion that it has less to do with the actual fight against discrimination than with undermining freedom of expression even further and , in particular , making political correctness into a legal affair .
I cannot agree with this and have therefore voted against this report with conviction .
( DE ) Mr President , we are all in agreement that every conceivable measure has to be taken against discrimination .
Therefore , we have also declared our faith in four directives .
A fifth is being prepared .
There is support for this one , too .
I have , however , voted against this report because it chooses a wrong strategy , because it does not advocate the implementation of existing laws , but instead immediately demands another new directive , which includes new authorities , new bureaucracies and new test procedures .
This means barriers are proffered instead of solutions .
All in all , this does not lead to discrimination being abolished .
My entire delegation is pursuing a different path .
My delegation would like the Member States to be asked ultimately to implement everything that already exists in current law and not , as the report suggests , taking the second step before the first .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , within the GUE / NGL Group there exists great tolerance for minority positions .
There are cases where those minorities like to show to the plenary of this Parliament that their viewpoint differs from the large majority inside our group .
Such was recently the case in the voting on my report concerning the relationship between Macedonia and the European Union .
We gave the limited speaking time for our group to one of our Greek Members , who declared that the European Union cannot admit any new member , as it would be better to abolish the Union itself .
Possibly this remark created the misunderstanding that my group did not follow my proposals to speed up the negotiations with this candidate Member State .
However , this position was only the viewpoint of the Communist Party of Greece , not of our group as a whole , which supported my proposals , as did the vast majority of this Parliament .
In the last debate this morning we again had such a situation .
On the Piecyk report on an integrated maritime policy , the two speakers from our group were the Greek Member Pafilis and the Portuguese Member Guerreiro .
Getting the opportunity to speak on this issue was very important for the parties they represent here .
In their national debate , those two parties prefer to use the Piecyk report as a symbol for everything that is wrong about the working conditions of seamen and port workers and also for everything that can be linked with NATO intentions for the military use of the sea .
The majority of our group , including the German and Netherlands delegations , take the view that the Piecyk report has nothing to do with those issues .
We twice supported the defeat of the Ports Directive but we are not against maritime policy in general .
We support Mr Piecyk 's proposals , which are focused on useful elements like the environment , the protection of coastal regions , education and the quality of labour .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this report for a number of reasons .
Firstly , one of the main challenges with which Europe has to contend is climate change .
This also has a direct bearing on maritime areas , especially coastal regions threatened by rising water levels .
Secondly , significant exploitation of maritime resources , especially through excessive fishing , as well as climate change , currently constitutes a serious threat to the marine environment .
Relations between oceans and the climate are treated as a major part of EU climate policy .
Thirdly , almost 80 % of pollution of the marine environment originates from the land .
Environmental threats such as shipwrecks on the sea bed and the remains of military ammunition and chemical weaponry are also of considerable significance .
Fourthly , intensive fishing has rocked the equilibrium of the ecosystem and is destabilising biodiversity too .
Fifthly , oceans and seas play an important role in the European strategy to ensure energy security .
On the one hand , they are a source of oil and gas , as well as a source of renewable energy .
On the other , they constitute a means and a route for the transportation of energy and thus increase energy security .
We therefore need to create a sustainable policy for development of the seas and oceans .
Written explanation of vote

I voted in favour of the report by my Swedish fellow Member Jan Andersson , under the simplified procedure , which confirms the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council repealing Council Decision 85 / 368 / EEC on the comparability of vocational training qualifications between the Member States of the European Community , which called for the Member States and the Commission to cooperate in drawing up Community job descriptions in specified occupations , and then match vocational training qualifications recognised in the Member States with the agreed job descriptions .
Because this decision was difficult to apply , it was sensible to repeal it .
The European Qualifications Framework ( EQF ) should address the limitations of the decision to be repealed , by focusing on improving the transparency of qualifications and by introducing a decentralised approach for cooperation which reflects the increasing complexity of qualifications in Europe .
Nevertheless , this unfortunate affair testifies to the need for clarification and simplification of Community law so that citizens can understand and use it in their everyday lives .
in writing . - ( PL ) A rise in employment in the European Union is directly related to occupational training and to mutual recognition of qualifications .
I supported Mr Andersson 's report because I feel that EU Member States should create a common model for verification of occupational qualifications regardless of the country in which they were acquired .
This will encourage employees to keep improving their skills , and students to study , gain new experience and improve their knowledge of foreign languages in various parts of Europe .
As a representative of Małopolska , the third largest region in Poland in terms of student numbers , I would also like to draw attention to the particular significance of diploma recognition for young people .
All academic exchanges and the potential to compare qualifications are of exceptional importance for young people wishing to acquire experience abroad .
One of the four principles on which the European Union 's common market is based relates to the free movement of people .
The free movement of people provides EU citizens with the potential to take up employment in another Member State .
Different education systems and regulations on occupational qualifications , however , often make it difficult to accept employment in occupations in which we hold qualifications .
This is why it is so important to be able to compare occupational qualifications between different Member States .
In the view of the European Commission and also of the rapporteur , Decision No 85 / 368 / EEC , which governs this matter , has not adequately facilitated the comparability of occupational qualifications to the benefit of workers seeking employment in another Member State .
This is what lies behind the decision to replace it with a newer and more effective instrument , the European Qualifications Framework , which increases transparency , supports the transfer of qualifications and makes it easier to assess the results of study .
I am pleased that this step has drawn broad support from various areas : social partners , industry and sector organisations , educational institutions and NGOs .
This guarantees broad acceptance of the changes being made .
I am therefore in favour of rescinding the Decision , and I feel that the EQF , as a tool enabling qualifications to be compared , will provide a chance for people to move more easily and will enable the aims that were not realised through Decision No 85 / 368 / EEC to be attained , thus ensuring greater worker mobility in the European labour market .
in writing . - ( HU ) I voted in favour of Mr Andersson 's report because I believe it is important to overturn all possible barriers to the harmonisation of professional and vocational qualifications .
It is important to repeal Council Decision 85 / 368 / EEC , since implementation of this decision failed to bring about comparability of professional and vocational qualifications .
The decision is now being replaced by other , newer and more effective European-level instruments such as the European Qualifications Framework ( EQF ) .
As an instrument for the promotion of lifelong learning , the EQF encompasses qualifications of all levels , from those achieved through compulsory education or adult education to those awarded in higher education and in professional or vocational education and training .
It is therefore important for Member States to give the maximum possible weight to education , as this is the basis for employment .
Education , alongside the acquisition of general learning and cultural knowledge , plays a vital role in developing a tolerant European society .
As well as learning to use energy efficiently and protect the environment , the next generation must also learn to accept and respect differences .
Education is the key to many other things too : it provides an opportunity for minorities , for example for Roma people , to preserve their culture and ensure their integration .
In minority communities nowadays there are increasing numbers of well-educated young people who are in a position to defend their own interests in the face of local authorities and governments .
In order for this to become the norm , we need to develop language teaching , devote more attention to minority cultures in schools , and minorities themselves need to take a more active role in teaching .
in writing . - ( DE ) In practice we have not always managed to smooth out all the difficulties regarding the mutual recognition of vocational training qualifications and maintain the quality of work here on the one hand , without creating unnecessary hurdles on the other hand .
In this regard it is alarming that the Services Directive granted foreign service providers a certain freedom to do whatever they want in the absence of the possibilities of effective control and unexplained sanctions , whereas domestic service providers still have to comply rigorously with the law and standards .
In a few years ' time our domestic enterprises will be demanding a re-evaluation of the regulations that apply to foreign enterprises so that they do not go under in the face of merciless competition .
Undercutting competition is therefore still being encouraged in the case of wages , working conditions and social security .
Nor should the EU be encouraging this development with the ' blue card ' .
We have enough skilled workers if only we are prepared to pay them a decent wage .
I voted in favour of the report by my Polish fellow Member Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg approving , in its first reading under the codecision procedure , the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council to codify Council Directive 93 / 7 / EEC of 15 March 1993 on the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the territory of a Member State as amended by Directive 96 / 100 / EC ( OJ L of 1 March 1997 ) and Directive 2001 / 38 / EC ( OJ L of 10 July 2001 ) .
I am disappointed that the codification process is taking such a long time ; it should be remembered that it was on 1 April 1987 that the Commission decided to instruct its services to proceed with the codification of all legislation at the latest after its 10th modification , emphasising that this was a minor matter and that its services should strive to codify the texts they were responsible for within an even shorter interval .
The President-in-Office of the European Council ( in Edinburgh in December 1992 ) confirmed these imperatives .
Finally , the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission agreed in an interinstitutional agreement on 20 December 1994 that an accelerated procedure could be used .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the Geringer report because I agree that the cultural objects that were removed from the territory of a Member State illegally should be returned to the lawful owner .
This report supports the idea of issuing a European Directive for establishing administrative cooperation between Member States on the return of cultural objects removed unlawfully .
The Directive will stipulate the establishment of a central authority in each Member State , which would exclusively deal with this issue and cooperate with the similar authorities established in the other Member States and Interpol .
At the same time , such a directive could simplify the administrative procedure existent at present in the European Union and , personally , I am looking forward to seeing this draft law implemented .
in writing . - I endorse the codification of legislation relating to cultural objects unlawfully removed from Member States .
The existing legislation has been modified a number of times and it is important that we have a clear legal framework within which Member States can secure the return of stolen cultural property .
I also believe that cultural objects should be returned to local communities within Member States when there is clear local support for such an initiative .
Within this context I fully support , for example , the return of the Lewis chessmen to a location in the Western Isles of Scotland and , likewise , the St Ninian 's Isle treasure to Shetland .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am voting in favour of the report by Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg on the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the territory of a Member State .
I consider it fundamental that Member States should be able to work together to settle disputes between national governments and to recognise the importance of the protection of cultural assets at a European level .
Cultural assets and works of art represent the heritage of the citizens of Member States , who have every right to be able to visit and admire them .
There are in fact cases of scandal and disputes concerning stolen works of art that go back decades .
I consider Community intervention to resolve these situations absolutely necessary .
in writing . - Although having voted in favour of the report , I must draw attention to the fact that Article 13 of the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the territory of a Member State states that this directive shall apply starting from 1 January 1993 .
Let me remind you that after the illegal annexation of the Republic of Estonia by the Soviet Union in 1940 numerous artefacts were moved from Estonia to different destinations in the Soviet Union that have not been returned , among those objects the Presidential collar .
I hope that the Commission has not forgotten about that and will soon produce a proposal for a directive dealing with unlawful removals prior to 1993 .
I voted in favour of the report by my Italian fellow Member Mrs Locatelli , written under the consultation procedure on the proposal for a Council regulation setting up the Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking .
Putting Europe at the forefront of fuel cell and hydrogen technologies globally is an excellent policy .
Fuel cells are discreet , efficient energy converters that considerably reduce the production of greenhouse gases .
They provide great flexibility since they can consume hydrogen and other fuels such as natural gas , ethanol and methanol .
It became essential to set up a Community instrument with this Joint Technology Initiative ( JTI ) to create partnerships between the public and private sectors in the research field under the Seventh Framework Programme for research and technological development ( FP7 ) .
The JTIs , which mainly result from work by the European Technology Platforms ( ETPs ) reflect the EU 's firm commitment to coordinate research in order to strengthen the European Research Area and achieve European objectives for competitiveness .
I support the idea of giving more assistance to SMEs .
I agree with the rapporteur that we should apply the Cooperation Specific Programme which identifies fuel cells and hydrogen as one of the six areas where a JTI could have particular relevance .
This proposal setting up the Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking is the fruit of work carried out within the European Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology Platform and aims to contribute to the implementation of the Environmental Technologies Action Plan .
Fuel cells are very quiet , highly efficient energy converters capable of delivering substantial cumulative greenhouse gas and pollutant reductions , since they can be operated on hydrogen and other fuels , such as natural gas , ethanol and methanol .
The introduction of hydrogen as a flexible energy carrier can contribute positively to energy security and stabilise energy prices as it can be produced from any primary energy source , and as such can introduce diversity into the transport mix , which is currently dependent on oil .
Although substantial EU public funding has been channelled towards research into fuel cells and hydrogen , those technologies are unlikely to be on the market as soon as we would hope .
I welcome the Berlato report on the possibility of extending the financing of the Community Tobacco Fund until 2012 .
The EU feels the need to protect this important sector because the complete withdrawal of subsidies would cause enormous damage to production , with negative repercussions for employment in the regions involved .
In some areas , tobacco can represent 35 % of agricultural exports and a potential fall in production would do serious economic and social harm , particularly if the local economy is already in difficulty .
It is important to underline the fact that the financing earmarked for the Community Tobacco Fund will be used to cover all initiatives and education and awareness-raising campaigns on the damage caused by smoking .
Therefore , I hope that the proposal to extend the anti-smoking communication fund is supported by my colleagues , thereby also protecting the interests of the consumer .
The Community Tobacco Fund financed by the transfer of a certain amount of tobacco aid for the years 2006 and 2007 promotes initiatives to raise public awareness of the harmful effects of smoking .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has proposed extending the funding until the end of the financial perspective and has increased the percentage rate to 6 % .
Tobacco consumption in Europe has not changed and the gradual reduction in European production has been replaced by tobacco imports .
The parallel question of maintaining the CMO in tobacco and therefore of postponing the 2004 reform that should have applied from 2010 must be addressed during the health check of the CAP because decoupling causes the almost total abandonment of production with no sustainable alternative from the point of view of the economy and jobs , which has had very serious consequences for the rural areas concerned but no impact on public health .
I do not think the fight against smoking and the extension of a transitional period enabling European producers to find alternatives to growing tobacco and reduce the negative impact on our regions are mutually exclusive .
in writing . - ( PT ) Financing of the Community Tobacco Fund is aimed exclusively at promoting information initiatives on the damage tobacco products can cause .
The proposal presented by the European Commission provides for the transfer of an amount equal to 5 % of the tobacco aid granted for the calendar years 2008 and 2009 .
For its part , Parliament is proposing the transfer of 6 % of tobacco aid granted for the period 2009 to 2012 , assuming that aid to producers is continued .
As we know , the European Commission has , unfortunately , moved towards decoupling production aid , which has been instrumental in reducing tobacco production in Portugal , although tobacco is still being imported from producer countries .
The Commission is still linking this Fund to the system of support for tobacco growers on the grounds that it is the only source of financing provided for .
In line with that rationale , and based on the view that information campaigns will continue to be of value , the amendments would seem to be appropriate .
It also seems relevant to support the recent formal request made to the Commission by almost all the tobacco-producing Member States , for the Commission to bring forward a proposal for a regulation extending the current system of support for tobacco production until 2013 , for consideration as part of the discussions in progress on the CAP ' health check ' .
in writing . - I have voted against this report because as someone who has argued from the very outset against subsidies for tobacco production , I believe that it would be devastating to extend the phasing out of tobacco subsidies from 2009 to 2012 .
I support the European Commission 's proposal which indicates there is no justification for tobacco subsidies to continue to be linked to tobacco production .
I believe that the Parliament 's report which tries to reopen the debate about phasing out of subsidies by 2009 is totally unacceptable .
I see no logical reason to continue supporting tobacco production particularly due to the negative consequences tobacco has on health and healthcare costs .
in writing . - I voted against the Berlato report on the Community Tobacco Fund .
The EU , in harmony with numerous Member States , has sought to reduce tobacco use by measures such as the ban on tobacco advertising .
It is therefore rank hypocrisy for the EU to continue to fund tobacco growers within Europe .
in writing . - The European Parliament resolution on the Tobacco Fund proposes to extend agricultural subsidies on tobacco .
We vote against in protest at the whole system of tobacco subsidies .
For the EU to financially support the growth of tobacco is ridiculous , to use part of this money to support anti-smoking campaigns hypocritical .
All agricultural subsidies for tobacco should be abolished immediately .
Anti-smoking campaigns are useful but can easily be financed in other ways .
in writing . - Sergia Belato 's report on the Community Tobacco Fund seeks to reopen the debate on extending tobacco subsidies until 2012 .
There is no justification for tobacco subsidies to be given to farmers from both a public health and economic perspective , therefore their extension is simply not necessary .
Indeed , given the EU 's stance on tobacco , I find the proposals contained in the report to be not only hypocritical but immoral .
I therefore could not vote in favour of the report .
I have voted in favour of the Berlato report , as has the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left .
It guarantees Community subsidies for tobacco growers for a further period and affords them protection against unfavourable discrimination in relation to growers of other agricultural products , for which subsidies are to continue .
It is particularly important to make use of all the possibilities offered by existing resources .
We must prevent tobacco growing from being abandoned and stop the exodus of the rural population during this transitional period for the crop .
in writing . - ( PL ) Although the vote on the Belato report was positive , it does not resolve the problem of smoking and tobacco production .
You could say that we have postponed a decision on these important matters , by several years .
This problem will consequently return and will remain a problem for as long as people keep smoking tobacco .
It will need to be solved , but not at the cost of farmers who have tied themselves to tobacco production and incurred the relevant investment outlay .
Tobacco growing provides a living for tens of thousands of families , who often have no other way of obtaining income , as , for example , in regions of Poland with poor soils .
This is why we need strategic decisions today , taken with due consideration , not under pressure from lobbyists representing intermediaries and traders functioning in an international system .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mr Berlato and voice my support for his report .
The report is extremely balanced and represents a rare and positive example of integration between the EU 's agricultural and health policies .
By proposing to increase the percentage rate of the deduction for subsidies paid to tobacco growers and releasing additional funding of over EUR 81 million for anti-smoking campaigns , the report manages to satisfy both camps with regard to certain sensitive areas .
On the other hand , this report extends partially coupled aid to producers at no additional cost to the EU budget , and without discriminating between them and other agricultural sectors , confirming the position expressed by Parliament in Strasbourg in March 2004 .
in writing . - You will be aware that over many years this Parliament has been very vocal in its efforts to highlight the dangers to health of smoking tobacco .
Yet through all that time the European Union has given millions of euros in support to farmers for growing that very same product .
It really is hypocritical in the extreme to carry on such a policy .
The report from the Committee on Agriculture tries to reopen the debate on extending tobacco subsidies until 2012 .
Yet the Commission proposal , that the report was allegedly drawn up in response to , is about extending the financing of the Community Tobacco Fund , which as we know is used to warn of the dangers of smoking tobacco .
What was attempted here by the Agriculture Committee was a sleight of hand that would have done any top-class magician proud , but thankfully this has been spotted and hopefully exposed for what it really is ; namely an attempt to extend subsidies to tobacco farmers .
This has to be resisted by this Parliament on moral , economic and health grounds .
The Commission 's position is clear .
There is no justification for tobacco subsidies linked to production .
It is now high time Parliament adopted the same line by rejecting the Agriculture Committee stance on this issue .
That is why I shall vote against .
in writing . - Over half a million EU citizens die every year due to tobacco addiction .
Not a penny of EU taxpayers ' money should go on the Community Tobacco Fund .
The Community Tobacco Fund should cease to exist .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by my British fellow Member Mrs de Brún on the evaluation of the PEACE Programme ( EU Special Support Programme for Peace and Reconciliation in Northern Ireland ) which stresses that local empowerment has been an essential part of peace-building in Northern Ireland and that the participation of civil society in this process has largely contributed to improving local policy making and implementation .
I support the idea that cooperation between participants in programmes financed by PEACE and IFI ( International Fund for Ireland ) should not cease when the programmes come to an end .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the de Brún report on the PEACE Programme which rightly highlights the importance of local empowerment in the peace-building process .
The PEACE Programmes have made a valuable contribution to the peace process in Ireland and efforts to build upon this in the future are to be welcomed .
in writing . - I am pleased to support the PEACE programme and hope it will continue to help communities at a grass-root level .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my German fellow Member , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , which proposes to modify the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning meat and livestock statistics , but in a way that should permit agreement at the first reading under the codecision procedure .
Livestock statistics ( twice a year for pigs and bovine animals , and once a year for sheep and goats ) , monthly slaughtering statistics ( head and carcass weight of pigs , bovine animals , sheep , goats and poultry ) and meat production forecasts ( meat from pigs , bovine animals , sheep and goats ) are essential for managing EU markets but the legislation in force , which had become very complex , urgently needed to be dealt with .
It seems sensible to include poultry meat in addition to statistics for meat from pigs , bovine animals , sheep and goats .
in writing . - ( RO ) The simplification of procedures is a major objective of the European institutions , which are aware that overregulation is a burden both for their operation and for the efficiency and competitiveness of economic operators .
For the farmers and agricultural producers in Romania , reducing the bureaucratic burden is a requirement in order to be able to fully benefit from the advantages of joining the European Union .
The statistical reports should be taken into consideration both by Eurostat and in particular by the national institutions and companies .
As regards meat , the statistical data represent a picture that allows taking actions in due time in order to regulate the market , by establishing intervention mechanisms .
The statistical reports should be unitary , correct and available in due time in order to avoid major imbalances on the Community market , affecting producers , consumers or both groups equally .
This report has precisely this mission and I welcome it !
At the same time , national authorities should also rigorously ( and , where necessary , firmly ) implement actions that would result in seriousness from respondents .
This issue should be treated with the same care both by the person collecting and processing statistical data and by the economic agents sending them .
Apart from rigorousness , this regulation will also bring about the uniformity of these data by common standards applicable across the European Union .
in writing . - I welcome Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's report on the proposal for a regulation concerning meat and livestock statistics .
The regulation aims to simplify existing legislation in this area .
I voted in support of the report 's recommendations .
I voted in favour of the report by my Belgian fellow Member Mrs Van Lancker , written within the framework of the consultation procedure , on the proposal for a Council decision on guidelines for employment policies of the Member States .
I salute the excellent job done by my colleague and friend Mrs Morin , the rapporteur for our political group , particularly on flexicurity .
At the risk of getting off the subject a little , since this Council decision basically aims only to make recommendations to the Member States on the basis of Article 128 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , I am disappointed that , although it was its duty in application of Article 138 of this Treaty , the Committee does not push forward the social partners and affirm that the time has come to create European employment legislation with the support of these social partners based on the procedure laid down in Article 139 of the EC Treaty .
We cannot have an ambitious employment policy if we do not establish European labour legislation with the support of the social partners .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lisbon Strategy , particularly following the mid-term review , represents the EU 's most important strategic commitment and is finally being accompanied by concrete results in terms of growth and employment .
In this respect , Mrs Van Lancker , while recognising that the strategy has the advantage of having contributed to job creation , expresses the view that quality and safety need to be improved .
It should be noted in fact that despite the steady fall in the number of unemployed , the number of workers with fixed-term contracts is on the increase , with clear implications and consequences .
The figures reveal the need to monitor individual Member States to ensure that they tackle employment issues with an increasingly balanced , flexicurity approach : this means new jobs , but also better conditions for workers in general .
As the rapporteur emphasises , however , the Lisbon Agenda needs to take more account of common social objectives : the buzzword of our strategy should now be inclusion , and not just growth and employment .
in writing . - ( PT ) The current situation shows that , ten years after the first guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States , there is ever less employment with rights , which in itself shows that the strategy is not aimed at the promotion of employment with rights .
On the other hand , the constant changes to those guidelines accompanied by the European Union 's ever more neoliberal economic guidelines have contributed to increased job insecurity .
Although the rapporteur includes some palliatives concerning poverty or social inclusion , there is in fact no mention of the need to break away from the present macroeconomic and employment guidelines , which are completely neoliberal and where competition and flexibility reigns supreme , which is why such proposals amount to nothing more than a smoke screen , failing to tackle the root cause of the problems .
Some other proposals even tend to promote flexicurity or , rather , the deregulation of the labour market , defending flexible and reliable contractual arrangements through modern labour laws , collective agreements and work organisation , with the indication that the Member States should implement their own action plans based on the common principles of flexicurity adopted by the Council .
We therefore voted against the report .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Van Lancker Report dealing with Member States ' employment policies .
The report correctly emphasises the need for Member States to implement guidelines in a way which seeks to combat discrimination whether it is based on sex , racial or ethnic origin , religion or belief , disability , age , or sexual orientation .
The report also calls for Member States to recognise national traditions in implementing employment policy .
I consider that the recognition of Europe 's diverse traditions should be at the heart of all EU policy .
in writing . - ( PL ) I abstained from the vote on Mrs Van Lancker 's report on employment policy guidelines .
The report did not , unfortunately , succeed in avoiding contradictions .
On the one hand it contains plenty of phrases such as ' knowledge-based society ' , ' competitiveness ' and ' technological challenges ' while on the other hand there is talk of the need to ensure ' employment security ' , ' stable employment ' and such like .
The former stresses intentions , the latter , keeping things as they are .
No progress can be made without disrupting the employment structure .
This has never happened in history .
Instead of talking about employment security , understood as maintaining existing jobs and types of work , then , we should talk about something else , namely ensuring access to work ; access to work that exists now , at this moment in time .
This should be our common concern .
The employment situation in the European Union is not very good .
The average unemployment rate of 7.3 % in 2007 , not taking account of assisted jobs , is higher than that of the other major economic blocs .
In North America it is less than 5 % .
Far from improving the situation , the guidelines that have been presented to us will make it worse .
The Lisbon Strategy , viewed in a positive light by the rapporteur , opens our economies up to unfair competition , particularly from communist China , which practises true social dumping .
Furthermore , by demanding the reduction of ' employment gaps between third country nationals and EU citizens ' , the report clearly forms part of the immigrationist policy pursued for decades in our countries which , by bringing more than 1.5 million immigrants in from outside Europe , is in the process of turning us into third world nations .
Restoring national preference , which is fair positive discrimination , reducing the weight of immigration and thereby reducing the tax burden on our companies and employees , and implementing the principle of Community preference to protect the European market : these are the principal measures that should be taken to develop employment in Europe .
in writing . - I salute the rapporteur 's move to strengthen the social dimension of the Lisbon strategy .
The call for the introduction of a balanced approach to ' flexicurity ' and the introduction of a clause on active inclusion , I feel , will strengthen employment policy across Europe .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( PL ) There are numerous contradictions in the report on employment policy in the Member States .
The rapporteur writes that the renewed Lisbon Strategy is delivering results in , among other areas , a rise in GDP in the EU in recent years and a fall in unemployment , and that the employment guidelines do not need a complete revision , but merely amendments to a number of individual points .
The rapporteur also notes that in recent years as many as 6 million young people aged between 18 and 24 have left school early and discontinued their education , and that youth unemployment represents 40 % of total unemployment in the EU , with this percentage being twice as high among migrants .
In addition 78 million people are living in poverty , which is twice the population of Poland .
She furthermore considers the rise in the number of jobs obtained at the cost of a fall in their quality , and the rise in the percentage of people employed part-time and for fixed periods , often under the terms of contracts concluded under duress .
Reality speaks for itself , but we do not always want to listen .
The reality is that society is not integrating , but dividing .
Poverty is not diminishing , but spreading with each year that passes .
Discrimination against women , older people and migrants in the labour market is not falling , and stereotypes in thought and in action are failing to disappear .
in writing . - ( SV ) By and large the content of the report is positive , but it is hypocrisy to speak of social responsibility , local economy and equality while at the same time seeking to ensure that procurement rules prohibit such things from being taken into account .
I will not contribute to this .
The report gives a false impression of reality , and I therefore abstain in the vote .
in writing . - ( PL ) I support this report and Mrs Van Lancker 's view that the common social objectives of the Member States should be better reflected in the Lisbon agenda .
I also support the transformation of the current Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs into a strategy based on growth , jobs and integration .
I feel it is essential to promote common social standards at EU level .
The creation of quality jobs is necessary , along with a strengthening of the values of the European social model .
In my view , one of the key tasks in the EU Sustainable Development Strategy is the establishment of an integrating society in which aims and operational strivings take priority in order to limit the number of people threatened by poverty and social exclusion and greatly increase the part played by women , older people and migrants in the labour market and promote youth employment .
in writing . - This report sets some important guidelines in the budgetary process of the 2009 budget and , overall , we strongly agree with the rapporteur 's determination to continue to respect the voluntarily imposed 20 % ceiling on parliamentary expenditure .
2009 will be a year that will bring much change to the way the Parliament works and we believe that , in order to maintain this discipline , it will be necessary to closely scrutinise all spending proposals to ensure that they deliver value for money to the taxpayer .
In particular we make no apology for reminding the Parliament that the biggest single saving they could make would be to abandon the two seat working of the Parliament .
We also strongly support the rapporteur 's proposals to provide the means for the removal of asbestos from the Strasbourg Parliament buildings .
British Conservatives look forward to receiving the rapporteur 's further thoughts in due course , and therefore have abstained on the final vote on this report .
I voted in favour of the report by my Polish colleague Mr Lewandowski on Parliament 's estimate of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2009 .
This budget has to meet major challenges such as the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon if it is ratified by the Member States , the fact that 2009 is an election year for Parliament and the entry into force of the new Statute for Members
Although I obviously agree with the fact that we need to be vigilant about the status of budgetary expenditure , I think we must be unyielding over expenditure associated with multilingualism ( translation and interpreting ) , which is a condition of the political success of the European Union .
We should also develop facilities for MEPs to receive visitors because these visits are very much appreciated and help citizens to get to know more about the European Union .
Finally , in my opinion we should increase the staff of MEPs and the European Parliament 's committees in order to ensure their independence and the high standard of their work , for example , when dealing with the other European institutions , lobby groups or national parliaments .
in writing . - ( PL ) The year 2009 will bring many challenges for the European Parliament , linked above all to the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the elections to Parliament , the new Statute for Members and the change of term .
The overall budget level for 2009 will have to meet the challenges despite being below Parliament 's traditional voluntary limitation to 20 % of outlay on administration .
The use in this year 's procedure of a pilot process involving early and closer cooperation between the Bureau and the Committee on Budgets in the case of all items with significant budgetary implications is worthy of note .
The new approach is aimed at ensuring the most rational use of available means and identifying potential savings .
I must state my satisfaction at the sensible estimations of expenditure on the new Statute for Members , especially as there is potential to fine-tune the amount at a later stage .
It is also pleasing to see the integration of the proposed 65 new posts into the estimates for 2009 with the idea of strengthening Parliament 's legislative activity and services to Members , while at the same time placing 15 % of those appropriations in reserve .
The announcement that the priorities established in the 2008 budget will continue in connection with interpreting and with the analytical service of the library is also pleasing .
A successful conclusion to this year 's budgetary procedure will also require debates to be held and specific decisions to be taken without delay concerning Parliament 's policy on real estate .
The budgetary process has now begun with the submission of the Commission 's proposed Community budget for 2009 .
In previous budgetary processes , the European Parliament 's budget has accounted for approximately 20 % of the amount budgeted under heading 5 - ( administrative expenditure ) of the multi-annual financial framework .
The rapporteur is proposing that similar levels should be retained for the 2009 budget .
Such a decision should not block or hinder the availability of financial resources required to respond appropriately to the needs already mentioned to increase the number of staff and improve interpretation and translation services , respecting equality and the right to use all the official languages in the European Parliament and the activities it promotes .
Furthermore , this has been a recurring problem , since the need to improve services such as interpretation and translation is frequently mentioned , but the financial resources required are not allocated ; rules created specifically to discourage the use of different languages are frequently applied .
Just look at the criteria adopted in the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assemblies .
On the other hand the report makes no mention of guaranteeing workers ' rights , in particular with regard to the EP 's increased outsourcing of services over recent years .
in writing . - ( RO ) The European Parliament should become aware of the importance of the principle of solidarity , according to which the regions that have remained behind or are less developed should be supported , including financially , from the European Union budget .
Unfortunately , approximately one year since its accession , Romania continues to dominate the top regarding the Gross Domestic Product per inhabitant at regional level .
6 out of the 8 regions are among the 15 less developed regions in the EU and the North East Development Region where I come from still remains the poorest of the regions in the 27 Member States .
Romania 's rhythm of economic growth is insufficient at this moment in order to very rapidly reduce the gaps that separate us and the disparities we find everywhere and the extremely low absorption of structural funds is certainly one of the reasons that place us near the top of the European Union poverty list .
This is why the politization of the central administrative act makes Romania become a net contributor to the EU budget , paying approximately 1.1 billion euros last year .
The only consolation that remains is that 16 million euros will be returned to our country due to the fact that 2007 was the first year in which a budgetary surplus was recorded .
The employment guidelines drawn up by the EU in collaboration with centre-left and centre-right governments have been enthusiastically contributed to by the European Parliament 's political representatives of capitalism .
They promote the most barbarous exploitation of the working class in order to achieve the aim of the Lisbon Strategy , which is the unrestrained growth of profit for plutocrats .
At the centre of EU and government policy is the notorious ' flexicurity ' , which spells out the complete dismantling of labour relations .
The EU is using unemployment as a means of intimidating workers .
It is doing away with collective agreements and full-time steady employment . These are being replaced with individualised employment contracts and mainly part-time jobs having precious little in the way of labour , wage , social , insurance or pension rights .
The EU aims to strike a decisive blow against state systems of social protection , insurance and pensions in all Member States .
In the mediaeval employment conditions being prepared by the EU , the ' model ' employee as described in EU employment guidelines is an ' employable ' person working under conditions of every conceivable form of part-time work .
He or she has no rights , having been trained and retrained in disposable skills according to the capitalist needs of the time .
He or she is constantly on the move in search of employment , works until advanced old age or even death , and provides untold riches to be plundered by the plutocracy .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by my Swedish fellow Member Mr Holm on trade in raw materials and commodities .
I agree with the idea that there is a need to secure the European Union 's supply of raw materials and to ensure access to raw materials on the world markets , while noting that the European Union currently does not provide a coherent strategy that would allow its economy to face the challenges to its competitiveness due to enhanced competition for access to raw materials .
I am disappointed that the report does not discuss the issues linked to currency manipulation in the world which , together with reduced exchange rates , distorts fair competition .
Among the raw materials , oil would have merited particular examination and I reiterate my proposal to create a European instrument for the annual regulation of crude oil prices , which is at least worth looking into - not to fight market forces , which we have to accept , but to regulate the suddenness of their application in the internal market and soften the impact of crude oil price rises in the cost / price chain of the sectors concerned ( fishing , transport , etc . ) .
Mr Holm 's report seems to identify fairly clearly the problems the world is currently facing because of the unprecedented rise in the cost of raw materials .
For European countries without natural resources of their own , this means problems with competitiveness , and therefore jobs , security of supply , greater dependence , and so on , and for poorer countries , puts their development in jeopardy and causes food shortage riots and the like .
Although some of the causes are mentioned , particularly the predatory behaviour of some emerging countries like China and the liberalisation of trade in agricultural products , others - such as speculation , Europe 's Malthusian agricultural policy emanating from Brussels , the principle itself of global free trade , etc . - are obscured or nearly obscured .
As for the solutions , it is clear that Parliament believes essentially in the regulatory virtues of the free , competitive market .
However , that market is now revealing its limitations , and cruelly so .
Energy , food and raw materials are not just products like any other : people 's survival depends on them .
It is time that in its international trade relations , Europe , from Brussels , defended its own interests and those of its Member States first and foremost , instead of trying to create a globalist utopia at any cost , human or social .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report considers aspects beyond traditional trade in raw materials and commodities .
In the new international situation various production factors and components may be regarded as raw materials , including energy .
The increase in the prices of those products is serious for European industry , which imports them from outside its borders .
The markets respond to the increase in demand on the part of more producers facing natural and environmental condition and react to financial speculation .
It is worrying that this international situation has encouraged price levels capable of wiping out economic growth in Europe .
Once that trend is established , the race for resources will give rise to pressure and shortages which are likely to pose a challenge to many generations of managers and will certainly have implications for the governance of the modern world .
By means of this report the European Parliament calls on the Commission to raise within the WTO issues of access to raw material markets .
The objective is to obtain reciprocity and one appropriate route is via the WTO .
Negotiations on these products should never go below regional level so as to promote integration , development and sustainability .
In order to prevent major speculation and conflict , we must ensure that our trading partners holding these resources receive a fair price for their commodities .
We do not share the vision with regard to trade in raw materials contained in the report .
We do not agree with the criticism that describes policies and measures introduced by third countries as : ' creating obstacles to free and fair access to raw materials ( ... ) , which have the effect of limiting access by EU industries ( ! ) to raw materials and commodities ' .
Each country has the inalienable sovereign right to decide how it uses its raw materials or how it trades in its commodities .
It is for the people of each country to decide upon the use of their resources and of the wealth created .
The report does not mention that the real problem actually lies with the EU 's neoliberal model .
Steeped in neo-colonial ambitions , it seeks to return many countries to the role of producers of raw materials for the countries of the EU , using technology and dominance and control of the market mechanisms - including financial speculation - to promote economic dependence and exploitation by the multinationals .
What is needed is a clear break from the reigning economic and social model , ending dominator / dominated relationships , defending national sovereignty , developing the economic potential of each country and complementarity and solidarity in its external relations , and production geared to satisfying the needs of the people and to preserving the planet .
in writing . - The report dealing with trade in raw materials and commodities expresses many important issues from a development perspective .
The report emphasises the problematic occurrence of speculation in inflating prices and increasing volatility on the markets , which needs to be regulated .
It also calls for more support for diversification in developing countries , and highlights the importance of policy space for these countries to enable the development of not least their agricultural sector .
The report also criticises the increase of meat consumption , and asks for ways of tackling that .
However , the report also expresses points , which we find deeply problematic .
This refers foremost to the repeated emphasis on the international competitiveness and the urge for the European industry to secure cheap access to raw materials .
We do not support this focus , and can only conclude that the neoliberal face of the EU once more has been articulated .
In general the report is a step in the right direction compared with earlier positions of Parliament on trade policy .
in writing . - I welcome Jens Holm 's report on trade in raw materials and commodities .
Free and fair access to raw materials is important for the EU economy .
Nevertheless , the implications of price volatility in raw materials and commodities for developing countries also need to be taken into account .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - Some news , although good in itself , cannot fail to give us concern as regards the consequences .
That is partly the case with the increase in the price of raw materials .
The good news is that , as shown by various indices , an ever larger proportion of the world 's population is attaining levels of consumption previously unknown to them .
The problem , however , lies in some of the consequences , above all the immediate consequences that such growth in consumption - and therefore in demand - might have .
The laws of economics apply even in distorted markets and an increase in demand results either in an increase in supply or , as in this case , in an increase in price .
That is what has happened .
The European Union should encourage a general opening up of markets , so that ever more producers are able to take advantage of the increase in demand and it should foster an increase in trade .
At the same time we have a duty to provide direct support to those immediately hit by these new circumstances : those who are unable to face the increase in the price of essential goods .
Market distortion rarely produces positive effects , above all in the long term , but there is nothing to stop us , quite the reverse , from providing funding for those who have less .
in writing . - ( NL ) Something is clearly going wrong with the trade in raw materials and commodities .
There is currently much speculation on the prices of raw materials .
Minerals , for example , are fairly expensive .
Despite their natural resources , countries that are rich in minerals are remaining poor or becoming even poorer .
Developing countries are also unsure of their own food supply , despite the fact that they produce a great deal of food .
The problem is that food is being exported on a massive scale at excessively low prices .
Furthermore , climate change forces us to manage this energy-guzzling market differently : extraction of minerals is to be discouraged , and localised food production and consumption are preferable to the global trade in agricultural products .
In short , the trade in raw materials and commodities , as regulated today , has a highly disruptive effect and requires a multilateral approach .
The report on the trade in raw materials and commodities initially comprised a just complaint against the ultraliberal trade policy proposed by the EU in late 2006 . In the meantime , however , it has been toned down to such an extent that I can no longer lend it my support .
For instance , it contains barely any significant policy proposals .
Even worse is the fact that the report labels free access to raw materials and commodities as a right of the EU and pushes forward a bilateral trade policy as the ideal instrument .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by my French colleague and friend Mrs Sudre , which she wrote in response to the Commission communication on the strategy for the outermost regions ( ORs ) .
I support the idea that taking into account increasingly mathematical justifications for the measures taken should not serve as a pretext for calling into question part of the Union 's policy to assist the ORs nor deter actors by imposing conditions on them which are too difficult to meet .
Community interventions should be a catalyst for a spirit of enterprise that will transform the ORs into centres of excellence , driven by sectors that fully exploit their advantages and know-how , such as waste management , renewable energies , energy self-sufficiency , biodiversity , student mobility , research into climate change and crisis management .
Finally , I support the fact that the future common immigration policy should devote special attention to the position of ORs , which are all EU external borders .
I applaud the job done by Mrs Sudre which , unremittingly and with a great deal of skill , determination and compassion , speaks up on behalf of the outermost regions .
in writing . - ( PT ) The motion for a resolution in this report contains recommendations on the assessment and future prospects of the strategy for the outermost regions , including in particular :
indicators other than merely GDP being used to measure the degree of cohesion achieved ;
cohesion policy being better coordinated with other Community policies across the board , so as to enhance synergies , and current and future European policies being more effectively adapted to the realities of the situation of the outermost regions ;
policies and measures in their favour that are not transitional and are adapted to their different needs and offer solutions for the permanent constraints to which they are subject ;
Community support for agriculture in the ORs and provision for support measures for their respective fishing industries ;
differential treatment in the transport sector , particularly as regards the inclusion of civil aviation in the Emission Trading Scheme ;
the need for the debate on the future of the strategy for the ORs to include Lisbon strategy implementation in their regard ;
the future common immigration policy should devote special attention to the position of ORs ;
placing ORs at the heart of EU maritime policy ;
ensuring future Community funding of the strategy for the ORs and the compensation of handicaps linked to their outermost status .
The report deserved my support and that of my group .
I called for the report to be adopted and voted in favour .
We regret that the majority in Parliament rejected our amendments seeking to incorporate into the motion for a resolution on the future of EU policy for the Outermost Regions ( ORs ) - adopted today in plenary - the valuable and important proposals in the interests of the ORs , approved in the Committee on Fisheries .
Some people argue that it is a resolution on regional policy rather than on fisheries .
That is a fallacy .
The motion for a resolution is the EP 's contribution on the future of Community policies for the ORs , and it is here in Parliament that we shall have to explain the proposals approved , in particular those adopted in the EP Committee on Fisheries - which is what happened with the EP resolution on maritime policy .
That is why we sought to present them again and also to be consistent with the view which we take in Portugal .
On the other hand , we regret the rejection of our proposal that clearly explained that the Community support measures for the ORs should be of a permanent nature .
The rapporteur states that the aim is that eventually these measures will no longer be necessary .
That is basically a ( pseudo ) argument to cover up the fact that the constraints faced by the ORs are permanent in nature and will need to be negotiated in every budget or Community framework .
in writing . - ( FR ) France is very concerned about the European Union 's policy on the outermost regions .
It is essential that the specific characteristics of these regions be taken into account , much more and much better than they are now , by the politicians in Brussels , especially :
through trade policy , as production by the outermost regions is in competition with that of the neighbouring countries that benefit from highly preferential conditions from the EU ;
through immigration policy , as these regions are particularly vulnerable to immigration and the influx of illegal immigrants is creating economic and social problems there that are far beyond the local capacity to overcome them ;
through provisions concerning State aid and especially by maintaining the tax exemptions that these regions benefit from , which are periodically called into question in the name of European law .
I am particularly worried about the legal ambiguity that exists regarding Saint-Barthélemy : this small French island has been a territorial authority since 2007 , and when it changed its status it wanted to preserve the tax exemption that is essential for its economic survival .
However , the EU appears to consider it to be among the outermost regions , in other words a territory of the Union that is subject to Community law .
It would be unacceptable for this ambiguity to put at risk the desire for autonomy that was clearly expressed by 95 % of the population .
in writing . - ( RO ) The main issue of the seven ultra peripheral regions is that , although they represent 1 % of the European Union population , they deal with a delicate economic and social situation , aggravated by their insular position far away from the continent , the difficult surface , relief and climate , as well as their economic dependence on a limited number of products .
Taking the actions listed by the Commission and supported by the Rapporteur a priority , such as the improvement of competitiveness , reducing difficulties related to accessibility and integration of ultra peripheral regions into the regional geographic environment , we can contribute to improving the socio-economic situation of these regions , homogenising their development with the other regions of the European Union and turning to good account their resources complementarily with the Community requirements .
This is also one of the reasons why I voted for this report and I would like to add the need to give increased attention to ports , since 6 out of the 7 ultra peripheral regions are islands .
The modernization of ports infrastructure can contribute to the promotion and development of the tourism industry , production sector and local markets .
in writing . - ( DE ) Supporting the outermost regions of the European Union is in keeping with EU thinking on solidarity in order to reduce the disadvantages generated by their being difficult to access .
In particular , we certainly need to ensure that these regions do not lose their agricultural self-sufficiency capability , which also applies generally to the European Union as a whole .
In this regard it must be our common endeavour to maintain small family farms - also those of hill farmers in Austria , for instance , as well as every individual traditional small , medium-sized and organic farmer - so that they can continue their ecologically useful work and we do not lose our food sovereignty to giant farms or become dependent on big agricultural concerns .
For this reason I voted in favour of the Sudre report .
in writing . - ( PT ) The ORs have specific characteristics that have come to be taken into account in measures to promote European growth and development .
However , there is still much to do for further development of those regions and for us to draw more benefit from that frontier area with other global economic blocs .
Cross-sectoral and complementary measures in favour of the ORs have helped to improve the economic and social situation of these regions and it is still important to work on improved accessibility , stronger competitiveness and better regional integration .
Nevertheless , there are still difficulties on the ground that are not being taken into account , such as the preservation of traditional agriculture , increased support for the development of key sectors or the maintenance of differentiated tax regimes .
Making the most of the specific assets of the ORs is thus the strategy that will ensure the sustainable development of the outermost regions in terms of attraction and cooperation .
Making new priorities of climate change , demographic change and migration management , agriculture and maritime policy is a good measure that needs to be complemented by the necessary diversification of OR economies , by their specific characteristics and by exploiting the rules in force as widely as possible , using the most appropriate tools for resolving the specific problems faced by the ORs .
I abstained from voting on the own-initiative report by my Finnish fellow Member Mr Lehtinen , in response to the Commission communication on Community consumer policy strategy for 2007-2013 .
I am naturally in agreement on the fact that the 493 million European consumers should be at the heart of the three main challenges that the Union has to face : growth , employment and the need to form closer links with citizens , and that they are the life force of the economy , as their consumption represents 58 % of the EU 's GDP .
Nevertheless , I remain convinced that while we have succeeded with the internal market through competition ; in other words paying particular attention to consumers , I consider that we should , in response to the current global challenges , place producers at the heart of our concerns .
Moreover , in the absence of a serious legal study , I have considerable reservations about the hasty manner in which the report tackles the issue of collective action by consumers against producers by asking the Commission to put forward a comprehensive solution at European level offering all consumers access to collective appeal mechanisms for settling cross-border disputes .
To offer consumers better protection , Mr Lehtinen 's report proposes improving the existing legislation in the relevant areas , making it simpler and smoothing out any regional differences .
The EU has a duty to develop a real transnational economic policy aimed at the protection of consumer rights and at safeguards for consumer health .
The proposal in question - which I support - is intended to create a harmonious legal framework to guarantee a solid , integrated system for product safety and to instil real consumer confidence in goods on the European market , thereby triggering widespread growth in consumption .
To arrive at an effective consumer protection policy , however , the EU must invest a great deal of energy in improving market surveillance , if necessary by stepping up international cooperation , and in education and awareness-raising campaigns for the consumers themselves : until consumers have been persuaded that its products are completely safe , the European market cannot realise its full potential .
This would allow Europe to become a truly competitive market able to satisfy and protect its consumers and encourage them to be bolder : real players in the market , in fact .
in writing . - ( PL ) I supported Mr Lehtinen 's report because the transparency of the regulations protecting European consumers is beneficial to those consumers and also to manufacturers who are competing among themselves .
Economic changes in the new Member States have brought about the introduction of new principles of action for market entities .
The range of goods on offer to consumers today is increasingly rich in terms of both products and services .
I nevertheless feel that the position of consumers , especially in the new Member States , where we all recall the beginnings of the free market , remains relatively weak vis-à-vis large concerns .
It requires greater transparency and an upgrading of the relevant legal framework guaranteeing consumers suitable protection of their rights .
I was also glad to accept that part of the report in which the rapporteur speaks in favour of support for small and medium-sized enterprises in the EU .
In my region , Małopolska , such enterprises account for 95 % of the total , and most of them have not been around for very long ( 30 % are less than 5 years old ) .
A genuine consumer protection policy must obey various principles .
Firstly , there must be a fair income distribution and redistribution policy , based on decent wages , adequate returns for producers , specifically small- and micro-scale farmers , manufacturers and traders , to encourage markets close to the areas where the food is produced and promote food security and sovereignty .
Secondly , there must be an effective policy to combat speculative trade and finance , and there must be information for consumers and guarantee of transparency .
The report , however , pays little attention to these issues ; on the contrary , it advocates positions that are more concerned with defending the interests of economic and financial groups and liberalising services than with consumers as a whole , although in parts it does contain some positive proposals , except that this is in a totally neoliberal framework in which consumers are the weakest link in the whole process .
For example , the report stresses that enhanced liberalisation of the services market in particular is needed to promote competition , thus offering lower prices for consumers , which we well know is contradictory and serves only the interests of companies .
That is why we were unable to vote in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( PL ) Consumers are at the heart of the common market and should therefore be its main beneficiaries .
In my view , though , a balance should be maintained between legislation that strongly protects consumers and the conditions for the functioning of businesses .
Nobody underestimates consumers ' rights to press their claims .
I think , though , that we should in particular provide consumers with the opportunity to put their rights into effect rapidly and effectively .
In my opinion that extra-judicial means should be especially strongly emphasised when considering consumer complaints .
I would like to make the point that , according to data from Business Europe , as many as 90 % of disputes relating to consumer rights are settled without recourse to the courts .
The cost element of proceeding in this way is also not without significance , as it is very much lower than when courts are involved .
I feel that the amendment voted through in Parliament calling for the creation of a European system of collective redress does not guarantee more effective consumer protection .
This matter should be considered by the European Commission , and we should delay taking a decision until such time as the results have been published .
It may be that this matter is adequately regulated by the Member States ' legislation .
Moreover , I fear that this system creates conditions for actions the real beneficiaries of which will not be consumers , but the world of lawyers who profit from the rise in rates for proceedings conducted .
in writing . - ( SV ) I think it is a good thing that the EU is taking responsibility for consumers and I therefore voted for the report .
On the other hand , I am opposed to ideas of harmonising consumer protection in the EU and appealing to more countries to adopt the euro .
in writing . - The report proposes to establish an EU consumer ombudsman .
We are sceptical towards this idea for several reasons : This post may create significant expenses which risk undermining the funding of consumer organisations .
Moreover , the creation of another post at European level risks being too remote from citizens .
Having said this , we still support the report since its strengthens consumers access to collective redress , which is fundamental for consumers ' trust in making safe cross-border purchases .
in writing . - I voted against the Lehtinen Report on the consumer policy strategy because , whilst there was much in the Report with which I could agree , I fundamentally reject the call for enhanced liberalisation of services .
It is true that certain services can benefit from a liberalised economic environment and the freedom of movement for services is one of the four fundamental freedoms of the EU .
However I consider that public services should be run for the benefit of the communities and individuals they serve and not for private profit .
Services in areas such as health , education and lifeline transport links should remain publicly owned , publicly accountable and the responsibility of Member States .
in writing . - Lasse Lehtinen 's report on the EU Consumer Policy Strategy 2007-2013 reiterates the need to empower EU consumers and enhance their welfare and protection across the Union .
My vote reflects the need for improved consumer protection across the EU .
in writing . - ( PL ) EU consumer policy strategy 2007-2013 presents the proper directions for the development of consumer protection , but the point should be made that ad hoc actions are far too little .
We must draw up a plan for further specific and consistent steps that will lead to consumer protection becoming an element in all EU regulations .
We must make sure that consumer protection itself does not become a separate area in European policy , but is written into every European policy establishing the European internal market .
Without the proper protective mechanisms , this important European project of creating a single market will not be completed .
We must also bear in mind that protection of EU consumers has an external dimension - one reminder of this at least being the recent problem with imported Chinese toys .
Our aim should be to achieve full consumer confidence in all products on sale on the internal market .
Furthermore , a true internal market should offer a European system of pursuing collective claims .
In setting this up , we must draw conclusions from the US system of class actions , with all its drawbacks .
in writing . - ( NL ) Mr President , in principle , the report by Mr Lehtinen has my support .
As approved in the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , it contains all the essential issues we must deal with in response to the Commission communication : the pursuit of a horizontal approach , attention to contract law , the acknowledgement of the role of consumer organisations , the need for balance , the particularity of SMEs , the importance of soft law and of an improved knowledge base , and the need for more attention to the services sector .
We also consider the passage on access to redress important .
This is a dimension of the maintenance of law and order .
It is a pity , however , that an amendment to section 40 was adopted in the plenary sitting that favours group actions before an analysis is available , based upon the examination requested in the report .
Group actions encroach fundamentally upon procedural law .
It is therefore unacceptable to put the cart before the horse . This is why I have abstained from voting .
I abstained from voting on the own-initiative report by my British fellow Member Mrs Lynne regarding the progress made in equal opportunities and non-discrimination in the Union since the transposition of the directives of 2000 .
I agree with the fundamentals of the principles laid down in the report , in particular in terms of non-discrimination in fields such as education , lifelong learning , employment , social protection , housing and healthcare , the images of groups that are victims of discrimination in the media and advertising , physical access for disabled people to information , telecommunications , electronic communications , the different methods of transport and public spaces , social benefits and access to them , as well as the goods and services made available to the public , etc .
Nevertheless , I am not convinced of the need for a new directive on the basis of Article 13 of the Treaty Establishing the European Community .
The political debate needs to continue .
To be continued ...
in writing . - Conservative MEPs abhor discrimination in all its forms : we have tabled our own amendments to this report to make this crystal clear .
But while some aspects of ongoing discrimination may still be a problem , to suggest that more EU legislation is somehow the solution is way off the mark .
The UK already has a full body of law regarding discrimination , which continues to prove difficult to implement in practice .
There needs to be better implementation of existing laws , and better understanding of the problems in their implementation , before we go down the road of yet more EU Directives .
This Report , an own-initiative Resolution calling for yet another ' comprehensive and broad ' EU Directive against Discrimination , is at best political posturing and at worst an open-ended invitation to the Commission to produce yet more and more one-size-fits-all EU legislation in a very sensitive area .
As one UK Chamber of Commerce member succinctly put it , ' Most discrimination is not going to be solved by extra legislation .
Time would be much better spent on multi-cultural , multi-faith events to change perceptions ' .
We agree .
in writing . - This report seeks to go beyond the competence given to the EU by the Member States in the area of anti-discrimination .
The Treaties clearly set out those areas where the EU has the power to propose legislation and what Member States can do on their own .
This report , which is an own-initiative report , i.e. there is no proposal for legislation from the Commission , goes beyond what the present Treaties allow and also goes beyond the position if the Lisbon Treaty is ratified .
In fact , any anti-discrimination measures which fall within EU competence are a matter for our Member State Governments and each Government has a veto .
This is NOT for the European Parliament .
Under existing Treaty powers , all Member States must agree to laws in the area of anti-discrimination .
Indeed Ireland has a very robust body of National anti-Discrimination law , e.g. Equal Status Act , and has an excellent record .
Improving the rights of the disabled and specifically addressing restrictions to goods and services is commendable .
This report , however , has gone beyond the competence of the Union and as such the Fianna Fáil delegation have rejected it .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Lynne on progress made in equal opportunities and non-discrimination in the EU , since we need to urge the European Commission to keep a strict check on the transposition of Directives 2000 / 43 / EC and 2000 / 78 / EC on equal treatment between persons , and on the implementation of national laws based on those directives .
I would stress that women are particularly vulnerable to acts of discrimination at work , above all as regards their maternity choices .
The right to be protected against any form of discrimination is a fundamental and basic principle of the European Union , and yet effective legal instruments and implementation are lacking , so that it is in danger of being emptied of all meaning .
The report contains some positive aspects , namely the insistence that the Commission and the Member States should end all discrimination based on the employment contract by ensuring equal treatment for all workers , health and safety protection , provisions for working and rest time , freedom of association and representation , protection against unfair dismissal , collective bargaining and collective action .
It also emphasises the importance of access to training as well as the continued protection of acquired rights by covering periods of education and training , improved care opportunities , the maintenance of essential social rights such as pension rights , training rights and the right to unemployment benefits during changes in a person 's occupational situation , between employment contracts and between dependent and autonomous employment .
In view of all the above , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats tried to amend the report in various aspects , in particular as regards the content of the demand for a non-discrimination directive ; they were not successful since the voting went against them .
For our part we reject the PPE-DE 's proposals and supported the rapporteur , although we disagree with some points in the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Lynne report on combating discrimination in the Member States , in particular in employment , is entirely in keeping with the texts adopted by Parliament on this subject .
Behind the general terms and the few mentions of women or the disabled , it is not at all difficult to distinguish the real , obsessive focus of your attention : immigrant populations .
In order to evade the issue , everything is intentionally mixed together : discrimination against women , young people , the elderly , people of ethnic origin , etc . , but also national origin .
If there is any type of discrimination that can be perfectly justified morally , legally and politically , it is national and European preference in terms of employment and social benefits .
Correlatively , your proposals for ' positive action ' , as you do not dare to use the real words , are well and truly reverse discrimination , the first victims of which would be , and already are , Europeans themselves in their own countries .
You think , however , that this type of discrimination is normal .
in writing . - ( PL ) As a member of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , I entirely support Mrs Lynne 's report .
I have no doubt that the international law in force and our own EU adjudications are - from a formal aspect - desirable and good solutions .
I therefore regret that their entry into force is continually coming up against numerous obstacles , even in our Europe , which would appear to be more democratic and less discriminatory .
It is astounding that we might need to call on EU Member States to treat the provisions of Directive 2000 / 78 / EC with full respect and to carry out constant and systematic monitoring of progress in the elimination of all forms of discrimination from political , social and economic life .
This is of particular importance for the citizens of my country , Poland , who , enjoying the benefits of the common market and freedom of personal movement , live and work in many EU countries .
I am very sorry to have to say that there is increasing evidence of discrimination against my fellow countrymen solely on the grounds of their nationality .
Disturbing information of this kind is increasingly coming to light from Germany , Great Britain and Ireland .
It would be a paradox if the European Parliament were to become so heavily and effectively involved in combating manifestations of discrimination in the world yet were unable to cope with respect for human rights at home - that is , in the EU Member States .
All EU citizens surely deserve equal and non-discriminatory treatment !
in writing . - I welcome Elizabeth Lynne 's report entitled ' Progress made in equal opportunities and non-discrimination in the EU ' .
I believe that we should not be aiming to promote a hierarchy of discrimination in the EU .
Colleagues in the Conservative Party obviously feel differently and I would defy them to find an explanation for a position that I find fundamentally indefensible .
We need a horizontal Article 13 directive and I voted in favour of Ms Lynne 's report .
in writing . - The Fine Gael members of the PPE-DE Group , Mairead McGuinness , Avril Doyle , Gay Mitchell and Colm Burke abstained in the final vote on the Lynne report on ' Progress made on equal opportunities and non-discrimination in the EU ' .
The report points out and criticises Member States for ' deficiencies in the transposition and implementation ' of Directive 2000 / 78 / EC and calls for more rigorous monitoring of Member States ' transposition and implementation as well as strengthening of EU law in this area .
We support the call for full transposition and implementation of EU Directives , but note that infringement procedures against some Member States have still not been concluded .
We strongly support measures to end discrimination , including additional measures , but cannot at this stage support a call for further EU Directives in this area .
It is important that existing EU Directives are fully implemented and the Commission should continue to ensure compliance at Member State level before there could be any consideration of new EU measures .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for this report and I consider it important for the progress achieved , but especially for the future actions required in order to achieve equality of chances and the fight against discrimination .
The provisions of this report represent one of the most progressive parts of the legislation , with real benefits for an important number of European citizens for increasing life quality .
According to the data provided by the Commission , 51 % of European citizens believe that not enough efforts are made in their country to combat discrimination and provide equal chances .
77 % of EU citizens believe that women are under-represented in management positions and 72 % believe that the population over 50 is under-represented at the workplace .
The success of the report is guaranteed by two things : important support of the population for adopting measures in order to combat discrimination , which would ensure equal opportunities for everyone , as well as our political solid commitment , of the European social-democrats , for building a society where nobody is excluded and where all citizens have equal chances .
I congratulate Mrs. Lynne on the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) The active and energetic defence of non-discrimination is not to be confused with relativisation in which everything is equal , everything is equivalent and all choices , options or circumstances have equal value in the legal order .
For example , the promotion of policies protecting larger families in no way constitutes a breach of the principle of non-discrimination .
Just as the refusal to set legal frameworks for all possible forms of relationships between human beings could not be compared to any type of discrimination .
What I support , and think it is my duty to support in the field of non-discrimination is , above all , the defence of a broad concept of individual freedom and not a collectivist State view of freedoms , in which only what is promoted by the State is regarded as non-discriminatory .
Society may and does have preferences , that find their expression in public policies .
It cannot and must not impose conduct or restrict conduct that does not conflict with the freedom of third parties .
There are currently no less than five directives on equal opportunities and non-discrimination in the European Union .
Twenty-eight actions for infringement are in progress against Member States that have not transposed them .
This can only be deplored .
Nevertheless , should we systematically impose gender equality by force and through repression ?
I do not think so , quite the contrary .
Let us stop stigmatising this discourse on discrimination by classifying minority groups and populations as ' good ' , in particular immigrants , and making Europeans feel guilty as if they were constantly practising discrimination .
We need to put an end to these leftist refrains that do not do anything to help people who are being discriminated against , who are on the contrary stigmatised by them .
Let us place more emphasis on each person 's personal responsibility to end discrimination of any kind and on the need , especially for immigrants , to adapt to our rules , our laws and our values .
in writing . - ( PL ) Discrimination , both indirect and direct , with regard to gender , age or disability , is still with us in Europe .
The Internet portal Pracuj.pl ran a questionnaire among people in work and seeking work , employers , students and graduates .
According to the questionnaire , the social groups most discriminated against in the labour market are the over-50s and disabled people .
The most common manifestation of discrimination in the labour market is employers being guided by prejudices and stereotypes when selecting a candidate for a job - nearly 62 % of respondents saw that as a major problem .
After that we have unequal access to job offers / lack of suitable job offers ( 56 % ) , unwillingness to provide employment for an undefined period / on a work contract ( 44 % ) and lower-than-average pay for the particular environment or industry ( 43 % ) .
My view is that an anti-discrimination policy , as one of the fundamental principles of the EU , has a very definite task to perform in this sphere .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote for this own-initiative report since it contains several worthwhile considerations relating to the creation of a system for the sustainable ecological and economic management of the EU 's marine environments .
We have also chosen to support the idea of a European Maritime Day .
There is reason for scepticism over grand campaigns launched by EU institutions , but in this case we chose to support the idea since the environmental situation in the seas is a matter of urgency .
However , we think that the report contains passages which can be interpreted as being too favourably disposed to commercial fishing .
The fishing fleets in the EU currently suffer from overcapacity and need to be reduced for the sake of the declining fish stocks .
It is wrong to guarantee commercial fishermen jobs in fishing .
Active vocational training projects are among many measures which can be applied to assist workers and regions which are dependent on the fishing industry .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by my German fellow Member Mr Piecyk on an Integrated Maritime Policy for the European Union , drawn up in response to a Communication from the Commission on the same subject .
The maritime areas ( two oceans - the Atlantic and the Arctic - and four seas - the Baltic , the North Sea , the Mediterranean and the Black Sea ) and the coastline ( 70 000 km ) of Europe are essential to its well-being and prosperity ; they are the trade routes , the climate regulators , sources of food , energy and resources , and popular places to live and for leisure among Europeans .
I would like to add that they are a reservoir of water , which will be a rare commodity .
In a context of globalisation and rapid climate change , there is an urgent need to act by establishing an Integrated Maritime Policy for the European Union , based on the acknowledgement that all the issues relating to Europe 's oceans and seas are linked to each other .
Maritime surveillance , which is essential for ensuring safety and security in the use of maritime spaces , maritime space development , which is an essential planning instrument for making ecologically viable decisions and a complete and accessible source of data and information , are very interesting paths to follow .
Europe , partly because of its strategic geographical location , must set an international example in its maritime policy , harnessing the economic potential of the oceans and seas as an invaluable source of renewable energy .
Similarly , setting up regional centres of excellence and providing encouragement and support for university research centres already in coastal areas , accompanied by an action plan based on innovation , research and environmental protection of oceans and seas , would represent a further step forward towards fully sustainable use of marine resources .
The report also suggests that the action plan must make an important contribution towards reducing greenhouse gas emissions through the use of fair emissions trading systems , by consolidating research into the oceans and seas as a renewable energy source and by introducing equal tax treatment of electricity and marine fuels .
This would mean that , when docked , ships would be encouraged to use a land-based electricity supply .
Finally , the proposal for coordination between the European agencies responsible for maritime surveillance would discourage and prevent attacks on European vessels and at the same time combat illegal activities such as smuggling , drug and human trafficking , thereby rendering international waters decidedly safer .
Given the opportunity to discuss Mr Piecyk 's report on an integrated maritime policy for the European Union , I would like to draw attention to implementation of the Water Framework Directive , which envisages action aimed at the identification and disposal of chemical weapons left behind in the Baltic Sea and the North Sea after World War II .
I am referring to the plans surrounding the NordStream pipeline , the construction of which may disturb weaponry dating back to World War II that is lying on the bottom of the Baltic Sea .
According to preliminary estimates , there are somewhere between 40 000 and 60 000 tonnes of chemical ammunition , of which about 12 000-13 000 tonnes are poisonous combat material .
We do not even have detailed information on the location of a large part of this weaponry , so the risk of a disaster is enormous .
Moreover , when the pipeline is commissioned , chemicals may be used that are harmful to the environment .
This may lead to an environmental disaster with very serious consequences .
This constitutes a direct threat to the life and health of people living on the shores of the Baltic Sea .
The report mentions bringing about a situation in which ' Europe 's oceans and seas will be the cleanest in the world ' .
I am therefore appealing for the European Union to take specific action on an integrated maritime policy and to ban the construction of projects that threaten the safety of European residents .
in writing . - ( DA ) Shipping must be included in CO2 quota trading .
The socialist delegation is working to have shipping traffic included in the CO2 quota trading system .
Although this mode of transport is particularly environmentally friendly compared with most modes of goods transport , shipping accounts for very significant CO2 emissions that clearly exceed the share from aviation traffic , for example , which is also set to be included in the quota trading system soon .
Today , the delegation has therefore voted in favour of the point in the report on an integrated maritime policy for the European Union that clearly states that we must include shipping in the trading of CO2 emissions .
We have therefore discarded an amendment proposal from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance concerning the same issue .
It is unclear whether the Green amendment proposal refers to a specific model for emissions trading .
If this is the case , we have had no explanation of what exactly it contains .
At present , we therefore do not wish to adopt a particular model , which in the worst case could hamper and delay agreement on the inclusion of CO2 emissions from shipping .
in writing . - ( SV ) We entirely agree with some of the views presented in this report , for example that it is urgent to combat sulphur and nitrogen oxide emissions from ships and that the common fisheries policy is too bureaucratic and centralised .
However , most of the proposals put forward are negative .
We have trouble seeing what could be gained from the introduction by the EU of a ' European Maritime Day ' .
We also question the value of EU financing for maritime research and a plan to survey and map wrecked ships and submerged archaeological sites , and we are critical of the idea that EU institutions should address the subject of maritime spatial planning .
The report constitutes a further example of how the European Parliament seeks to gain influence in ever more areas of policy .
Respect for the subsidiarity principle , which is often paid lip service but seldom applied , is conspicuous by its absence .
We cannot accept that .
We have therefore voted against the report in the final vote .
in writing . - ( PT ) We think that a maritime policy based on cooperation between the Member States , that add value and promotes policies and measures linked to the sea set by each country , could have a positive impact .
Nevertheless the EP is reaffirming objectives - for the integrated maritime policy - although less strongly than in the previous report , that we cannot agree with .

Apart from being imbued with a federalist and geostrategic vision of the use of the exclusive economic zones of each Member State , it advocates the rapid integration of intra-Community maritime transport into the single market , i.e. , its liberalisation ; it stresses the initiatives aimed at establishing a European coastguard , an area falling within the competence of each Member State ; it advocates incorporating shipping into emissions trading - yet more bargaining ; and , paradoxically ( or perhaps not ) it declares itself in favour of maritime policy being given appropriate consideration in the EU budget ( ? ) after 2013 ; i.e. , it is once more advocating centralised EU political and economic authority whilst offering nothing in return ( even if that could ever be acceptable ) .
Certainly the EP motion for a resolution contains some proposals with which we agree - some of which we tabled - but they do not make up for the negative content of the motion for a resolution .
We therefore voted against it .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Piecyk Report on the EU 's maritime policy .
I particularly welcome the section which recognises that the CFP has been an unmitigated disaster and that the EU must learn from its failures in delivering an integrated maritime policy .
My own country , Scotland , is at the very heart of Europe in maritime affairs and we can benefit from an EU-wide policy which covers areas as diverse as the environment , transport , tourism and employment .
However , recognition must be had for the diversity of Europe 's maritime areas and decisions must not be taken on the " one-size-fits-all " basis which has come to represent Europe 's failed fisheries policy .
I voted in favour of this text because I consider it to be essential for the European Union to equip itself with an Integrated Maritime Policy as quickly as possible .
The EU would in fact have a great deal to gain from adopting a coherent strategy for implementing the different sectoral policies that have an impact on the maritime field , such as for example certain social , industrial or environmental policies , and also promoting the establishment of a real ' mutually supporting system ' .
I also welcome the will to step up the fight against climate change and pollution through the emergence of real centres of innovation , which will also be a source of competitiveness and social welfare for the coastal regions of the Union .
Finally , I support the report 's proposals regarding the security aspect of maritime policy , and in particular the idea of drawing up common rules in this area and sharing surveillance methods within the Community maritime space .
This would enable us both to combat maritime piracy , a phenomenon that we have seen the return of in recent years , and to protect the natural heritage and archaeology of these areas in order to prevent any catastrophes that would have disastrous effects on the development of the Union 's coastline .
in writing . - Willi Piecyk 's report ' An integrated Maritime Policy for the European Union ' addresses the challenges that Europe 's maritime industry now faces .
Its recommendations will help facilitate Europe-wide decision-making in the area .
It is only in establishing an integrated maritime policy that global issues such as globalisation and climate change and their effects on our oceans can be effectively engaged with .
I voted in support of the report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express myself in favour of Mr Piecyk 's report on an integrated maritime policy for the European Union .
I agree that an integrated maritime policy is necessary not only because the oceans and seas represent one of the most important economic and trading resources for the EU and thus must be protected , but also because effective and sustainable concerted action between the Member States would improve the way in which it is managed and developed .
One of the points I consider to b fundamental is that maritime traffic should be regulated and improved in accordance with the objectives for tackling climate change and that the marine resource should be the focus as a potential source of clean , alternative energy .
in writing . - Our seas are our common resource .
We need a coordinated approach against the exploitation and pollution of our seas .
We can only do this by working across EU countries which have an interest in maritime policy .
I hope that next year more EU citizens will be able to participate in the European Maritime Day .
Perhaps , as next year this day will fall during the European Elections , all candidates will use 20 May to highlight maritime policy issues .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.55 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Misleading ' Directory companies ' ( e.g.
' European City Guides ' ) ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Council on misleading directory companies , ( e.g.
' European City Guides ' ) , by Arlene McCarthy , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection - B6-0152 / 2008 ) .
author . - Mr President , the clear objective of this oral question is to get action and redress for the thousands of small businesses across the EU which are being defrauded daily out of millions of euros by sham European ' directory companies ' .
This Parliament has received hundreds of petitions and a mass of correspondence to our constituency offices from businesses who have fallen victim to these prolific scams against small businesses .
We must , of course , recognise that these scams have been in existence for over 40 years , according to the legitimate directory publishers represented by the EADP .
But this is without doubt a scam which requires a European response .
As an example , the structure of the Maiwolf holding company , which owns the European City Guide and other such companies , is a complex web of European scam companies registered , operating and domiciled in several Member States of the EU and in the EEA countries Switzerland and Liechtenstein .
Despite legal action and fines issued by courts in several Member States , it continues to operate , making a mockery of EU cooperation on law enforcement .
Indeed it took seven years through the courts for the company to be shut down in Barcelona , only for it to immediately restart trading in Valencia .
Maiwolf Holding is a hub of a web of companies operating scams not just at EU level but at global level and continuing - I am afraid - to escape the long arm of the law .
By responding to the European City Guide , businesses were led to believe that they were simply responding to an information request or updating or correcting their data .
They were led to believe it was a free service , and then suddenly they found themselves slapped with an invoice for thousands of euros which , if mentioned at all , had only appeared in very fine print in a confusing and misleading manner .
The same Maiwolf holding company apparently also owns the debt collection companies which then proceed to harass , bully and threaten businesses to pay up .
A website , ' Stop the European City Guide ' , that campaigns against the City Guide fraud , was also subject to legal threats and their ISP had to shut them down , although I am pleased to say that they are currently up and running again .
Many of the activities of this fraudulent company are clearly in breach of the Misleading Advertising Directive of 1984 .
We need better and more coordinated enforcement to close the loopholes or gaps which are exploited by such companies .
I can inform the presidency that my committee will review the implementation and transposition of the Misleading Advertising Directive and , of course , the new Unfair Commercial Practices Directive .
We are particularly interested in the example of Austria 's transposition of the Misleading Advertising Directive whereby businesses cannot be bound by a contract unless they have clearly and explicitly signed up to its terms and conditions .
This is a model , Presidency , which I hope you will follow in discussions with the other Member States .
Small businesses , of course , are not helped by the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive as it does not cover business-to-business transactions - even for small businesses .
Member States must make better use of the cross-border enforcement network to put these cowboy businesses out of business and out of operation once and for all .
I certainly share with my colleagues here the sense of frustration of the many small businesses who for years , not months , have continued to suffer harassment and financial loss .
If we believe , as we say we do , that small businesses are the backbone of the EU economy , then it is time to stand up for them , to defend their rights and to defend them against these fraudulent practices .
I certainly welcome Commissioner Kuneva 's interest and her commitment to monitoring their activities , but monitoring alone does not get results and does not actively target these companies .
It is unacceptable , I believe , that the business complaints have fallen on apparently deaf ears and that the sole trader behind the City Guide has been allowed to continue to peddle his fraudulent practices without facing the full force of European law .
So I am calling today on the Member States to urgently take action , to recognise the serious and damaging consequences of allowing this fraudster to continue to rip off our businesses .
I want the Member States , and indeed the presidency , today during our debate , to commit to taking action , not just to debate the issues we have known about for many years .
So I urge the presidency to answer these questions and to work together with us to find a resolution for the businesses who continue to suffer from this fraud .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) I should like to thank Mrs McCarthy for her question .
My thanks go also to the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
I shall try to answer the question within the framework set by Mrs McCarthy .
With regard to the first question , namely what Member States have done to close fraudulent directory services , I must inform you that as yet the Council has not received a proposed solution from the Member States .
Similarly , it has not been informed either of action taken by the Member States to close such companies or of the intentions of their competent authorities as regards exchanging data on the companies .
With regard to the second question , about taking steps to close the loopholes in transposition of the Misleading Advertising Directive - the European Commission is responsible for this Directive and its implementation , as laid down in Article 211 of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
So in my opinion , the European Parliament should address this question to the European Commission .
In connection with these two questions , I should also add that as yet the Council has not been informed of what action the Member States have initiated to make the business world aware of the risk constituted by fraudulent directory services .
With regard to the issue of extending the scope of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive , I can , however , confirm to Mrs McCarthy that this Directive does not cover the cases described by the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
In other words , it does not cover cases of fraudulent commercial practices targeting small and medium-sized enterprises .
The reason for this is that the scope of application of the Directive concerned is restricted to business-to-consumer relations .
With regard to the possible extension of this Directive to business-to-business relations , I can only say that the Council will adopt a position on this issue as soon as an appropriate legislative proposal is put before it .
I should , however , remind you that the Council has already debated the issue of whether the relevant Directive should also cover business-to-business practices , at the time when the Directive was adopted .
I should remind you that in addition to the Commission , most Member States also rejected the idea of extending the Directive to cover unfair commercial practices that do not harm the consumer .
Irrespective of this , however , I must emphasise that companies , including small and medium-sized enterprises , are not without protection against such practices .
They are protected by the Misleading Advertising Directive .
I should like to end by explicitly agreeing , on behalf of the Presidency , with the Committee 's view that unfair and fraudulent business practices are unacceptable in any economic area .
I also believe that action needs to be taken against such conduct .
The Member States deal with unfair business practices as stipulated by their legislation .
The example of the European City Guide , which you mentioned in your question , has also been brought before the courts in at least one Member State .
I should like to thank you again for your question , and I shall in any case listen attentively to the debate .
Mr President , when you open this directory - because this is a big , thick publication - you find hundreds of pages , with thousands of companies , very often small businesses that found themselves in this directory after being cheated .
They did not want to be included in it , but were included against their wishes .
Parliament 's Committee on Petitions has received about 400 petitions from small businesses caught in this trap .
I believe there are three aspects to this issue .
Firstly , the small businesses involved are the victims of fraud .
Secondly , there is a cross-border , transnational aspect , which should therefore be of interest to us in Europe , in the European Parliament , in the Council and in the Commission .
Thirdly , companies like ' European City Guides ' are profiting from shortcomings that exist in legislation .
What is the European Parliament doing , besides what the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection is doing , as Mrs McCarthy has told us ?
The Committee on Petitions will be producing a report on this issue .
I will be the rapporteur , and my report will have four aims .
Firstly , it will aim to increase awareness of this problem , which is a big one .
Secondly , it will continue to encourage the Council and the Commission , in particular , to take clear action , because if they cannot take action today , they need to be in a position to do so .
Thirdly , we also need to determine whether there are legislative shortcomings , and this is the role of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
Lastly , it also needs to offer these victims useful advice .
The Committee on Petitions will hold consultations and meet with the victims and social partners , as well as with the Commission , before adopting this report , which is expected to be adopted by the end of this year .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the activities of companies that carry on dishonest commercial and marketing practices are worthy only of condemnation .
We must surely protect consumers ' rights against such pseudo-market actions and support them in their battle against companies that , in the current European reality , see themselves as completely beyond punishment .
Thousands of companies throughout Europe are taken in by allegedly free advertising in business catalogues , for which they are in reality required to pay anything from a few hundred to a few thousand euros .
The publishers of these worthless catalogues - from a business as well as an advertising point of view - not only target specific industries , such as tourist agencies , hoteliers , doctors , restaurateurs and even the world of science , but also , unfortunately , approach state agencies and institutions .
This is why EU citizens are asking how it is that the originators of such practices , who have after all been identified by their first name and surname as the proprietors of the companies publishing these catalogues , have been able to make a fortune using fraudulent and dishonest practices profiting from the fears of small European businessmen in the face of vindicatory companies and courts .
I am consequently asking the Slovenian Presidency - and I am addressing the Presidency more than the Commission - to instigate coordination of action by Member States , mainly in the sphere of exchange of information and mutual warning against this type of fraudulent practice , to send out information concerning the owners and the boards of these companies , and also to propose the introduction of stricter penal sanctions for this type of activity .
Continuation of the current situation will undermine the faith of businesses and citizens of the European Union in the idea of a European common market and will also , unfortunately , erode the differences between honest businessmen and quasi-Mafia activities .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , many thanks to Mrs McCarthy and the Internal Market Committee for presenting this question .
I could wish that we had had a rather more robust answer from the Council , I have to say .
The situation is absolutely unacceptable and I am going to start by making a confession .
In the early 1980s , I was a lawyer in the UK , but I founded a practice with a lawyer in Germany .
We started getting these demands that we had advertised our practice in a European City Guide and , even as a lawyers , we felt harassed and frightened .
So if lawyers feel frightened by these people , I am sure ordinary small SMEs must .
But the oddity of this is that EU law ought to be able to provide an answer and it is seemingly failing to do so , even after 20 , 30 years that this has been going on .
Indeed , if you read some of the letters from these people , they are even quoting EU law back at people to harass them even further as victims .
And what do we get from the Council ?
I am sorry , it is not good enough : well , we might look at misleading advertising and we will think about it .
Thirty years on we really need something more .
What are people meant to do ?
We need a thoroughgoing debate about whether we should redefine who and what is a consumer .
We tried to raise it during the discussions on contract law .
We need to go further and deeper if we are going to deal with this problem .
Lastly , if the Member States are too timid or too frightened to deal with this , let me make another suggestion that perhaps is a little contentious here .
If the Commission gives us a substantial system of collective redress , let us call it class actions , then maybe citizens will be able to take action themselves if nobody else will do it for them .
Now there is a thought .
Mr President , four years later we are at last having a debate on the European City Guides .
I could not carry down the files of complaints I have , as other colleagues have outlined .
Europe gets beaten about because it does not connect with its citizens and here we have a golden opportunity - and I direct this to the Council - to connect with people who have a real problem and who are coming to their MEPs for a solution .
It is not just businesses that are affected .
I have heard from school secretaries who signed this in error and are terrified and who have paid over money .
The tragedy with European City Guides is that it works because people are threatened and terrified .
Whether you pay or not , they continue to harass and abuse people .
But it is a European problem and therefore requires a European solution .
I suppose I am celebrating slightly that we are having this debate and that my colleague , Simon Busuttil , is going to have a report and prepare information , but I think the Council needs to be a little more proactive on this , and indeed the Commission likewise .
The question is very specific and it raises five key issues that need to be addressed .
In my view , this problem is enormous but we need to have it quantified .
Exchanging information is a great idea but it could cause frustration if we do not have action as a result .
We must close loopholes .
For example , in Ireland , European law is being quoted to those who have signed up to European City Guides .
They are being told that they will be taken to court in another Member State and fined and penalised .
They are getting phone calls with huge amounts of harassment to themselves and their co-workers .
This is not acceptable .
We definitely need to redefine what a consumer is because , as I said earlier , this is not just about business .
But I repeat the point .
We have a golden opportunity here to show people all over Europe that we are active on issues that are hitting them directly .
Let us seize the moment and let us not waste it today with just words and no action .
Mr President , the power of many of these fraudulent directory companies is that they are in another Member State , so they seem untouchable unless in some way the EU intervenes .
They also instil fear in people , many of them very small businesses without any legal help or advice and many , after being harassed for years , eventually give up and pay the money .
Like many of the other speakers , my office has been inundated with complaints , but usually from sole traders : plumbers , dentists , doctors , people who have been targeted by European City Guide .
These people feel as if they are on their own , that they have just made a bad decision , that they got caught out and in some way they almost blame themselves .
I find it unbelievable when I hear that the majority of Member States do not want any extension of the Directive to do something about the relations between companies .
I just wonder , is it because the companies that are being targeted are small businesses , that it is not the big corporations that are being affected ?
I believe citizens need more and better from the Council and the Commission than they are getting at present .
I think the current situation is not good enough and I call on the Council to do something about it immediately .
Mr President , I want to get straight to the point .
Let me address this to the Slovenian Presidency ; I think they have been great in their presidency .
Minister Lenarčič , just let me give you four things that I would like you to bring up at your next meeting of the Competitiveness Ministers .
The first thing , is for you to ask the Commission to take the SOLVIT mechanism - which is supposed to deal with every single internal market complaint , not just market-related ones - and put this firmly on the agenda .
Get them to circulate the information that is already available on independent websites - and we should be ashamed of the fact that it is actually the people affected by this who have taken this up on their own - there is a lot of comprehensive information , and make that part of their remit .
That could happen straight away .
So that is your first task .
The second task is that you should be saying to all your colleagues that their business information services ( because they have services that reach out to SMEs ) should also be circulating that information to them in their own languages and you should be putting just a modest amount of your budget behind to actually explain to businesses what is going on .
Thirdly , give those to your law enforcement authorities .
And , also say to the Commission and to the people who are running your consumer protection cooperation : put this on your agenda .
It will not take very much to do .
The information is there .
It is not a difficult thing to do .
So that is three things you should do .
And the fourth thing you could do as well is to say to your colleagues this : these practices , if practised on individual consumers are absolutely illegal under the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive .
Everybody knows that is the case .
And the companies affected are essentially taking on the role of private consumers .
But , in individual Member States , in your process of implementing that ( and I have to say by the way the Member States have not done very well in implementing it , and even my own Member State is actually well behind ) , you could easily include a clause specifically including directories and small businesses in your implementation .
It would not take much to do .
So there are four specific actions there .
So I look to you , Minister , and we will look at the agenda , and we expect it to be on the next agenda of the Competitiveness Council .
How can we go round saying to small businesses , ' participate in the internal market ' , if we cannot even give them the simplest of safeguards on a simple act like this ?
It is a disgraceful neglect by all of us of our duties in the single market .
Mr President , the European City Guide and the similar guides are essentially a bunch of crooks , but our legislation has not been good enough to enable us to deal with them .
This question should equally have been asked of the Commission in terms of initiating a new legislative proposal to tighten up the relevant legislation so that we can deal with them , but pending that my advice to any small business faced with demands from European City Guide and similar guides is simple : do not pay ; ignore them ; ignore the pressure .


An organisation has been set up called ' Stop the European City Guide ' , an association of victims of this guide .
Their website had to be removed because of pressure and legal threats against their internet service provider to make them shut down their website .
I now therefore host their website on my website so that they can continue to disseminate information as to how businesses can protect themselves .
We need firm action on this .
We need it soon .
( PL ) Mr President , may I congratulate Mrs McCarthy on an excellently prepared oral question on the subject of the dishonest practices of advertising companies based on ' European City Guides ' .
The Committee on Petitions , which I chair , has appointed Mr Busuttil to draw up a report on this matter .
We have received an enormous number of petitions complaining about precisely this practice .
The Commissioner said that the Commission has not received such complaints that might spur it on to launch an investigation into this matter but , the way I see it , this debate , along with the debate to be held on the basis of Mr Busuttil 's report , will serve as an adequate reason for the Commission to take action in this matter , as these practices are hugely dishonest and harass small business and ordinary people - in other words , people who do not have armies of lawyers at their disposal to protect them .
I urge the Commission to take action in this matter .
Mr President , I have dealt with 19 cases of people who have been fraudulently exposed to expenditure and to debt actions because of European City Guides .
Of those 19 , 17 were small businesses that employed three people or less .
And of those 17 , six of them were elderly people over the age of 60 who were afraid of seeing a solicitor 's letter coming in the door .
The reality was that what actually happened here was a misrepresentation under the Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Act or the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive , as Mr Harbour was talking about .
That in itself is a fraud because , if you agree to do something , you expect to get something in return that should be offered in consideration .
What actually happened was a misrepresentation as regards the service that was being provided .
I think , as some of my colleagues have said , this is probably a matter best dealt with at Commission level .
However , it would be right that the Competitive Council and each Minister be made aware of it , and would be empowered to introduce legislation at a national level which may be quicker to do than to actually try and bring forward a revised European directive on this matter .
Mr President , I just want to echo my colleagues .
We have to stop passing the buck on this issue .
We must stop allowing these companies to ' catch me if you can ' .
That is the game they are playing with this .
I am not leaving the plenary , Minister , without some commitment to action .
Mr Harbour gave you some ideas , but what I want you to do is to raise specific things that I did actually raise in my intervention at the beginning .
I want you to raise at the Council working group the Austrian model where , under the Misleading Advertising Directive , they already ban these practices .
Not all Member States do it .
You could ask other Member States to follow suit , take the Austrian model and ban these practices by introducing amendments in their national legislation .
I also want you to ask the Council to agree that we have cross-border enforcement networks for consumers .
I want you to instruct them to accept , investigate and act on the directory companies in the context of the cross-border enforcement network .
That , I believe , will enable us to have some action across the border and to stop these people escaping the long arm of the law .
So , please , if I could have that from you , I think we can all go away somewhat happier .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Thank you very much , Mr President , for allowing me to speak .
I should also like to thank all our colleagues who have taken part in the debate .
Let me start by making one thing clear . Nobody in the Council , neither the Presidency nor any Member State , supports the continuation , or even the occurrence , of fraudulent conduct in the internal market constituted by the European Union .
Quite the reverse , and that is why this debate is so welcome , and why I personally welcome it on behalf of the Presidency .
Secondly , I can assure you that the Presidency has taken note of the unanimous demands for increased activity and immediate action .
You can rely on us to pass these demands on to our partners in the Council .
Thirdly , I am delighted that the Committee on Petitions has decided to prepare a special report , and we look forward with pleasure to this report by Mr Busuttil .
This should generate additional impetus for appropriate activities at European level .
However , I should like to emphasise one thing .
Mrs McCarthy , you mentioned the example set by Austria .
Good examples certainly serve to encourage others to follow them .
And I also believe and hope that this debate will play a part in this .
I must stress , however , that the Commission is responsible for transposition of the directives .
As has already been mentioned , and as you also thought in your question , this issue involves two directives .
The Unfair Commercial Practices Directive does not cover this segment .
One solution would be either to redefine the concept of the consumer or to extend the scope of application of the Directive .
I expect both these options to be on the table when a decision is taken on these matters .
We are aware that the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive has not been in place for long .
It has only been in force since December , and I think we shall soon have to assess how it is being applied .
Secondly , I wish to stress again that the Misleading Advertising Directive covers this area .
Swindles and fraud of this kind definitely involve misleading advertising , which means that certain legal remedies are already available .
Finally , let me stress again that I have followed the debate very attentively , and that the Presidency will convey the mood of this plenary to Council members .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
, in writing . - The ' European Cities Guide ' and similar outfits are fraudulent operations which specifically target SMEs .
They urge companies to sign up to directory services which are presented as being free of charge .
However , due to dubious and complex ' fine print ' , theses schemes then proceed to harass people for money in an extremely threatening and malicious manner .
Ironically , these fraudulent companies quote EU law in order to intimidate their targets further .
Of course , these scams represent no value whatsoever to the consumer or businesses .
In fact , they flout numerous examples of EU legislation , such as the 1984 Directive on Misleading Advertising .
This problem is evident in countries throughout the EU and therefore requires urgent action .
The solution lies in EU level cooperation , namely in the form of some tough legislation .
We must ensure that any EU directive tackling this issue contains no loopholes and that it is satisfactorily implemented in all member states .
I call on the Council and Commission to assist the work of Parliament and take action which reflects the urgency of this situation .
If we are encouraging our SMEs to compete within the single market , we must at least be able to guarantee their protection against these appalling scams .
Conditions to be complied with to pursue the occupation of road transport operator - International carriage of passengers by coach and bus ( recast ) - International carriage of goods by road ( recast ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mrs Ţicău , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing common rules concerning the conditions to be complied with to pursue the occupation of road transport operator - C6-0145 / 2007 - ;
by Mr Grosch , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules for access to the market for coach and bus services ( recast ) - C6-0147 / 2007 - ; and
by Mr Grosch , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules for access to the international road haulage market ( recast ) - C6-0146 / 2007 - .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Mrs Ţicău , Mr Grosch , ladies and gentlemen , the European Commission published draft legislative instruments in July 2007 .
These were the proposal for a regulation on common rules for admission to the occupation of road transport operator , the proposal for a regulation on common rules for access to the international road haulage market , and the proposal for a regulation on common rules for access to the market for transport services by coach and bus .
The Portuguese Presidency began work on the regulation on common rules for access to the international road haulage market , and the Slovenian Presidency continued this work and also opened the other two dossiers .
In parallel with the work in the working group , we also began informal talks with rapporteurs in the European Parliament .
At the April meeting of the Transport , Telecommunications and Energy ( TTE ) Council , ministers conducted a political debate based on a package with the main issues , with the following results .
Firstly , with regard to the regulation on common rules for access to the international road haulage market , the key question of cabotage remains unanswered .
Most Member States essentially supported the compromise decision under which three cabotage trips are permissible within seven days after unloading in the host Member State .
However , quite a lot of Member States , who were also supported by the Commission , called for transit cabotage also to be made possible , to avoid empty road traffic .
The Presidency is currently endeavouring to find a compromise solution in the Council .
Secondly , with regard to the regulation on admission to the occupation , a compromise needs to be found on the national electronic register and the register of transport undertakings .
In fact we shall soon be agreed on the timetable for establishing this register .
Thirdly , with regard to the regulation on international coach and bus services , the debate needs to be continued at working-group level .
We have agreed that the solutions in the other two regulations should also be applied analogously in this regulation .
The Slovenian Presidency will be endeavouring to achieve political agreement on these three proposed regulations in the TTE meeting on 13 June 2008 .
I wish to emphasise that we shall try to take your requested amendments into consideration as far as possible and thus , to a great extent , bring our points of view into line with one another .
The Slovenian Presidency wishes to help to consolidate and complete the single market .
I am convinced that the fast-growing road transport sector constitutes one of the foundations of the single market for the free movement of goods and passenger transport , and that the Community 's legal regime needs to be modernised , in order to be made more efficient , to have greater control , and to ensure honest competition .
The Slovenian Presidency unreservedly supports the aims set out in the proposals for the three regulations .
I should like to emphasise that the Slovenian Presidency is aware of the existing restrictions in the European Union 's transport market , which means that it sees its task as lying not only in strengthening the rules and control mechanisms for cabotage , but also in introducing uniform rules for access to the occupation .
The electronic registers in particular will help to improve efficiency and transparency in the transport sector and to effect a substantial reduction in the administrative burden .
Lastly , I must thank MEPs and , in particular , the rapporteurs Mr Grosch and Mrs Ţicău for the constructive exchange of views .
Let me say again that the Slovenian Presidency will do everything in its power to achieve a balance between the various interests , and also to ensure that the solutions we accept will make the European road transport industry more efficient and more competitive .
At this point , I should like to say that it is my hope and wish that we shall continue the constructive dialogue , and that the European Parliament will achieve a consensus as soon as possible .
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) Regulations regarding access to the international road passenger and freight transport market , together with the Regulation regarding access to the profession of road operator form a package .
These subjects are inextricably connected .
I am very pleased to see these three texts subject to a vote today in order to establish your position at a first reading .
I thank your Rapporteurs , Mrs. Ţicău and Mr. Grosch , for their work , as well as all the members who have contributed to it .
A rapid agreement is necessary for the following reasons : the European Council of March 2007 expressed its wish in this respect ; the sector in question , more than 900,000 enterprises , wants to harmonise the conditions for access to the profession in order to have a loyal competition and clear rules regarding this restricted but delicate problem , namely cabotage .
15 years after the first regulations regarding access to road transport , the market continues to be fragmented , with 27 national versions of rules as regards the control of access to the profession and the definition of the good repute required for this access .
I will also remind you , one more time , of the divergent interpretations of the notion " temporary ” as regards cabotage .
Consequently , it was about time to stimulate the progress in integrating the internal market in the field of road transportation .
A rapid agreement is possible .
I have the feeling that the Council 's and your positions can be directed even more toward a common point .
With the help of the Slovenian and the French Presidency , I believe it is possible to reach an agreement soon .
I can assure you of my support , at least in principle , regarding most of the amendments proposed by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Since the detailed position of the Commission regarding each amendment submitted has already been transmitted to the relevant Parliament service , my reserves or observations will focus only on a few matters .
The first one , the matter of the cabotage , seems to be a major item of this package .
Yet , no solution will be good unless it is controllable .
The essential quality of the Commission 's proposal is precisely the clarity , simplicity and controllability of the mechanism introduced : three operations within the seven days following an international transport .
This relation to an international transport is generally recognized and , exactly for this reason , I understand the interest raised by amendment 17 of the Grosch report , which provides the performance of cabotage operations in a transit country on the shortest way back .
Nevertheless , the proposed formulation makes the amendment difficult to control - and I cannot support it for this reason .
On the other hand , in order to avoid empty races , I believe we could control a provision saying that one of the three operations within seven days can be performed in a transit country within a maximum of three days .
I would have no trouble with supporting an amendment in this respect .
It is the same with amendments 18 , 37 , 40 , 44 and 47 , which provide that restrictions regarding the number and duration of cabotage operations shall be eliminated gradually , until their complete elimination in 2014 .
We have to take into consideration the market reality in various Member States .
The fiscal , social , and salary conditions are still very disparate due to the absence of sufficient harmonization and I am afraid they will remain the same in 2014 as well .
The proposed package will certainly contribute to this harmonization as regards the control of access to the profession but it could not guarantee a sufficient degree of harmonization by itself .
Under these circumstances , an automatic liberalization of cabotage would result in a deformation , and not a consolidation of competition conditions .
Therefore , a clause of subsequent review of this matter seems more appropriate to me .
I mention that , until this review , it goes without saying that the regulation does not prevent Member States in any way from completely opening their cabotage markets provided that they do this without any discrimination against the other Member States or under agreements between the national governments prior to the Community rules in force regarding market access .
Amendment 21 , as formulated , omits these specifications and , consequently , cannot be supported by the Commission .
As regards access to the profession , the aspect of good repute and serious infringements of the law is essential .
I believe the procedure you propose , regarding the withdrawal of good repute in case of a serious infringement of the law , has a great dissuasive power , still remaining appropriate .
I welcome in particular amendment 104 of Mrs. Ţicău 's report , which provides a very clear list of these infringements .
Therefore , we can support the Parliament 's proposal as regards article 6 .
The European Companies Register has a special importance in guaranteeing the control of good repute .
In this respect , in principle , we support amendments 70 , from 72 to 78 and 114 , which provide for a rapid and progressive introduction of interconnected national registers .
Lastly , the draft regulation allows small businesses to resort to so-called external administrators .
In other words , they are administrators who do not work directly in these small businesses .
Amendment 27 does not establish limits for this possibility which , in my opinion , should remain an exception and not become a rule .
Therefore , I cannot support it .
Yet , I could support amendment 109 , which provides for a reasonable limit of 50 vehicles .
Finally , as regards the issue of the 12 days , I remember the former amendment 102 in Mrs. Ţicău 's report , which refers to the reintroduction of the so-called 12-day derogation in the case of coaches .
I agree with the plenary session 's choice to vote this amendment in Mr. Grosch 's report regarding buses .
The Commission has not adopted a position on the content for the moment .
At present , the social partners are working on this subject and we have to wait for the result of the first exchanges in order not to legislate in a hurry .
A more detailed re-examination of this matter will be necessary as soon as an agreement is reached between these partners , yet without slowing down the progress in reaching an agreement on cabotage and the register .
Rapporteur . - ( RO ) I would like to begin by thanking the Commission , the Council , the Co-Rapporteurs , in particular Mr. Grosch , Mr. Sterckx , Mrs. Lichtenberger and all the colleagues I worked with in making this report .
The Proposal for Regulation regarding access to the occupation of road transport operator is important because it concerns 4.5 million employees in the field of road transportation and over 900,000 European companies .
We tried to have consultations that were as comprehensive as possible with those operating in this field and for this purpose the TRAN Committee organized a public debate last October in order to gather as many opinions as possible regarding the proposal for regulation .
The Regulation replaces Directive 96 / 26 , which was implemented differently by Member States .
The Proposal for Regulation establishes common criteria according to which a company has access to the occupation of road transport operator , a stable headquarters , management from an operational centre , access to a sufficient number of parking spaces , criteria to prove the financial standing , good repute , the transport manager 's role and the conditions he / she should meet , and here I refer to the certificate of professional competence and good repute , as well as the Member States ' obligation to create national electronic registers to be interconnected .
193 amendments were submitted to the TRAN Committee , which have brought changes to the Commission 's proposal .
Thus , the Parliament , the TRAN Committee opted for a text that refers only to severe and very severe infringements , the latter being well-defined in a new appendix to the Regulation and , for the severe infringements , the Commission shall come up with a list of infringements whose repetitive nature can result in losing the road carrier licence .
This list will be approved by the procedure of control regulation .
As regards the national electronic registers to be interconnected by 1 January 2012 , they will be developed starting from a minimum common structure , which shall be presented by the Commission by 1 January 2010 .
The electronic registers will have a public section and a confidential section .
The public section shall contain data on the road transport operators and road transport managers and the confidential section shall contain data on the infringements committed or the sanctions enforced and shall be accessed only by relevant authorities , in compliance with the provisions regarding the protection of personal data .
I emphasize the fact that these confidential data can be kept in separate registers .
As to obtaining the certificate of professional competence , the TRAN Committee opted for eliminating a fixed number of training hours and replacing them with the obligation of a written examination followed by an oral examination as well , according to the decision of each Member State .
Another amendment proposed stipulates that a transport manager shall be sanctioned only for the facts imputable to him .
Thus , any sanction decision can be disputed and the recording of sanctions in the electronic register will be made only after a final decision in this respect .
The TRAN Committee considered it was sufficient for a company to prove its financial capacity based on the annual accounts examined by an auditor or a properly accredited person , based on a bank guarantee or another financial instrument , for instance insurance .
Therefore , the minimum 80 % limit for immediate available funds was eliminated in favour of a minimum threshold for capital and reserves .
The TRAN Committee also considers it important that the euro value be established every year and not every 5 years , as provided in the Commission 's proposal .
We also proposed the elimination of article 22 from the Commission 's proposal , which established certain rights of priority differently for various Member States and amendment 52 was introduced , which allows people who prove that over the last 10 years prior to the effective date of the regulation they continuously administered the road transport activity to be exempted from examination .
We proposed to limit the number of vehicles administered by an external manager to 50 , and the number of companies to 4 .
As regards the internal transport manager , the socialist group proposes to limit the number of vehicles directly administered by a transport manager to 250 .
We believe this is necessary because the transport manager should also have decent working conditions .
Two amendments regarding the 12-day derogation in relation to the rest period of coach drivers for international passenger transport were also submitted in the TRAN Committee .
An agreement between employers and trade unions is expected in this respect and , for this reason , the two amendments will be submitted again in Mr. Grosch 's report .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I should also like to thank the rapporteur , the shadow rapporteur , the Council and the Commission for their effective cooperation .
I believe we have been trying to create a complete package in order to maintain a certain coherence between the three reports .
At first glance I would say that Parliament to some extent leads the way .
We were perhaps hoping to have achieved a result already in an unofficial trialogue .
However , Parliament can now point the way .
I am convinced that the Council can very usefully take on much of what has been debated here and will be agreed .
The transport manager , as just stated , plays an important role in access to jobs .
I believe it is important that we shall know tomorrow how enterprises are structured in an international sector such as this , who takes responsibility there on the one hand in terms of finances and reliability , but also on the other hand in terms of the important regulations on transport .
If we are working at international level tomorrow , it is important to know how partners are structured and that we can rely on them .
We have tried to organise this as simply and transparently as possible in administrative terms .
We are , however , very much counting on the Council 's cooperation because the information network we want to create must be transparent , efficient as well as readily available .
Any kind of delay here is unnecessary in our view , because progress on this can be very quick thanks to today 's information technology .
The preconditions for jobs are also clear .
We do not want any special conditions for people who already have work experience and have proved they are reliable .
We would , however , like this also to remain verifiable at regular intervals .
In terms of market access , transport by bus is somewhat easier .
We have also sought coherence there with access to jobs .
We in Parliament have set our priorities on focusing for the time being on serious offences .
An exchange of information on minor offences between countries in future was really not what we were after .
If we have good information available on serious offences , we are already a major step ahead .
In our view existing treaties should not be jeopardised .
In addition , we believe public urban transport is already protected by its own regulations and it is incumbent upon the Member States to check whether or not problems are occurring there .
The 12-day regulation is already the subject of debate here , of course , and as has just been mentioned , Parliament had already requested this 12-day regulation before , but it was not resolved under the British Presidency at the time .
Parliament has always spoken out clearly on this because we are not just market-oriented .
We have also been considering safety criteria and we wanted to take this subject up once again .
I hope that this Parliament will find the right time as well as the correct formula for adopting this subject .
Finally , access to road haulage : the famous concept of cabotage is , of course , enormously important here .
In simple terms it is ultimately about somehow regulating what is referred to as the Services Directive in the transport sector .
How should I , if I come from a third country , provide services in another country ?
Should I be doing this indefinitely ?
Should I be doing this under just any conditions ?
This is ultimately the key question .
We are not talking about large transport companies here , but about smaller enterprises .
On the one hand we are accommodating the environmental aspect by wanting to avoid empty runs , but on the other hand we should not - being well aware that the social as well as the fiscal conditions differ greatly from country to country at the present time - be encouraging direct dumping in these two sectors either with this regulation .
Limiting cabotage operations to three a week is at least in my view a clear statement .
This is much better than the term ' temporary ' , which would virtually have meant 27 countries having 27 different legislatures in the next few years , which would definitely not have been beneficial for the sector .
I believe the regulation is clear .
The fact that this now has to be completed within a reasonable time is , in our view - I am now speaking for myself - plain sailing insofar as the differences in terms of wages and taxes are being abolished .
We have also been examining cabotage rather more realistically and this means we are already able to start after the first unloading .
Unlike the Commission , I am of the opinion that cabotage must be possible on an international journey as well as on the return journey .
We therefore also want some coherence in market access in terms of serious offences and information about them , just as we also want to simplify the administrative procedures .
Finally , an appeal once again to the countries themselves .
With these regulations , as we have been debating and adopting them here today - particularly with regard to cabotage - there is little sense in going into too much detail when the countries as a whole are not being given the necessary funds to carry out accurate monitoring of these cabotage journeys .
There is not a vast amount of work .
In our view it entails eventually harmonising the management documents on the one hand , and on the other hand getting to a point where total cabotage expenditure of 2 % is properly monitored at European level ; for certain countries , however , this does mean 30-40 % of the work in this sector .
I believe that only then will what we are doing here make sense .
Certain details , which we disregard , will then make sense , too .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to congratulate both rapporteurs on behalf of my group : firstly Mrs Ţicău , and secondly my colleague Mr Grosch .

They have done very good work : they have attempted to bring together the various conflicting opinions within the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Our group supports in principle the Commission 's proposed new regulations for conditions to be complied with to pursue the occupation of road transport operator and for access to the market for coach and bus services and access to the international road haulage market .
However , our amendments call for further steps towards harmonisation and liberalisation .
May I point out that we are still aiming towards the idea of the European internal market , which was actually supposed to be introduced in 1958 .
The Council has long been reluctant , but the European Court of Justice said in 1985 that we must also establish the European internal market in the transport market , so we must become a little bolder in this respect .
A brief comment on the topic of licence to pursue an occupation .
The demand that the Commission develop an integrated register of infringements of road transport legislation by 2010 is very important because Member States must be able to decide on the withdrawal of licences , for example , according to unified criteria .
We must consider not only licensing , but also withdrawal of that licence .
If we want to eliminate the black sheep , we must decide on the matter of withdrawal of licences according to unified criteria and , in this respect , I hope that the Commission will undertake to produce a unified register by 2010 .
With regard to access to the market for coach and bus services , I believe that we ought finally to make the internal market a reality , step by step .
Therefore , I hope that the Commission will support us in making it no longer necessary to obtain authorisation from another Member State for cross-border regular services not extending more than 50 km beyond the border .
This is nothing less than protectionism rearing its head .
With regard to access to the international road haulage market , we must stop cabotage at some point . It makes no sense in a common internal market .
The point of a common internal market is that every business must be able to offer its services in every part of the Community .
For environmental reasons , I would say to Mrs Lichtenberger that if I want pointless return trips to stop , then I must find a sensible way of making it possible for providers to undertake trips within other countries .
Do not come to me with conditions !
We are talking about doing away with cabotage in 2014 .
There are still six years to go .
If we cannot manage to harmonise the conditions to some extent in six years , then we will never manage it , and you will still be promoting cabotage regulations in the year 3000 .
I am familiar with these sorts of stories from Hamburg , because we always thought that our neighbours outside of Hamburg would pay incredibly low wages .
We must see to it that we create an internal market .
My most important point is the issue of the 12-day rule .
Here we must simply draw clear lines .
We need the 12-day rule for occasional cross-border coach services .
It is not helpful when the operators and the unions now say : ' We are about to reach an agreement . '
We must make a statutory ruling .
We must pave the way for revision of driving and rest times .
I am more than willing to discuss details of implementation with the unions and operators later but it is for Parliament to legislate the provisions on driving and rest times .
We have clear proposals , which were supported by a majority in committee , and I would ask you to vote accordingly tomorrow .

Mr President , Mr Jarzembowski , the reason the state of Hamburg now has a black-green government is so that the Conservatives can learn a thing or two about all this .
That is excellent .
I would first like to congratulate Mrs Ţicău , as it is her first report .
She did a very good job , as of course , did Mr Grosch , of whom Parliament has come to expect good reports .
I was somewhat startled by the questions put from outside .
We are not trying to reinvent road transport with these three reports , but rather to determine how best to organise it and also ultimately how to raise the safety criteria , because there are a great many companies that want to use the roads .
Finally , we are also interested in how social protection is connected with all this .
The freeing up of cabotage should not really pose any problems either .
As has already been mentioned , unladen journeys are of no benefit to anybody .
They make no sense at all .
However , we do need to ensure that the situation does not get completely out of control .
Therefore , it would make sense for us to resolve tomorrow that we will check , in 2012 , what has happened by then , and how everything has developed , so that we build in some reserve , as it were - and there is an amendment in this vein by Mr Grosch , which we support .
By 2014 , when everything is supposed to launch fully , it also should be provided with a safety clause .
In the event that serious disruption to the market does occur , a Member State can then say ' We are pressing the emergency button and going to the Commission .
This is a case that requires a remedy . '
My final point concerns the 12-day rule .
I have always supported it ; we supported it at the time .
Now , however , a new situation has arisen , in which the unions and the hauliers have reached an agreement .
That could cause problems with the amendments .
Therefore , tomorrow , we would be very much in favour of postponing by a month acceptance of the report that contains the part about coaches and deal with it later , in June , when it is fully ready .
To do it that way would make sense and would also involve the industry .

on behalf of the ALDE group . - ( NL ) I should like to quote from the White Paper : ' Nowadays , lorries are no longer forced to return empty from international deliveries .
They can even pick up and deliver loads within a Member State other than their country of origin .
Road cabotage has become a reality . '
This is what the European Commission said in 2001 .
Since that time , a number of Member States have once again introduced a number of restrictions and so , once again , we have a fragmented market that we did not have in 2001 .
What does the Commission say now ?
We shall mould this fragmentation into rules so that the fragmentation is the same for all .
I am therefore very disappointed - I even said so to Commissioner Barrot - with the Commission proposal , which means a step back in comparison to the 1993 directive .
Fortunately we have been able to do something about this but , in my view , nowhere near enough .
What is it that we are doing , then ?
We are spending billions of euro via Galileo in order to ensure that we know where the transport is .
This means that a transport company can organise its operation efficiently throughout the European market and then we say : no , stop , bureaucracy .
You must submit papers despite being busy .
You must do all kinds of things that mean you operate less efficiently and even possibly see your lorries returning empty .
That is what the Commission is now saying , and I find it a major disappointment that the Commission even dare put it down on paper .
Therefore , in this instance , I believe that the social aspect is a kind of excuse that is very readily used .
Otherwise , why would the French authorities approach Belgian transport companies to find out whether they are conducting no cabotage or too much cabotage in France ?
The wages in Belgium are higher than in France , not lower .
This is not a social issue ; it is about protecting a country 's own market .
The result , therefore , will be greater environmental damage followed by , within a couple of weeks , Commission proposals for green transport .
Congratulations !
Fortunately , therefore , we and the rapporteur have been able to do a number of things about this .
I hope that these make it through .
We have the prospect of an open market by 2014 , but this is not enough as far as I am concerned .
I would prefer to see this achieved by 2012 .
Nor do I believe that we require new studies .
This time , we must truly throw open the market - and , Mr Piecyk , I agree with your amendment - in order to ensure that action is taken in the event of a disruption in the market .
This action must be taken in an open market , however , not by creating additional obstacles in a market in which there are already hundreds .
With regard to the report by Mrs Ţicău , I am in full agreement with a strict approach towards people who are starting out in the business .
Incidentally , I have made the requirements even more stringent on a number of points .
I thank the rapporteur for entering into discussion with me in this respect .
If we are strict towards the players in the market , therefore , we must also ensure that the market is truly an open one .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , cabotage sounds like a good idea .
Preventing unladen journeys also reduces emissions and , after all , the transport sector also has an obligation to finally start reducing emissions .
It is just a pity that , in the past , this regulation was frequently abused , to disregard social standards and to use dumping prices to gain market share .
The rapporteur has therefore generously chosen an approach that takes this into account .
Monitoring of everything that is decided here is crucial - and that is also my appeal to the Member States .
Otherwise , none of it will work .
I can therefore agree with this part of the package .
That is not quite the case with the report on coach transport , however , where some members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism expressed a wish to include the famous 12-day rule on driving and rest times again , and the very well organised bus lobby has been providing us with an excessive amount of information for months on end , in order to achieve this .
However , far too little effort was made to canvas the opinions of employees working in this industry .
I could not support this regulation , purely because of the amendments .
However , if an agreement between the social partners comes about - I mean between the companies and the others who are affected , because this includes people who are not part of any union , as this sector has a particularly low level of union membership - then I would like the regulation to be accepted as well .
We will just have to wait and see .
It is only fair to do so , if we recognise social partnership .
Therefore , let us postpone this part and find a better , prudent solution later , so that we do not have to renegotiate afterwards and find ourselves in a position where we may not be able to achieve anything further .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , my group believes that continued and improved protection of workers and consumers is more important than constantly increasing freedom for businesses within the European market .
This choice is even more important in relation to cross-border , long-distance transport by bus and lorry than in many other business sectors .
Regulations have applied in the coach transport sector since April 2007 that require coaches to spend one day off the road every six days during a group holiday trip in order to protect the driver from fatigue .
We expressly agree with the objective of this measure .
Nevertheless , we realise that the method of implementing this causes annoyance , not only to operators and customers , but also to the drivers themselves .
I have previously pressed for improvement in the implementation of this by means of agreements with the trade union , the European Transport Workers ' Federation .
It is better that drivers be guaranteed rest at home than be forced to do so en route in the midst of surprised and displeased customers .
Agreement on this point is good , but we reject any attempts to unilaterally abolish this protection .
There is exasperation in the road freight transport sector because each country has different rules on whether or not freight can be transported when driving back from abroad .
As a result of this , lorries too often return largely empty .
Nevertheless , it is still too early for the whole of Europe to adopt the system that now functions reasonably between the Netherlands , Belgium and Luxembourg .
Such a system can be implemented only between countries with a similar level of income and social conditions .
We have no objections to cross-border solutions if these guarantee all drivers a respectable wage , satisfactory mileage allowance and adequate safety measures .
We do object , on the other hand , if in such a system the current large wage differences existing between EU Member States are abused to reduce labour costs .
This would mean that everyone earning a respectable income would lose his or her job and then the only people still working in that industry would be doing so based on the current terms and conditions of employment of Poland or Romania , for example .
My group has therefore submitted Amendments 45 and 46 to the report on haulage , in order to make the opening of the market for cabotage dependent upon the development of equal working conditions and an evaluation in 2012 .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) I should like to thank Mr Grosch and Mrs Ţicău for the work they have done and to make three comments .
My first comment relates to the amendment of the list of offences in Mrs Ţicău 's proposal , which may lead to the permit of a transport operator being withdrawn .
This list of offences is an essential element of the package , and constitutes a potential restriction of the internal market .
For that reason , it would be better if the list of offences were to be amended via the codecision rather than the comitology procedure .
I have therefore submitted an amendment in support of this alteration that I hope you will all support .
Secondly , I should like to stress the importance of thorough supervision of the list of offences .
The proposals being discussed here this afternoon are intended to improve the internal market .
This means that it is important , however , that a truly level playing field be created .
The Member States will have to enforce the rules under this regulation in the same way , and therefore I request that the European Commission thoroughly monitor the correct application of this regulation by Member States .
My third point is that there are indeed Member States that attempt to limit this cabotage to a minimum .
This is in complete contravention of the principles of the internal market and , in addition , indirectly pollutes the environment .
I shall therefore certainly lend my support to the amendment that is intended to lift the restrictions upon cabotage with effect from 2012 .


( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposals by Mr Grosch are aimed at the uniform and stringent application of road transport regulations , which I support ; I agree that criteria ought to be laid down which should have to be met before these activities can be carried out , and that surveillance by the relevant authorities should be stepped up through a single document recognition system and a system of sanctions , and that permission must be sought from the countries that these services cross .
Following the excellent work by my fellow Members , I would just like to add that as I see it , shortening the time for international cabotage is not possible unless there is a truly fair and equal approach to laying down the rules so that we avoid any cases of dumping , which often ends up benefiting some operators at the expense of others .
In my opinion , the 2014 deadline is fitting and could even be extended .
Mr President , you wait for one report on buses and trucks and three come along at once .
The question is , are they all travelling in the right direction ?
On cabotage : I am one of the strongest supporters in this Parliament of liberalisation , and indeed in general on the issue of cabotage .
But , of course , I want to be absolutely certain that we do have a genuine level playing field for this to operate .
We have different vehicle and road safety standards in the UK , we have a geographical seclusion , we have a particular tax system which is different to some others , and there are employment concerns : these are issues also to take into account .
So , whilst I think there is a lot of clarity in the Commission proposal and I welcome it , I think that we have to be very careful in the opening-up of the market in the way proposed .
The overall impact of cabotage is somewhat ambiguous and I know that a lot of hauliers , people involved in the industry , are very concerned .
Therefore , I think we have to be sensible and balanced about this and I certainly would like to see a review of the proposal within four years of implementation with full consultation from the industry in the meantime .
That is the only way I think that we can guarantee a level playing field and full liberalisation to have good effect .
I would just like to add another point on another of the reports .
I am concerned , for example , when the scope of regulation in Europe begins to extend to the transport of the elderly by volunteers .
Surely the application of law to such groups is both unnecessary and unhelpful .
European law should aim to always encourage mobility and access .
I think that in this case , in the beautiful areas of Britain such as my own constituency of Yorkshire , we do not want any impediments to the enjoyment of our regions and this road transport package coupled with the drivers ' hours regulation should not lead to public transport in rural areas becoming a thing of the past .
( ES ) Mr President , I would especially like to thank my colleagues Mrs Ţicău and Mr Grosch for their patience and their ability to bring together all the shadow rapporteurs around proposals that have at times been well supported and at times more controversial .
The truth is that Parliament has taken the opportunity to recast these texts on road transport in order to try to improve the legislation and move towards more opening up in the case of cabotage , in principle for reasons of co-modality , as we are working on in other matters , in order to promote freedom of movement and , of course , to prevent unladen journeys from being made .
In order to do this , we have suggested the possibility of establishing a clause that will ensure that the liberalisation of the market does not lead to distortion .
I would like to stress that the central reason should be social dumping ; and for this purpose we are also establishing the date of 2014 for complete freedom of cabotage .
It should be said that to some extent this text will be more credible because we have essentially focused on serious infringements , as they are the ones that can really be monitored .
Of course , we reject the suggestion of specific , privileged bilateral cabotage between neighbouring countries , because , as one of my fellow members rightly said , it fragments the market still further .
With regard to the text on buses , we would like to inform you that the Socialist Group is going to ask for , or I should say , has already asked for the vote on this legislative text only to be postponed , because we think that if , as we have already been told , there is an agreement between the employers and the workers ' representatives and the trade unions for a review , shall we say , of the 12-day rule , it must be recognised -even though some of my fellow members do not wish to do so - that to some extent it opens up a review by the back door that has not been sufficiently explained or clarified , and that therefore needs this guarantee of the agreement between the employers and the trade unions .
Otherwise the public will not understand why we are voting on a text tomorrow that is already useless because there is an agreement outside Parliament .
( NL ) Discussions regarding the phenomenon of cabotage have caused emotions to run high for many years .
The existing regulations are supposed to be too unclear owing to the use of the word ' temporary ' , which serves as an excuse for various Member States to illegitimately further protect their own market .
In order to clarify this issue once and for all , the Commission introduced another new regulation last year and , as Mr Sterckx has just stated , I had high expectations of this .
Remarkably , however , the Commission proposed that a strict check be put on cabotage opportunities .
Based upon the current Commission proposal , transport operators would be faced with more restrictions , rather than greater freedom .
This is indeed remarkable given that the existing regulations have been perceived as a step towards complete freedom , including by the European Commission , since their adoption in 1993 .
Naturally , we need a European approach .
The sector should not be subject to all manner of national concoctions designed to limit cabotage opportunities to a minimum for one day longer .
The Commission proposal itself , however , is not sufficiently - if at all , to be honest - in keeping with the principles and objectives of the internal market , nor with those of the Lisbon Strategy .
The arguments in favour presented by the Commissioner in his speech , such as road safety , the environment and the reduction of the administrative burden , are neither here nor there .
In order to achieve the greatest possible degree of efficiency with regard to planning , a free market is simply essential .
After all , each restriction leads to increased transport movements , whether it relates to cabotage , as in this instance , or , for example , the totally absurd medley of driving prohibitions .
Therefore , as Mr Sterckx has just quite clearly stated , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe is committed to achieving a completely free market , preferably as of 1 January 2012 .
The Member States must also be completely at liberty to agree unrestricted cabotage arrangements earlier than this , should they deem it desirable .
Furthermore , it must be above all clear that authorisations granted prior to the entry into force of the intended regulation will nevertheless remain valid .
We do not agree with the ' another study and then we shall see ' path .
The appointment of committees and study No 250 will lead to virtually nothing , except maybe to a great deal of fuss , associated costs and other bad jokes , and that is something we are all too familiar with .
A free market would prove beneficial to the sector and indeed also the consumer , and this should be achieved as soon as possible .
I should like to conclude by saying one more thing : that , quite rightly , there is a clear majority in this Parliament for dispensing with the references to ' repeated minor infringements ' .
There is no room for these in the regulation .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the three regulations we are debating here are closely linked to the free movement of goods , persons , services and capital .
When the four freedoms were established in 1957 , no one had clearly envisaged the transitional regulations for the new countries of the European Union .
Of course we are up against limitations set out in the Accession Treaties of the 10 new Member States .
Even after the opening of the Schengen border , these countries comply with the transitional regulations for transporting people and goods that can be summed up as follows : banned or limited cabotage .
In the course of debates on lowering emissions and on the effectiveness of road haulage in particular , some requirements in the regulations in question seem somewhat futuristic , in our opinion .
I remember the fines on transport of empty lorries and the so-called ' full-capacity freight transport centres ' that existed in the people 's democracies .
Perhaps we will have to return to some kind of a similar regulation .
Basically , we do the right thing when we try , in the common area , to harmonise the use of the existing rules , in addition to the common CMR documents .
If access to the market is simplified , the restrictions on cabotage are partially relaxed , and the basic working conditions in the sector are harmonised : both in regard to employment and to the attitude of individual Member States to enforcing the EU regulation , this will be heartily approved by both entrepreneurs and employees in the sector .
Consequently , having given consideration to the aspects I just mentioned , the GUE / NGL Group supports the proposals in question .
- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if the regulars at the long-distance drivers ' table , hauliers and public policy watchdogs are not criticising our proposals to replace and simplify existing directives , then we are on the right path .
For me , it is a good path , because it contributes to several fundamental points : firstly , to increasing safety in road transport , because controls and the exchange of the data thus gained are more important than new legislation , but also because access to a profession and the issuing of licences are subject to unified quality criteria .
Secondly , to eliminating distortions to competition , because it makes it possible to put a stop to the activities of the black sheep in the transport industry , fight discrimination and increase the status of the occupation .
Thirdly , to environmental protection and the conservation of energy resources by reducing unladen journeys .
Fourthly , to making coach tourism more attractive , because 12-day tours will be guaranteed once more .
Fifthly , to the reduction of bureaucratic requirements , because the national electronic registers will be networked and access to these should be made easier , and simplified templates for Community licences and driver attestation are also planned .
Sixthly , to setting the modernisation of the sector in motion .
I believe that legal certainty for future cabotage transport operations is particularly important , even if these currently make up only 2-3 % of the transport market .
Every unified regulation in Europe is better than the current patchwork quilt arrangement .
From an ecological point of view , we should open the way for cabotage transport immediately , but from a social and economic point of view , it makes better sense to limit it for the time being .
However , the goal must be the complete abolition of all limitations on cabotage transport operations by EU companies , as long as they meet the new licensing conditions .
I expect to see concrete steps towards this by 2014 .
Moreover , we should not hamper bilateral agreements that open up the market more quickly .
( NL ) First of all , I should like to thank the rapporteurs for their work .
This is an important package of measures that have a major , very specific impact upon a great many people within Europe .
What stands out most is of course everything relating to cabotage .
In that respect , it was and remains necessary to clarify a number of issues in order to set the bar equally high for everyone .
The way in which the existing cabotage rules were interpreted varied too widely from Member State to Member State , necessitating rules .
Furthermore , just to be perfectly clear : more cabotage can lead to more efficient road transport , which is good for both the economy and the environment , and must by all means be encouraged , therefore .
Nevertheless , it must be clear that this must not result in social dumping , and therefore the gradual opening of the market must go hand in hand with the establishment of social rules of play that are equal for everyone .
The differences in fiscal and working conditions must be smoothed out as far as possible , that is to say preferably with the worse conditions being brought up to the standard of the better conditions .
The compromise of throwing open the market in 2014 therefore seems justifiable , provided that Amendments 47 and 48 are adopted , that the Commission , in particular , takes the 2012 study into the differences in social and working conditions seriously , and particularly that the Member States still have a type of alarm procedure at their disposal , including after 2014 , for use in the event of serious disruption to the national transport market .
There is a need for a clear definition of which activities are and are not permitted in anticipation of this , and of course adequate supervision is required .
With regard to the driving times and rest periods of coach drivers , it would also seem logical to me - as a number of Members have already mentioned - to postpone the vote , so that the compromise worked out last Friday by employers and employees can be fully incorporated into our legislation .
The compromise is in the pipeline but has yet to be transposed into legal language .
The result of the talks proves that social dialogue can work at European level .
A good balance has been achieved , taking into account the specific features of the coach sector .
( PL ) Mr President , in such a short speech one can deal only with fundamental matters concerning the documents under discussion .
It is worth remembering that our goal is a free market , and a free market in terms of these services - road services - too .
From this aspect the documents we are discussing are in reality a type of services directive , only one that is aimed at this particular market .
In this connection the second point worth thinking about is that all restrictions and indirect routes that we apply - such as solutions relating to transitional periods , cabotage and the year 2014 - are partial solutions that should not divert us off the main highway of maximum market openness .
Finally , it needs to be emphasised that certain special restrictions linked to this specific market , such as working time and solutions relating to the environment and to traffic safety , are obviously of great importance here , but we should not forget where the boundaries of safety and social negotiations lie .
( FR ) Mr President , we cannot seriously discuss the issue of carriage of goods by road without tackling the problem of dangerous materials .
In the texts being proposed to us today , as elsewhere in European legislation , this problem is either underestimated or poorly dealt with .
Yet if there is an area in which we need more from Europe , more restricting Community regulations , it is this one .
As many businesses put their dangerous materials on the roads in order to prevent their establishments from being classified as a ' Seveso site ' , the flows of dangerous materials circulating around the Union are constantly growing , thus increasing the risks of a major catastrophe .
With regard to the carriage of dangerous materials by road , there is a huge lack of training , a major shortage of equipment in terms of parking areas that can safely take the vehicles concerned in accordance with Community regulations .
The danger of mixed loads is sorely underestimated .
Goods that are harmless when taken separately can become dangerous if they are in the same parking area ; currently , people are quite simply unaware of this danger .
I argue in favour of the creation of a European agency for the safety of land carriage of dangerous materials to promote a truly comprehensive safety policy at Union level .
Mr President , I would like to begin by saying that I wish to speak specifically on the Ţicău Report .
While we have a proposal that is largely unproblematic , I would like to comment on the issue of sanctions .
It is important to understand that we need common sanctions , but we also need to address the issue of common enforceability .
Whilst I am against more red tape , we must find a system whereby drivers and their companies can be more easily prosecuted when they cause accidents in other Member States .
At present , such companies and their drivers are escaping prosecution for offences caused , for example , in the United Kingdom , as the paperwork required to bring them to justice is currently too great .
This is particularly alarming when we consider that according to my information there has been a 75 % increase in road traffic accidents by drivers from other Member States in parts of my constituency alone in the past five years .
I regularly receive complaints from people who have been quite badly injured by commercial vehicles and their drivers and it is frustrating that our present police enforcement services are either unable or unwilling to hold these drivers to account .
I therefore look forward to further developments in this area so that we can ease the path in bringing these reckless individuals to justice .
( PL ) Mr President , we are holding this discussion at a rather specific time - that is , when we have lost a good Commissioner for Transport , by whom I mean Jacques Barrot - a time when we are awaiting a new Commissioner .
In fact , I am interested in whether the designated candidate for Commissioner is listening to our discussion today , as that would surely be justified in every possible respect .
We are talking here about the road haulage sector , a sector that has made it possible to achieve a 40 % rise in economic exchange between the EU Member States in the last five years .
We are talking about a sector that is de facto keeping Europe moving .
My view is that we need as much freedom as possible here , including in cabotage .
At the same time , though , we need as much firmness as possible , especially in combating practices such as the existence of rogue coach operators , who are frankly wrecking the market .
The sanction of withdrawing their licence is not applicable , as they do not have and have never had any such licence .
Throughout the sector , though , I can see several significant threats : the price of fuel and its rise , the way in which external transport costs are internalised , the way in which working time is executed , and I also have the impression that the profitability of haulage companies is generally falling .
This is why I would like to offer my particularly enthusiastic support to Mr Piecyk 's report , in order to be able to discuss the issue of bus and coach transport and to vote in June .
I support Mr Sterckx 's position on the need for a new study of the consequences of opening up the market , but this should also be linked to an assessment of the economic wellbeing of the road haulage sector .
( ES ) Mr President , I would first like to discuss Mrs Ţicău 's report .
This proposal is key to modernising the occupation of transport operator , through the uniform application of common rules in all Member States to authorise access to that profession .
In this respect I applaud and willingly welcome the Commission 's proposal .
However , I would like to repeat a question that I raised during the debate on this report in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
It is regarding the term ' good repute ' , which I put forward , and which , in the interests of consensus , I then withdrew and proposed substituting it with ' ethical standards ' .
I am not in any way questioning this requirement ; on the contrary , I agree that it should be required that transport managers should not have any serious criminal convictions or serious sanctions for infringements of Community legislation relating to road transport .
I do , however , advocate changing the term , because we are presuming bad practice in a profession that is a key sector of the European economy , that generates wealth , creates employment and guarantees the mobility of people and goods .
We should think carefully before assuming that someone is not of good repute to pursue an occupation if that is not proven .
Secondly , I would like to highlight the importance of Mr Grosch 's report on common rules for access to the road haulage market .
The proposal for a regulation defines cabotage operations , putting an end to the current legal uncertainty .
It allows up to three consecutive transport operations for an international carriage of seven days .
However , we should go further in order to lift any restrictions on cabotage and achieve greater liberalisation of national markets .
Finally , I applaud the reduction in bureaucracy that this new proposal for a regulation brings in relation to the new simplified formats for the Community licence , copies of this licence and the drivers ' certificates , that will help to reduce the delays caused by roadside checks .
Ladies and gentlemen , we need to make the transport sector more efficient and more competitive .
( RO ) I would like to congratulate the two Rapporteurs for their work and refer to the Ţicău report .
I welcome the introduction of the criteria for quality access to the profession of road transport operator into the report in order to the quality of licensed operators and not to restrict their access to the profession .
Whether we speak about people or goods , the profession of road transport operator involves the performance of indispensable activities for the economic development of the Union , in harmony with the Lisbon objectives to stimulate the economic activity in the European Area .
I believe the implementation of this Regulation will result in an increase in the number of jobs , as well as in achieving a higher degree of safety and correctness related to road transport in the European Union .
Again , congratulations to the Rapporteurs .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , here in the European Union , we are always proud - and quite rightly so , more often than not - that we try to find the middle ground and work together to find a solution , and that we often succeed in this .
It is not always easy .
Today 's joint debate on the reports by Mrs Ţicău and Mr Grosch provides some particularly good examples of this , and also some exceptionally bad ones : the 12-day rule and cabotage have been mentioned more than once .
The 12-day rule is good ; hopefully it also brings social benefits .
However , for a certain sector of the low-cost tourism market , it has become an increasing problem , and we want to take consumers ' interests into account here as well .
We have heard that attempts are being made to arrive at a good compromise , for which perhaps a little more time is needed .
If it is a matter of a limited time - and that is indeed the case - then perhaps we should also take this time .
The same applies to the cabotage rules .
We are all agreed that we want to see better use made of the diverse infrastructures . However , this naturally affects many areas , particularly the transport industry , and the interests in the Member States vary widely on this .
I am not entirely sure whether , when it comes to the topic of cabotage , a little ' euromythology ' does not come into play here - simply because of the many years it has been under discussion .
I would like to know whether there are really as many unladen journeys represented in the long lines of trucks that we have to overtake on the motorways - or are not allowed to overtake , as the case may be - as we are always being told .
Perhaps an ' I 'm running unladen ' flag would be of interest here .
However , the heart of our debate today is not so much the legislation we pass but what the Member States will put into effect , apply and implement .
( FR ) Mr President , I would first of all like to thank our two rapporteurs for the excellent work that they have done , and then hope that , under the French Presidency , this very important road package will obviously have a future and come to a conclusion .
I would first like to focus on two subjects .
The first is cabotage and the date that the European Parliament deemed right to set , in other words automatic liberalisation in 2014 .
From this point of view , there is a natural distortion created between the peripheral countries and the transit countries .
Countries such as France , Germany and probably Austria are by nature the most cabotaged countries , and the fact that we have just chosen a definition of cabotage that involves cabotage following an international journey is a good thing , but it means that the social issue is definitely going to create considerable distortions , while in carriage by road , it is the principle of the country of origin that applies , once one is mobile .
I therefore think that it would have been much wiser to wait , as was initially planned , for a report from the Commission enabling us to take stock of the social distortions before deciding on automatic liberalisation .
My second point relates to the derogation concerning driving time for buses .
As I have already said , without going into the subject in depth , I find this procedure detestable .
Under pressure from pressure groups , an amendment has been tabled which is an amendment to a text that is not the original text .
This issue should be resolved by a new proposal from the Commission , amending what we called here the ' Markov report ' .
I would also like to remind you that we are tabling an amendment to the Markov report in the form of a regulation when the Markov report was a directive .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am not - ah , it was a regulation , you are right , it was a regulation - but , in any case , I think that the formats need to be the same and that we should not get into this habit of tabling amendments , under pressure from pressure groups , to texts other than the original text .

Mr President , I am not saying that I give preference to Mr Grosch or to Mrs Ţicău but I will speak about cabotage like my honourable colleague Mr Savary did .
This cabotage discussion has been going on for many years .
As one of the stakeholders said , ' The behaviour of the Council can be compared to the behaviour of a snail ' ; that is how slowly the Council has been moving on this subject whereas Parliament has finally got its act together .
Cabotage is more important than we realise and I have to say that I cannot agree with my dear friend , Mr Savary , when he expresses fear that the social market will be distorted .
If you do not allow cabotage to happen , what does it mean ?
It means unnecessarily high transport costs ; that means unladen , empty lorries going here and there .
What is the EU all about ?
The EU is all about an open market , and we have to care for EU citizens .
If we get the transport costs down that means that the EU citizens will benefit and therefore we are giving them added value in their daily lives .
At this point in time people everywhere are asking : ' What is the EU doing ? '
Ordinary people are literally running after the money as the prizes are getting higher .
Well , at the same time we cannot apply protectionism .
We must allow people to have a better life and , if we can lower the costs , our economy will improve and the ordinary people will benefit from it .
Just to give an example , on trade between Finland and Russia all the transport has been taken over by Russian lorry drivers and the Finnish citizens are benefiting from it .
I cannot see why French citizens - I have my feet in both camps - would not benefit from cabotage .
So we have to say ' yes ' to the future .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Naturally I agree with all those who believe that the matter must urgently be brought to a conclusion .
Admittedly cabotage is a very sensitive subject .
This has become clear in your discussions today , including with respect to the individual Member States .
There are some who support complete liberalisation and others who advocate partial liberalisation , while others again are essentially opposed to liberalisation .
Of course it is important for us to bring our points of view into line with one another , despite the differences that exist .
We must also - and I wholeheartedly agree with this - take account of small and medium-sized enterprises and , in particular , of environmental concerns .
Here , I am thinking above all of what is known as transit cabotage , although I should like to leave this aside .
It would be absurd - not to mention unacceptable - to have empty road traffic .
Since there are differences of opinion here , in my view we need an intermediate stage or transitional period before the cabotage sector is completely liberalised .
Naturally I hope that tomorrow Parliament will accept the proposed amendments that help to harmonise cabotage services in the European Union and , in particular , will accept the proposed abolition of empty road traffic , as I have already emphasised and which I wish to stress once more at this point .
Thus cabotage should also be possible on the return journey .
In my opinion , the differences between Parliament and the Council are not so great as to prevent progress or agreement in the relatively near future .
I also agree with all those who regard monitoring and control as very important in this area .
In my view , this could also be brought about by the electronic register that is yet to be established , and here , I must emphasise , we are very close to reaching an agreement as regards the timetable and the actual establishment of this electronic register .
This also applies to traditional means of control like the digital tachograph and the waybill , of which you are probably aware .
Offences also play a major role , when they lead to disqualification from driving .
Here , we obviously have to proceed very circumspectly and with sensitivity , and above all to be receptive to companies .
The ' 12-day rule ' for bus transport has been mentioned a number of times here .
The Council has not yet reached a decision on this either .
However , we are also aware , and this needs to be clearly stated here , that the social partners are conducting a dialogue .
Naturally we are prepared to discuss this , so that Council and Parliament come to an agreement as soon as possible .
I should like to thank the two rapporteurs , Mr Grosch and Mrs Ţicău , once more for the constructive exchange of views .
The Slovenian Presidency will , in any case , do all it can to bring the various interests into line with one another , and also to ensure that the final compromise text helps to make the European road transport sector more efficient and above all , as I must emphasise , more competitive .
It is my hope and wish that this productive dialogue will be continued , and that agreement will be reached with the European Parliament as soon as possible .
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) I am pleased with the agreement that comes into view in relation to the essential aspects of the road package .
I refer in particular to the register and the withdrawal of certain abilities in the case of serious infringements of the law .
On the other hand , it is obvious that the subject of cabotage is more problematic .
Nevertheless , I would like to remind you that the notion of temporary cabotage , which is now in force , leaves serious legal uncertainties .
This situation is not acceptable for the sector in question .
No rule is perfect , but the rule proposed by the Commission - three operations within one week after an international transport - is at least clear and much easier to control .
This does not introduce more or less cabotage into the Member States taken separately , but a better performed cabotage which is , on the one hand , better controllable and , on the other hand , effective from the logistic point of view .
I am telling those who want more cabotage that the internal market is being built gradually and has to go hand in hand with harmonization .
Since I have mentioned harmonization , I would like to remind you that certain matters regarding fiscal , salary and social harmonization are related either to the Member States ' competence or can be achieved by unanimity .
In this context , we can say that total openness , without any guarantees and safeguarding measures , taking into account that cabotage is temporary , by definition , would send us back to today 's legal uncertainty .
Consequently , the European Commission accepts that the liberalization of cabotage is a long-term objective .
On the other hand , we should closely monitor developments and , in this context , we are ready to make a report in 2012 .
In conclusion , I note the concerns expressed on numerous occasions in relation to the issue of the 12 days for tourist trips .
If the European Parliament is in favour of postponing the vote on international passenger transport , the European Commission will not be against it because , indeed , we need an agreement on the register and cabotage as soon as possible but , at the same time , we also need an agreement as comprehensive as possible between the social partners on the issue of the 12 days .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Situation of the Roma in Italy ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the situation of the Roma in Italy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission strongly condemns any form of violence against the Roma and asks the authorities of all the Member States to ensure the personal safety of all the people within their territory .
The events last week in Ponticelli are not an isolated case .
The racist violence that is fed by political populism , hate speech and media hype is a phenomenon that can be seen in many Member States .
The Commission categorically rejects any stigmatisation of the Roma or likening them to criminals .
The authorities of the Member States must not only refrain from such conduct , but also set an example in the fight against racism and xenophobia .
They have the obligation to investigate racist attacks and to punish those who incite them or perpetrate them .
I would like to highlight something .
The very point of the European Union is to overcome what has characterised the history of Europe over the centuries , racial hatred , pogroms and destruction by fire .
Europe promotes the right of every man , woman and child to be protected from persecution and discrimination .
It embodies social solidarity , democracy and the rule of law , along with respect for every person of a different origin , religion , skin colour or way of life .
We should not close our eyes to the real problems that the Roma are facing in Italy and in other countries .
Everyone can see the extreme poverty , social exclusion , intermittent unemployment and low level of education that they are victims of .
This situation leads to human suffering and social tensions .
It pushes the Roma to the margins of society .
This loss of talents and potential is cruel for the Roma and a loss for Europe .
Why does this situation exist ?
The Roma are not less intelligent than the majority , and neither are they beggars or born criminals .
What can we do to change this situation ?
Let us be honest about what the Commission can do and what the governments of the Member States must do .
As was rightly underlined in the conclusions of the European Council in December 2007 , which your Parliament welcomed , the Member States and the Union must do everything in their power to improve the inclusion of the Roma .
With regard to free movement of citizens within the European Union , Directive 2004 / 38 is based on well-established principles of Union law .
Many of its provisions have already been in force for decades .
The Directive also incorporates the case law of the European Court of Justice on these issues .
Following the accession of Romania to the European Union , the Romanians enjoy the same freedom of movement as the other citizens of the Union .
The Romanians are no longer immigrants from third countries .
Romanians are citizens of the Union .
They cannot under any circumstances be treated less favourably than the other citizens of the Union , and the Commission will ensure that their rights are respected .
The Directive allows Member States to deny citizens of the Union who are inactive and do not have sufficient resources the right to live in their territory , so that these people do not become a burden on their social welfare system .
The evaluation of these resources cannot be automatic , but must take into account the behaviour of the individual .
The rules on free movement are not made to benefit criminals .
The Directive allows the exclusion of people whose behaviour represents a genuine , current and sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interests of society .
The fight against crime must be done with full respect for the rule of law .
A decision to exclude can only be made on a case-by-case basis and the procedural guarantees and basic conditions must be respected .
In the case of immediate exclusion , the urgency must be duly justified .
The exclusion of citizens of the Union is an extreme measure .
It is a limitation of a fundamental freedom of the Treaty .
Most of the essential aspects of the inclusion of the Roma in society , such as education , employment , social inclusion , public health , improving infrastructures and housing fall under the competence of the Member States .
The European Union is nevertheless prepared to take on its role of coordinating , supporting and facilitating national policies .
If we all learn to exercise peer pressure , we will be able to achieve results .
In the field in which the European Union clearly has competence , the fight against discrimination , I am making a commitment to ensure the application of Community legislation .
Directive 2000 / 43 is an important instrument with a broad scope for application .
Its implementation at national level must nevertheless be complemented by initiatives to raise awareness focused around rights and obligations .
Active monitoring of complaints by the bodies responsible for equality and full involvement of civil society in this supervision process are essential conditions for any improvement in the situation .
The events of the past week in Italy require joint efforts on our part .
Our Roma fellow citizens need our solidarity in order to break the vicious circle of exclusion and violence fed by despair .
I interpret this outbreak of violence as a cry for help .
As political leaders it is our duty to offer every individual the hope of a sustainable solution to these problems .
It is possible to combat social exclusion through targeted , made-to-measure programmes with funding from the European Structural Funds , in particular the European Social Fund .
This programme could improve the living conditions of the whole population , and therefore of the minorities as well as the majority .
In response to the call from the European Council and the European Parliament , we are currently examining the Community instruments and policies that can be implemented in order to promote the inclusion of the Roma .
I would like to invite the Italian Government and the governments of the other Member States to discuss the results of this exercise with us and to take notice of the lessons that can be drawn from it .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Commissioner Špidla .
Social solidarity , democracy , rule of law : I wish that Parliament was more in tune with these values !
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you , Madam President .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation of Roma people in Italy - as in the whole of Europe - is terrible , and has been so for many decades .
We have done extremely little , and the governments we guide or support , even governments belonging to our own political groups , are doing very little to put a stop to it .
Neither left-wing nor right-wing governments have managed to bring about any change over recent decades as regards acceptance of the Roma , and this is why I believe it is extremely important to give this issue a regular place on the agenda and in debate in this House .
We would like to ask for an even deeper commitment on the part of the political groups , however , and I believe that programmes are needed , genuine , properly implemented integration of the Roma is needed in Europe , if Roma people are not to fall victim to atrocities as a result of this sort of mass hysteria .
I do not think it is enough to make speeches in plenary sessions , and it is completely useless to treat this issue as a party political matter , because neither socialist , nor liberal , nor conservative governments have been able to do anything .
The ongoing lack of action in Europe at the moment with regard to the Roma issue is something we oppose , just as we oppose any reference to - or practice of - the principle of collective guilt , and just as we oppose crime .
I believe it is very important that the Italian government should do everything it can to fulfil its promise and ensure that the planned security package is not directed at any individual ethnic group , and that mass deportations are avoided .
Even more important in my view , however , is the message that we can send to countries from here , from Europe , and the responsibility that the European Commission needs to assume in order to ensure that minimum requirements are put in place , that an agreement is reached among the Member States regarding how they plan to go about changing the situation of Roma people in Europe in the immediate term .
I think it is indispensable for Europe 's standing in both moral and competitive terms to stop the empty talk and place the emphasis instead on action , on putting serious plans into effect .
This should be the key focus .
I also think that it is our task to promote and to demand this . Thank you .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament requested this debate and I thank you , Commissioner Špidla , for having addressed the essential elements of what needs to be said .
I am also very grateful for your very clear words .
Allow me therefore to begin with a plea to us all .
Those both on the right and on the left in this Chamber share common values .
I am very thankful that many Conservative Members in this Parliament agree with us that we must take a humanitarian approach to the problems that we have to solve .
Human dignity in the European Union is non-negotiable .
Burning down camps , chasing people through the streets - this is unacceptable !
This approach does not solve anything at all .
Thank you , Commissioner Špidla , for placing this core value of European politics at the centre of your remarks .
We want to contribute to solving problems , so I want to make one thing very clear .
The problem that we are talking about today is not an Italian problem but rather a problem which , while it occurs in Italy , has in fact occurred everywhere in the European Union in recent years .
The problem is that minorities are not sufficiently well integrated into European societies , and that the Roma communities in particular are suffering because of this in all EU countries .
Events like those that occurred in Italy , about which we have been expressing our outrage today , have also occurred in other EU countries .
Once again , therefore , this is not a time for pointing the finger at Italy .
It is a time to think about how we , together with the authorities in Italy , can solve the problem , primarily in the interests of the Roma community , which needs immediate , direct assistance .
It should also be solved in a way that is in the interests of the local authorities , the small towns and cities , some of which are overwhelmed by the integration work required of them .
The mayors there need our help too .
It was therefore very clever of you , Commissioner , to suggest that we think about how we can help municipalities like this immediately , using the EU funds available .
I believe that the efforts we now have to make should all be focused in one direction .
We should not be arguing at this point about who is to blame for something or who failed to do what .
We should make a collective effort to take recent events as a reason to say that the Roma community needs all EU Member States , the entire community of European citizens , to be willing to integrate it .
We must also insist that the Roma community allow itself to be integrated in our society .
This has to be possible , with total respect for the cultural identity of this community .
I spoke with Mr Frattini , the Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs , by telephone today , to make it plain that we as the Socialist Group , together with the Commission and the Council , want to achieve a solution to the most urgent problems , because I believe that we must not allow the Roma to become the target of attacks by people who want to indulge in right-wing populist politicking on the basis of these inadequacies .
This is our common task ; this is the reason why we requested this discussion .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I congratulate the Commissioner on his very fine speech on this subject .
I would like to express myself in response to the anti-Romany pogroms which took place in Naples on 13 May this year and the subsequent developments in Italy .
I decided to visit Rome and Naples last weekend as a kind of field research and spoke personally to people living there .
I also demanded urgent intervention by the Italian authorities to ensure fundamental rights and protect Roma in the country from further acts of violent , racist aggression and to defuse the climate of anti-Romany hostility prevailing in Italy .
I had written a letter to Silvio Berlusconi on 23 February .
Together with 88 other NGOs , we were seriously concerned that the political campaign which had been carried out associated Roma with negative stereotypes and used the whole Romany nation as electoral scapegoats , which is totally in opposition to European values .
Now we can see the impact of that campaign .
The Roma emergency was declared when the media reported that a 16 year-old Romany girl had attempted to kidnap a 6 month-old baby from her mother in Naples .
According to my fact-finding mission , this story is false : the police have no record of this ; there is no investigation concerning this case .
On 13 May a mob of approximately 60 people used Molotov cocktails to set fire to five Romany camps in Naples .
Similar violent outbursts have also occurred in other Italian cities , such as Milan .
What is really worrying is that , according to the information I have received from the police officers in Naples , there is no police investigation concerning this case either .
I have to tell you that the Italian Government appears to be strong with those who are weak and weak with those who are strong .
Whenever they raise the security issue , they should first raise the organised crimes committed by the Camorra .
They intend to talk about the immigration and Roma issue in order to divert the focus from Italy 's real problems .
I hope that the Italian authorities will ensure adequate and effective investigation of the events which took place in Naples and Milan and prosecute to the fullest extent of the law all responsible persons , including public officials making hostile statements about Roma which incite racial hatred .
I call on the Italian authorities to cooperate fully with intergovernmental institutions , international organisations and domestic civil society to swiftly and effectively end the human rights emergency of the Roma in Italy .
I also call on the European Commission to come up with an EU Roma strategy with the aim of making Roma inclusion an urgent priority and to provide leadership and coordination for Member States in their responsibility to ensure respect for the rights of their Roma citizens .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament is not the right place for polemics against any one government ; it is a place where we discuss , examine and look for shared solutions to issues that concern and worry European citizens , and what is happening in Italy concerns many Europeans .
The incidents vary enormously in terms of importance and gravity : from attacks on the Roma , the situation of degradation and poverty of entire areas controlled by criminal gangs , where Italians and migrants fight over nothing , to the tragic waste crisis and finally the incredible statements made recently by Italy 's beautiful new equal opportunities minister , bordering on homophobia .
Therefore , without sterile polemic , let us stick to the facts and look at what we can do to help and improve the situation , rather than make it worse .
What we must not do is deny the facts .
Why are we here discussing the Roma situation in Europe and Italy ?
It is because the Roma are the most discriminated against minority in Europe , and Parliament has been dealing with this issue for years .
We are not do-gooders , but there have been episodes of extreme violence , intolerance and racism , which must be called by their real name if we want to start putting them to rights .
As I said , we are not do-gooders .
At the heart of the solution that we are all searching for is legality : by this I mean respect for all of the rules .
This means rules that prevent people from stealing and squatting on public property , forcing children to beg or women into slavery , but also those that prohibit discrimination and persecution of the poor , and the decades-old repression of people who no longer know what nationality they are and are travellers not through choice , but because after fleeing so many times , the only thing that remains is life on the road .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is the reality for many Roma in Italy and Europe .
To conclude , I would like to thank Commissioner Špidla for his contribution , because he took a courageous stand and clarified some of the points that we have always maintained with respect to Directive 2004 / 38 / EC and how this has been misinterpreted in places by the Italian government .
I hope that his work to introduce clarity can continue , with our support .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , perhaps the gravity of the economic , energy and security situation for all EU citizens should have persuaded this Parliament to take it upon itself to stem the tide of fear that seems to be sweeping through all the EU countries .
Yesterday however , with its partisan decision , it chose a different path , although perhaps this was just for the benefit of the media .
It is obvious that the basis for the decision is not political but party-political , because of the fact that this is a debate without resolution .
This speaks volumes !
We share the Pope 's view on solidarity and generosity .
Before there can be solidarity , however , there must be respect for the law .
Italy is known for its generosity .
While other countries have fired on non-Community nationals , while other countries have turned away ships carrying refugees or left people to drown , clinging to fishing nets or wreckage , Italy has always welcomed non-EU and EU nationals with great kindness and generosity .
Of course , there have also been acts of atrocity , and these must be condemned and indeed have been by the current government .
We wonder , however , why the Roma situation in Italy was not picked up by Mrs Mohácsi last year , five months ago , or even a year and a half ago .
Why is Parliament talking about this today , five weeks from the vote , when it failed to address the issue clearly when it was obviously urgent ?
No , Mr Schulz ; if the title of this debate had been ' Situation of the Roma in Europe ' , we could have believed that this was a general problem .
This is a party issue , whereas political solutions are needed .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with Commissioner Špidla : we are facing political acts and events of unprecedented gravity .
The directives and declarations of the European Parliament must apply to everyone , even Italy .
We say this to the current government , whose acts and declarations on taking office cause us real concern and have shocked us .
We also said this to the previous government .
The fight against discrimination and the commitment to integrating the Roma is enshrined in parliamentary votes .
The rights of mobility and residence are pillars of European citizenship .
Europe must facilitate the implementation of its decisions .
As a European minority which was persecuted by the Nazis , the right to citizenship of the Roma must be recognised .
I consider what has been happening of late to be extremely serious : this is political exploitation of fear , for example of Romaphobia , to win electoral consensus ; fear as a basis of vote-winning .
In the process , politics and democracy are being stifled , peaceful coexistence is being poisoned and the very civilisation that Europe is called on to nurture is being destroyed .
This discussion must produce concrete results : the monitoring of action by the Member States , the monitoring of local action and the monitoring of the living conditions of Roma citizens .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , what is happening in Italy is an example of what can happen when reality collides with the utopian idealism of the European Union .
The idealism of the EU is that it can bring about a great , new , borderless state by means of unlimited , uncontrolled and indiscriminate immigration .
The reality is that such mass and unregulated immigration brings with it massive social problems .
I and my party totally condemn the violence recently seen in Italy perpetrated against groups of people because of their ethnic origin .
We have heard about the integration of communities into host societies , but how can that happen when the sheer numbers of immigrants do not allow it ?
The EU 's mission is to create a great borderless state , and this has brought about vast movements of people in Europe in recent years , surely unparalleled since the fall of the Roman Empire .
Signor Frattini , the new Italian Foreign Minister , wants to bring about tougher immigration laws .
This is the same Signor Frattini who , when he was an EU Commissioner , said that Europe needed at least 20 million new immigrants from Africa and the Third World .
Now that Signor Frattini has left the ivory towers of the EU and has a job in the real political world , he has changed his tune .
The open-border policy of the EU means that no Member State can control who can and cannot enter their country .
In Britain this has led to unbearable strains on infrastructure , public and social services and housing .
It has brought about increases in disease and crime .
Most of the organised crime in London , my constituency , is now the province of foreign ethnic gangs .
Any country should be able to have a controlled immigration policy so that they can select what immigrants they want in the appropriate numbers for their needs .
The appalling scenes of violence in Italy are a direct result of the European Union assuming control of what should be solely the province and control of nation states .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , unless I am mistaken , the repeated accusations made by Spanish socialists against Italy and its sovereign right to internal security come from those who keep a close guard on their coastline , those for whom the Ceuta and Melilla affair is still fresh , those who deal with Catalan and Basque separatism by putting political polemic and terrorism on the same footing .
Do Spanish and European socialists know how generous Italy has been towards the Roma ?
Do they know how much welfare , financial support , education and healthcare the Roma receive , which even Italian citizens do not get ?
Do they know what percentage of anti-social offences is attributable to these ' travellers ' ?
I would like to ask Commissioner Špidla who is protecting the children who are on the streets begging , selling roses and cleaning car windscreens at traffic lights in Italian cities ; in short , exploited children , whose parentage is often undetermined ?
Why , for example , is action not being taken to analyse the DNA of all these children , with the twofold aim of protecting minors and confirming their lineage ?
I believe I am right in saying that a precedent exists in Argentina for the children of desaparecidos .
In my opinion , Commissioner , there should be no Romany camps in Italy , or for that matter in Romania or in any other country of the European Union .
As a matter of fact , to allow the Roma to express their identity properly - and for their own protection and better self-governance - I propose that the EU should advocate the creation of a Romany State , perhaps even in Eastern Europe , given that a large number of Roma come from that region .
This would mean an end to their diaspora ; they could manage and govern themselves autonomously , their quality of life and welfare would improve and , if you permit me to say so , so would ours !
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a minute is certainly not enough time to cover this topic .
It has been said that the Italian Government is not being charged , but in the speeches that I have heard , there has been frequent mention of populist right-wing policy .
Mrs Mohácsi said that the incident in Naples involving the six-month old baby was untrue .
Mrs Frassoni blamed the Italian equal opportunities minister .
A government sworn into office just six days ago is the target of fierce accusations from Spanish ministers , when much more serious incidents have taken place in Spain .
I think - in fact I am convinced - that it would have been far more plausible if the Commissioner had spoken about solidarity with citizens in general , rather than just some of them .
We are and I am in favour of the issue of universal solidarity .
I believe , however , that a government has a duty to ensure the safety of all its citizens , and not just some of them ; it has a duty to ensure that all children can live in the same conditions , and not just some of them ; it has a duty to strive for integration , but not by offering to become , in some cases , a refuge for criminals .
It must defend everyone .
Madam President , you have been very generous , so please allow me to finish this thought .
I believe that a government cannot and should not be indicted ; a government , moreover , which was voted in by an unprecedented majority in Italy .
I believe that this issue , which is extremely sensitive and extremely important , as we all agree , must be tackled in earnest , and not with political gestures .
I have always supported the idea that Parliament , the European Union , must abandon political posturing once and for all , and have a credible European integration policy without attacking individual governments .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Špidla was right when he said that the recent attacks on Roma camps in Rome and Naples were very serious incidents , and that these must be dealt with by finding answers that neither absolve Europe of the blame , nor make scapegoats , nor use discriminatory and humiliating language .
I apologise to Mr Romagnoli , who we have just heard .
These types of response risk fuelling a dangerous climate which could erupt into violence and racism .
This debate , Mr Zappalà , is not a trial for Italy or its government : the Commissioner has sent out a clear message of cooperation .
We expect convincing and concrete answers from the Italian Government , in line with two basic requirements : integration and safety , and reception , integration and security in accordance with the law and enforced by the State , not by militia and vigilante patrols , which hark back to a dark time in our country 's history that we do not want to see reappearing .
Some newspaper headlines today read ' Europe puts Italy on trial ' or ' Comrade Schulz , Berlusconi 's enemy , against Italy ' .
This is ridiculous .
I would like to say that Italy , a country held in high esteem and loved for its civilised values , asks Europe to fulfil its role in strengthening security and fostering integration .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would simply like to say this : despite the gravity of these incidents , which I think everyone here recognises , there is a certain mindset and an ignorance of the situation in Italy and in Europe which frightens me .
It is always somebody else 's fault .
Therefore , I demand the duty and right of self-accusation .
We have been in power in Rome and Naples for 15 years !
In Rome , Naples and throughout Italy , a disgraceful television campaign has emerged .
The percentage of airtime spent denouncing crimes , creating a psychosis of fear , has risen from 10 % to 24 % .
Madam President , I just want to say that where there is no democracy , there is no peace for the Roma , or even for Italians .
Italy is not a democracy ; there is no rule of law .
We can start from this point and fight , and we can hope , but not with the cheap morality that too many of us have .
Madam President , I am deeply disappointed to find President Barroso not sufficiently engaged in dealing with Roma issues .
In this parliamentary term we have adopted two joint resolutions on Roma and a report on Roma women , and we have had a number of meetings with the EC .
Meanwhile anti-Gypsyism has increased and , apparently , the public acceptance of racism too .
It is high time for action .
This case in Italy with the Roma is a clear example of government-sponsored racism .
The violence against the Roma scapegoats in Italy reminds me of the anti-Jewish and anti-Romany pogroms of the 1930s .
Berlusconi 's political tactics look like the ones of Milošević 's ethnic cleansing in ex-Yugoslavia .
I want to call on your solidarity to exert pressure on the EC and the Council for an EU Roma policy .
I am convinced that the EU presidency has heard this debate and will examine the Roma issue more seriously during the next EU summit .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to clear up any misunderstanding .
Any act of violence and discrimination must be condemned in no uncertain terms , but we need to consider the situation , and especially to avoid hypocrisy or , even worse , political exploitation .
I am sorry to be so blunt , but I would like to cast a veil over the attempts made by many in this Chamber today to place the blame for the current Roma situation in Italy on Silvio Berlusconi .

Perhaps Mr Veltroni and Mr Bassolino know more about blame , especially when it comes to the squalor in illegal Romany camps .
I would , however , ask everyone to make an effort to act responsibly and in earnest , which we now need after all the delays and calls for a solution which have fallen on deaf ears .
We need to redouble our efforts and to stand up for the people living in the Romany camps in conditions that are absolutely inhumane and unacceptable ; we need to forget the mother whose baby was almost abducted and the family of Mrs Reggiani , raped and killed just under a year ago , sadly a case that has occupied this Parliament .


Our proposals , which we have been making for years , are clear : they were incorporated into both the last European Parliament resolution on the situation of the Roma in the European Union , and into the European strategy on the rights of the child .
One : solve the problem of Romany camps , where health and safety is non-existent ; two : propose drastic measures , such as the loss of parental authority , for those parents who force their children into begging , prostitution and child labour ; three : lower the school drop-out rate among Roma children , which is 75 % in some Member States ; four : make better use of Community funds available for all citizens of Roma origin who work , who want to be integrated and who send their children to school , but at the same time isolate and repatriate habitual offenders .
Finally , I make this appeal to the entire European Union , given that the problem concerns all Member States , as the Council of Europe , among others , recently pointed out with regret .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Špidla , I am extremely worried by the recent events in Italy .
There is a witch-hunt climate against Romanians and Roma , with a great number of punitive expeditions and with travellers ' camps that have been set on fire .
The Italian Government is waging an obsessive security campaign that calls into question Europe , the Schengen Treaty and free movement in the EU .
We need to readdress the security issue from the point of view of legal culture , which cannot be influenced by the emergency aspect .
The rule of law requires criminal responsibility to be individual ; it cannot be attributed to collective categories .
To depart from this principle sets a dangerous precedent that will lead to the criminalisation of entire ethnic groups .
The security requirement is legitimate , but we cannot resort to exploitation designed to fuel hatred and xenophobia for political ends .
Rather than making illegal immigration a criminal offence , the Italian Government should use EU funds more effectively for integration policies .
In short , we need to reopen the debate on the expulsion of the Roma in the proper European setting and confirm that existing laws should be enforced , without calling into question the freedom of movement of EU citizens , which is an inalienable right of European citizenship .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that this is an indictment of a government which for two years has allowed hundreds of thousands of people to enter its country and at the same time has allowed those people to live in a state of absolute squalor , creating a new sub-proletariat .
Those who did not consider a moratorium when Romania and other countries joined the EU should also be indicted .
I do not think that Italy is able to tackle this problem , amid other pressing issues such as waste management , employment and housing .
The Roma question is an insurmountable problem , given that this ' solidarity ' is represented by camps - as shown on yesterday 's Porta a porta [ Italian current affairs programme ] - which are theoretically legal , but where there is continuous child abuse and the sanitation conditions are absolutely appalling .
I think the only thing that Italy can do - and Europe must support it in this - is : 1 ) suspend the Schengen Treaty for at least six months with regard to Italy , since Parliament recognises that there is a problem with the Roma emergency in Italy , so there should be a suspension of the Schengen Treaty ; 2 ) make illegal immigration a criminal offence in Italy , as it is in other countries ; 3 ) negotiate with Romania , Bosnia , Macedonia and Serbia - in other words with both EU Member States and third countries - for the humane repatriation of Italy 's Roma population .


( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to give Mr Schulz the benefit of the doubt when he says that he wants a constructive approach towards reception and the unavoidable rules that the Roma , like everyone else , must obey if they are to participate in the coexistence project that we call the European Union .
The steady erosion of the rights and dignity of these people and the Italian victims involved in the escalating violence over the last 18 months are an example of the contradictions demonstrated by those governments and institutions that on the one hand preach understanding and on the other allow human beings to live in squalor and to be robbed , raped and killed at the hands of mob justice .
If we are really determined to find a solution , Mr Schulz , ladies and gentlemen , let us admit that not only did Mr Prodi 's government collapse , but that both left and right must make an effort to accept each other .
This will make it easier to shoulder a problem in which we would otherwise have been held to ransom by old-school politics and would have needed to raise the spectre of Mr Berlusconi to feel absolved from our mistakes .
Thank you .
Madam President , in Italy , a country worthy of our respect and love , the populist rhetoric has united with extreme-right doctrines and fuelled inter-ethnic hatred , encouraged anti-Roma pogroms and prepared the ground for racial laws .
In a bizarre way the Roma phobia was combined with a Romanian phobia .
While we protest vigorously against inhuman behaviour and discrimination in Burma or other remote places , yesterday the number of MEPs who thought that the events in Italy require more than a complaisant one-minute speech exceeded only by six the number of those who believe that this is not business as usual .
The problem in Italy is not a Roma problem or a Romanian problem , as Mr Daul put it yesterday .
Romanians and Roma are only victims .
Italians are also victims .
The events and developments in Italy are only the shocking expression of a tendency which is latent in many other places in Europe .
And therefore they could spill over in all Europe ; this is a European problem .
To prevent this problem and to cope with the Roma challenge one does not need more repression but more integration .
One does not need more police but more justice , and especially social justice .
One also needs states which function , media who never mix up criminality with ethnicity and a European Union which is able to conceive and enhance a truly comprehensive and bold European strategy on Roma in particular and on intercultural relations in general .
If we do not pass this test , the flames in Naples will set fire to all Europe .
- ( DE ) Madam President , more than 10 million Sinti and Roma live at the margins of society within the European Union .
The Decade of Roma Inclusion , which began in 2005 , has so far changed little about this .
The incidents in Italy clearly show that measures taken so far against exclusion and discrimination have had little effect and have not been implemented .
In January we called again for an integration strategy for the Roma , and today we have debated and passed the Framework Directive on Anti-discrimination .
The pogroms in the Romany areas of Italy show how urgently we need a genuine , comprehensive political solution . We do not need confrontation .
True integration of the Roma into our society would be good evidence that the cornerstones of democracy , the rule of law and human rights form the foundation of the EU .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , it is up to the people of our country to ask the government to tackle the crime emergency , including Roma crime , realistically and without adopting a do-gooder attitude .
Defend human rights by all means - this should have been done in Ceuta , but instead there was the conspiratorial silence of Socialist International .
Comrade Schulz , would you agree ?
Above all , defend honest citizens from the unlawfulness of others , including the Roma !
I will personally campaign so that the government in our country makes it a criminal offence to be a member of a criminal gang , much like the typical Roma gangs , who commit thefts , burglaries and even more serious crimes .
Xenophobic violence is not characteristic of our people , let alone the people of Campania or Naples .
It belongs to the Camorra , who we must fight .
People are demanding safety , in the knowledge that this does not preclude humanitarian and solidarity measures .
Safety is , however , the first priority , and it is just as important to guarantee this .
We are not convinced by the idle talk of the Commission : citizens in Italy and in Europe are calling for protection from uncontrolled immigration and from the influx of people who are not emigrating in order to work but are often criminals who emigrate , rather than emigrants who commit crimes .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the difficult law and order situation and the natural public reaction following the numerous episodes of violence that have shaken public opinion in my country have led the Italian Government to adopt new security measures .
I believe that we must vigorously reject the attempts of those who define the provisions contained in the security package presently being ratified by the Italian Council of Ministers as discriminatory , racist and outside Community directives .
Strict measures on squatting , the expulsion of migrants without visas and higher penalties for those who commit anti-social crimes are consistent with European law .
Italy is and will remain a receptive country which is developing a new integration policy , but it is no longer prepared to tolerate the presence of illegal immigrants .
All EU and non-EU citizens are welcome , provided that they abide by the rules of peaceful coexistence .
The European Union and its 27 Member States must each do their bit , and we must monitor the situation to make sure that civil rights are respected throughout Europe .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if you do not mind I am going to stick to the facts .
The facts tell us that Silvio Berlusconi 's government is reintroducing the concept of race into the Italian legal system and is rapidly marginalising Italy within the EU , systematically violating the founding principles on which Directive 2001 / 38 / EC is built , first and foremost the fundamental principle of the right of free movement of persons .
I would like to mention just two implications of this : the first we witnessed in Naples a few days ago , when the Camorra were appointed as stand-in law enforcement officers and dislodged anyone who remained in the city 's Romany camps with Molotov cocktails .
The second one we heard from Mr Romagnoli , who has come out with a proposal whose origin can certainly not be embellished .
This is a completely unoriginal proposal : to rebuild , build or conceive a State to which all Roma citizens are confined .
I seem to recall that the same proposal was made about gypsies and Jews by Goebbels in 1930s Nazi Germany before war broke out , and the State of gypsies and Jews was replaced by crematoria .
This is the message behind the proposal we have heard today .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I had planned to speak once , but I will speak again after Mr Fava has spoken , of course .
Madam President , I am very sorry , but I believe , from what I have heard here today , that this debate was prompted by a persecutory , accusatory and punitive attack on a Member State and a government that was elected by an overwhelming majority .
Unfortunately for some , however , it is guilty of not being a left-wing government .
It is not our fault if the Roma are visible in Italy almost exclusively by virtue of their crimes of theft , robbery , child abduction and begging .
This is the image that gypsies have in Italy , this is the image that the Roma have created , despite our best efforts .
I am still looking for a Roma in Italy - and please someone tell me if they know of one - who is legally employed and who pays taxes .
Do not accuse me of racism , please be serious .
I am only defending honest Europeans - be quiet and go back to your gallery , go back to your gallery ! - Madam President , I was interrupted .
Do not accuse me of racism , be serious .
I am only defending honest Europeans and honest Roma .
Each Member State should put the safety of its citizens first , otherwise citizens will feel justified in dispensing their own justice .
Therefore , to conclude , I would like the Spanish MPs and MEPs to get a grip , keep quiet and put their own houses in order a bit more .
Please , Mr La Russa and Mr Pannella : we are not in the Italian Parliament , please behave properly - and stop making those gestures , do you understand ?
Please let us stop this , otherwise I will call the clerks !
( HU ) Thank you , Madam President .
It fills me with dismay to note that , after Tibet and Kosovo , we have now arrived on European Union soil .
Let us not forget that the Roma are European Union nationals ; they too are EU citizens .
Social issues and xenophobia are always connected .
I would have been delighted if our socialist friends had also raised their voices when socialist and former communist prime ministerial candidate Walter Veltroni was still mayor , clamouring for the deportation of undesirable elements , confusing Roma people with Romanians .
Next , we must not forget that the issue of minorities is many-layered : there are Roma , new immigrants , and national minorities , but they are all alike in that every European Union country must find a solution to their problems .
The minimum would be to establish a human rights committee for minorities from 2009 and ensure that legislation is uniform throughout the European Union .
To conclude , I would just like to say a word or two regarding preventive strategy : the role of the EU must not merely be to put out fires ; rather , it must adopt the stance that unless there is social security , respect for fundamental human rights , and cultural and territorial autonomy for minorities , there is no Europe .
Thank you .
( ES ) Madam President , I would first of all like to thank Commissioner Špidla for the clarity of his speech and the speed with which the Commission has reacted .
Madam President , allow me to speak on behalf a former Member of the European Parliament , the first Spanish gypsy Member of Parliament who was elected fifteen years ago , Juan de Dios Ramírez Heredia , who sent me a letter that reads as follows :
' You are well aware of the sad events that in recent days have caused so much sorrow to hundreds of innocent gypsy families who have been victims of racist violence .
As the Unión Romaní we want this debate , so that no one can ignore the fact that we must , at all costs , defend human rights and the pre-eminence that law must always have over political passions .
As European gypsies we believe in Europe .
No one has constantly defended a Europe without borders more than the gypsies .
For this reason we think that placing arbitrary limits on the free movement of persons within European territory would be a serious step backwards for the European integration that we so much dream of . '
Allow me to conclude , Madam President , by addressing Commissioner Špidla , who , along with Vice-President Frattini , presented a plan , a roadmap for legal migration here in Parliament three years ago .
I think that Vice-President Frattini did a good job as Commissioner and I hope that he will also help to deal with this situation in Italy .
( HU ) Thank you , Madam President .
In the city of Naples , the social reality that was temporarily masked by symptomatic management has burst to the surface with astonishing force .
In the Europe of the 27 , the problem can no longer be dealt with at Member State level ; it is crying out for much more complex Community action .
The problem is not an issue of relations between one nation and another , or between old and new Member States , or even between the Roma and non-Roma population .
The crisis has made visible the hopeless situation in which a million European Union citizens are living , teetering on the edge of society in the suburbs of towns stricken with unemployment , in emergency accommodation , in insanitary conditions , struggling unnoticed for survival with no proper assistance or training services .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has not been silent .
They have taken action , and not just talked about it , and they have also stated that , in a united Europe , blaming the Roma population for the current public security situation is unacceptable .
How much we understand on the basis of events like those in Naples and how we can best use the Community resources available for remedying the problems is up to us .
As the person reporting to the European Parliament on Roma issues , I offer the Commissioner our cooperation and ask my fellow Members of this House to do the same .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , having listened carefully to the whole debate , I would like to put forward a final opinion .
The debate for the most part has not been up to level of the Commissioner 's report and Mr Schulz 's invitation to ignore the specific problems or machinations of a particular country - specifically Italy - and to consider the general problem which , I think we all agree , is reception and solidarity for those who enter different countries , for the Roma , who certainly have a specific problem , and at the same time security and legality , because security and legality underpin the reception and solidarity that we must offer .
We should have answered the Commissioner , who asked : what can the Commission do ?
I believe that Mr Barón Crespo said recently that the Commission , with the support of Parliament , can issue guidelines : European directives , when these are transposed .
As with the issue of waste , so for the question of non-EU and EU nationals , a directive could be the solution , although not when Parliament , the Commission and the Council fail to take advantage of their solidarity , when they use it to have a debate which is purely about Italy and is manipulative , the government having been in office for only a few hours , a few days .
If on the other hand the whole of Parliament focuses on solidarity - as envisaged by the Commissioner - then I believe we might be able to find solutions and get results .
Madam President , when we Romanians were a candidate country , we were lectured amongst others by people like former Commissioner Frattini about the absolute need to respect the rights of minorities , including the Roma .
Now we are members and many of the Roma population , as European citizens , have established themselves in other countries , like Italy , joining other Roma people living there , some in camps which are already 40 years old .
I agree that some have committed crimes and have to be punished properly .
But to generalise and incite aggressive , negative feelings against all of them , including through false media reports , is not acceptable .
If we tolerate this gross infringement of the core European values , which we so much like to invoke , and close our eyes to those responsible , we only invite the worst , which would soon get completely out of control with incalculable negative consequences for the entire Union .
( RO ) I believe this debate could have been named : " Serious infringements of human rights in Italy ” , because , in fact , we are dealing with the Italian Government 's lack of actions when a community has been subject to incredible violence and this was possible because , unfortunately , over the last months , the racist speech of a part of the Italian press , as well as some top politicians , remind us of the worst periods in Europe 's recent history .
The Italian government has the obligation to investigate the authors of these violent acts , who must be tried and the Italian justice must decide .
Otherwise , the Italian government seriously infringes articles 6 of the Treaty on European Union .
The non-State actors , the criminals , must answer before the Italian justice .
The Italian government must answer before the European Union .
This is the spirit of article 6 of the Treaty .
( HU ) Madam President , estimates suggest that Romania has several million gypsy citizens , and instead of there being a responsible social and minority policy addressing their intolerable situation , the world tends to hear about their fate through the sensationalist media .
We witnessed this in connection with the criminal acts committed by Romanian gypsies in Italy .
It is regrettable and distressing that it is only the shocking events in Italy that have managed to reach the European Parliament 's social response threshold .
It is even sadder that some political forces are treating these events as interference in Italy 's domestic affairs and are trying to make political capital out of the gypsy issue .
We must , on the other hand , oppose the use of anti-Romanian gypsy sentiment among the public by some political forces to foment anti-Romanian feeling in general .
In the first place , the situation that has evolved in Italy is not an Italian domestic matter , and neither is it merely an issue relating to Romanian gypsies .
It is an issue concerning all gypsy people living within the European Union , and one that demands and warrants more than just case-by-case or symptomatic treatment .


( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a political and media campaign is under way for the criminalisation of migrants and the Roma in Italy .


A number of Italian MPs have exposed the Italian Government 's true self here today , for example Mr Fiore , Mr Borghezio and Mr La Russa , who , as we all heard , clearly said that Schengen needed to be suspended , illegal immigration made a criminal offence , and all Roma expelled : it is tantamount to equating the Roma to criminals .
This is the real Italian Government .
The campaign is evident from the fact that it has just announced the appointment of a Roma special commissioner .
This was followed by a round-up of Roma , instead of arresting those who set fire to the Romany camps in Italy .
Statements of the kind that we have heard here are often expressed by various ministers in the Italian Government .
This is why , Mrs Muscardini , we are having the debate now and did not do so sooner .
Only one thing needs to be said , and I will conclude on this point : there are 200 000 Roma in Italy .
Of these , 80 000 are Italian citizens .
Of the remaining 120 000 , 50 000 were born in Italy .
If we granted citizenship , that would probably solve a large part of the Roma problem in Italy .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak , having listened to your debate .
Allow me to touch very briefly on several issues .
The history of Europe shows quite clearly that racism , ethnic hatred and intolerance always end up in disaster , sooner or later .
Those who do not learn their lesson from history will sometimes experience the disaster again .
The concept of human rights is Europe 's answer to the lesson of history .
Human rights are indivisible and must be protected by all constitutional systems throughout Europe , in all Member States .
Each Member State must comply with this and make adequate efforts to fulfil this duty .
There is another thing I want to mention in this context . This morning we debated poverty and social exclusion .
It is true that poverty in Europe has been very individualised , very much pertinent to personal circumstances .
There is one single exception though .
If you belong to the Roma minority , with only a few exceptions you are socially excluded and poor , practically everywhere in Europe .
That is the reality .
On the other hand , it is clear that the situation of Roma citizens is not the same in all countries and that there are effective projects and methods that improve their situation .
The debate also clearly showed that the issue of minorities is very complex and , as I said before , it must primarily be dealt with by the Member States , although there is also a role for the European Union and the European Commission .
Therefore , I am pleased to be able to say , ladies and gentlemen , that as early as June we will submit a conceptual document to the Council that will attempt to review our hitherto ineffective policies .
This is the unfortunate truth and this issue requires a great deal of effort on our side .
The debate also showed clearly how easy it is to turn such extreme issues into political instruments .
One of the duties of all democratic forces is to prevent such manipulation , which makes any efficient approach to the issue impossible .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for expressing your views , which clearly highlighted the many facets of this matter .
I would perhaps add just one more quick word : you expressed a number of different views , many of which I do not support .
This is normal , just as some of you may not agree with my views .
However , we heard one view that is quite unacceptable .
I cannot remember who voiced this opinion but I believe you noticed it , too .
The debate is closed .
Thank you , Commissioner Špidla .
I wish that this issue could be discussed calmly , with humanity and dignity , as President Pöttering often says .
Mr Romagnoli , I have not forgotten about you .
You made a request based on Rule 145 , which is personal , so you will have a chance to speak after the debate , which is now .
You have one minute .
I just need to remind you that under Rule 145 , you must not enter into the merits of the debate , but simply state whether there is a personal matter or comments that you think were wrongly attributed to you .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this should be a place of free and educated debate , but it fails to be that if it tolerates rudeness and insults that were perhaps unfounded .
Personally , I have always condemned and still do condemn all violence and discrimination , at any time and in whatever form , against both individuals and communities ; I believe that self-determination , if we grant it to Palestinians , must also apply to others , so this was what I meant when I expressed my views about the Roma .
I am sorry that someone twisted my words .
I am sorry that some of my fellow Members called me names that I do not deserve , as anyone who knows me will agree .
No one wants to question human rights .
I am not a racist or a xenophobe , but I insist , ladies and gentlemen , on the right to social order which everyone here should defend , and on Italy 's right to complete sovereignty .
There was the business of a request ; the Secretariat is checking , because there was no mention of what type of request it was .
As you know , there is no resolution and no vote .
- ( DE ) Madam President , I fully understand that often it is not possible to allow everyone to speak under the ' catch the eye ' procedure .
However , I do not understand why selection should then come down to allocating the right to speak to each group .
This distorts the political weightings in the European Parliament significantly .
Basically , it means that the small groupings are repeatedly given a much greater weighting .
That is a legitimate political concern , but it is not what was intended by ' catch the eye ' in the Rules of Procedure .
I would also like to ask that in future , when somebody registers to speak in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , they are in fact given the opportunity to speak .
We have five minutes left of allotted time .
This was decided by the Conference of Presidents , and this is the correct amount of time .
I will , however , make a note of your comments .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
, in writing . - ( RO ) The increase of violence against Romanian immigrants and the Roma population in Italy is the direct result of extremist speeches of fascist type , promoted by the right-wing and extremist right-wing parties in the recently ended electoral campaign in Italy .
The Italian authorities should take into consideration the fact that the legislative amendments they intend to adopt must strictly comply with the European norms and not provide any collective expulsions or continue to promote a xenophobic attitude toward Community citizens settled in Italy .
In fact , the main problem is not related to criminality .
This involves an individual liability and it should be sanctioned as such by the Italian justice , according to the Italian laws .
The priority is a coherent policy of integration into the Italian society and the support of the Italian State , including by using the European funds in this field .
We regret the previous position of the Liberal Government in Bucharest and the ALDE group in the European Parliament , which refused the mandate extension for the European Commissioner appointed by Romania for minority issues in Europe , including issues related to the Roma population .
Thus , Romania has lost an important political lever and the possibility to generate European solutions regarding the issue of integrating the Roma people into European society .
in writing . - ( RO ) I welcome the fact that the European Parliament decided to organize a debate on the situation of the Roma community in Italy .
This is a signal that this issue has begun to be seen in its true dimension : the European one .
The issue of the Roma is so complex that only mobilizing the energies of the entire European Union could provide a concrete solution to a situation that comes from history .
This is why we need a strategy and concerted action at a continental level .
I request the competent Commissioners to propose a work plan in this respect urgently .
I also believe it is the duty of the European forums to take a firm position on the way in which the Italian authorities understand implementing extreme measures .
Setting nomad camps on fire , night raids , arrests without warrant and threats with mobilizing the army in the fight against crime - all these reflect an atmosphere of painful intolerance for the 21st century and represent a dangerous situation for the future of the EU .
If we arrive at legislating on the climate of ethical and racial hatred , I believe it is the duty of the EU to consider the adoption of possible sanctions against a government that infringes the values at the foundation of the United Europe .
in writing . - ( RO ) The recent events in Italy and the xenophobic position of the representatives of right-wing and extreme right-wing parties , which have formed the new government , against the Roma people prove that , unfortunately , speech and actions of a fascist nature are present in 2008 Europe .
Making criminality ethnic is extremely dangerous , as well as the fact that politicians and the mass-media , by the media overlapping of crimes committed by Roma people , promote the idea that all criminals come from the Roma population .
Criminality is individual and should be punished in compliance with the laws of the Italian state .
The increase of violence against the Roma people in Italy both in speech and action is a European problem due to the consequences it may have and its solution consists in an integrationist policy of the Italian authorities regarding the Roma people .
The European Union provides a series of funds for financing such social integration programmes , which the Italian executive can and should use .
Secondly , the Community executive should take actions regarding the discrimination against certain ethnic categories on the Italian labour market , since at this moment Italy is far from achieving the objective of full employment .
, in writing . - ( RO ) I welcome the position expressed by the European Commission through the voice of the European Commissioner Vladimír Špidla , of condemning the violence against the Roma people , wherever they are .
I also emphasize the need for a European strategy regarding the inclusion of the Roma population into the economic , social and political life of the European countries where they live .
In the absence of such a European strategy , each country will try to solve its problems regarding the Roma population sometimes by using policies and means that are incompatible with the fundamental human rights , the free movement of people in the European area .
Thus , I remind the European Commission that the European Parliament approved the Resolution for a European strategy on the Roma in November 2007 .
My country , Romania , has made great efforts to include the Roma people .
The results have started to appear but the programmes in operation require more time in order to be able to assess their efficiency .
From these programmes , I mention in particular the training of specialists from among the Roma people for public administration and police , the decrease in school abandonment among the Roma children , as well as their integration into universities .
, in writing . - ( RO ) One of the fundamental principles of the European Union is the free movement of people .
The area of freedom , security and justice should ensure the security and , particularly , the respect for the rights of all European citizens .
The current situation of the Roma people in Italy questions precisely the common fundamental values upon which the European construction relies .
On 14 December 2007 , the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union was signed and adopted .
The European Union acknowledges the values stated in this Charter , in Article 6 which says that " The Union is founded on the indivisible , universal values of human dignity , freedom , equality and solidarity " and " the Union places the individual at the heart of its activities , by establishing the citizenship of the Union and by creating an area of freedom , security and justice " .
Also , Article 19 of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights mentions explicitly that collective expulsions are forbidden .
I request the Italian government to ensure compliance with the rights of the Romanian citizens in Italy , as well as their safety .
I request the Italian government to take actions against any forms of discrimination on nationality or ethnicity criteria .
I request the Commission , in its capacity as guardian of the Treaties , to sanction firmly the infringement of the fundamental rights of the European citizens and not allow the adoption of laws or actions that would limit the free movement of people .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0156 / 2008 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Subject : Biofuel trading practices
What action is the Commission taking to stop the reported biofuels trading practice that exploits US agricultural subsidies ?
The practice involves shipping biodiesel from Europe to the US where some fuel is added , allowing traders to claim 11p a litre of US subsidy .
It is then shipped back and sold below domestic prices .
It is estimated that up to 10 % of exports of biofuels from the US to Europe are part of this rogue scheme .
This is not an illegal act , but puts the European biofuel industry at risk .
It also involves unnecessary shipping across the Atlantic , which increases emissions of greenhouse gases .
Will the sustainability criteria as proposed by the Commission solve this problem and make it illegal to sell biofuels on the European market that have been involved in this practice ?
Member of the Commission . - While the Commission cannot comment on the extent of the alleged practice referred to in the question , it shares the concerns about the impact on the European industry of the United States tax subsidy .
The subsidy appears to benefit all bio-diesel exported from and , by the way , sold in the United States , whatever its source .
According to the industry data , the US exports to the European Union rose from 100 000 tonnes in 2006 to 1 million tonnes in 2007 , which is equal to about 15 % of the European market .
My colleague , Commissioner Mandelson , has raised this on a number of occasions with his US counterpart , Trade Representative Susan Schwab .
He has advocated a change in the US legislation , for example restricting the subsidy to goods sold in the United States as a possible solution to the problem .
So far there has been no movement from the United States side and the tax credit remains in force .
The Commission would be prepared to consider an anti-subsidy investigation upon receipt of a properly documented complaint from the European Union industry containing sufficient evidence of countervailable subsidisation and injury .
The honourable Member asks whether the sustainability scheme proposed by the Commission in its proposal for the directive on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources , adopted by the Commission this January , will solve the problem created by the trading practice referred to in the question .
The sustainability scheme provided for by the Renewable Energy Directive is about ensuring the sustainability of biofuels .
It is designed to promote the use of sustainably produced biofuels while discouraging the use of poorly performing ones .
You will remember the 35 % discussion .
The sustainability scheme would therefore not be able to address trading practices such as the one referred to in the question from the honourable Member .
Commissioner , I am glad you are dealing with this .
I think it is a scandal and it makes a mockery of all the work we are doing on climate change .
In terms of sustainability criteria , if we have a greenhouse gas savings criterion , would these kinds of biofuels not fall foul of that because it has been shipped up and down the Atlantic adding greenhouse gas from shipping emissions , which are 5 % of world CO2 at the moment ?
If we have to wait for a complaint from industry and the opening of a procedure on illegal subsidies , how long will that take ?
My fear is that , by the time we get something done , the European industry will have gone out of business .
Member of the Commission . - The method of the calculation of greenhouse gas emission from biofuels compared to fossil fuel emission contained in the Renewable Energy Directive follows what we call the life cycle approach , which also takes into account the level of emission produced during transport of biofuels both within and outside the European Union .
In this respect let me reiterate once more that reducing greenhouse gas emission from transport is one of the guiding objectives of the biofuel policy .
Subject : European food aid programme for the most deprived persons
In 2005 , the European Parliament approved a written declaration on the durability of the European food aid programme for the most deprived persons .
The declaration not only advocated a permanent food aid programme plus an annual budget , but also called for it to be expanded .
To ensure distribution of balanced food rations , the European Parliament called for the programme to be opened up to new sectors such as pork , poultry and eggs .
Mariann Fischer Boel , European Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development , was tasked with following up the declaration .
That fact is that , three years later , there is still no sign of a basis for a new regulation and that only modest steps have been taken .
As yet , it is totally unclear what budget funding is available .
Food aid is very much an issue in the European Union , where 16 % of the population lives below the poverty line .
Can the Commission ensure a food aid programme at European level ?
In the process , will it enter into a dialogue with the European NGOs active in the field ?
Member of the Commission . - For 20 years the European food aid programme has made a decisive contribution in meeting the food requirements of undernourished people in the Community .

On 4 April 2006 this Parliament adopted a supportive declaration on the European food programme for the most deprived people in the Community .
This declaration calls on the Commission and the Council to provide a multiannual budget allocation and to introduce a series of flexibility measures in the management of the programme .
A strong emphasis is also put on the need to secure a balanced diet for needy people .
This programme actually started back in 1987 as an emergency measure in a time of abundant surpluses of agricultural production .
During its first years , the food aid programme mainly relied on supply from intervention stocks .
As stocks have been declining over the last years as a consequence of the successive reforms of the common agricultural policy , the Commission introduced a series of changes to secure the continuation of this scheme and these changes include the possibility of market purchase for products that are not available from our intervention stocks , the exchange of products within the same ' family ' and the possibility to mix or incorporate intervention products and products bought on the market .
The budget has also been adjusted in particular to take into account the recent enlargement of the European Union .
It has increased from EUR 213 million in 2004 to EUR 305 million this year , 2008 .
Therefore the Commission has made all efforts to keep in operation a programme that is based on intervention stocks in spite of the fact that these were vanishing .
So we can actually say that we have been pushing the programme to its limits .
Now the time has arrived to rethink the future of this programme without losing sight of its broader picture .
With this aim the Commission services are already working on an impact assessment that examines the options for the future .
The internet consultation has attracted huge participation with more than 12 000 replies , which proves the high interest among European citizens for this initiative .
NGOs have actually played a crucial role in the implementation of the programme and they will also remain a key player in the future .
In a seminar which we organised in April they expressed the wish to maintain the food aid programme under the administration of the Directorate-General for Agriculture and they also stressed the need to introduce some kind of a multiannual allocation of funds and supply a broader range of different products .
We are now examining these requests from the NGOs and will stay in close contact with them .
After the completion of the impact assessment I intend to submit to this Parliament in September a proposal that allows the continuation of this scheme but on a very solid basis for the future .
So I thank you very much for your interest and attention to this very important scheme .
( NL ) Madam President , I should like first and foremost to thank the Commissioner for this very clear , full reply , which also offers prospects for greater durability of this food aid programme , based upon the evaluation that is currently under way .
I only wanted to ask whether this evaluation also takes into account the fact that a large number of people are still evidently dependent upon this food aid programme and that almost 16 % of the European population lives below the poverty line , and whether it also takes account of the current food crisis and the spectacular growth in food prices .
Member of the Commission . - We are taking into account all the input that we are getting from our very open approach to this process .
According to the current figures available , 13 million people in the European Union are taking advantage of the special scheme for deprived people .
As far as we can see , demand is not decreasing at the moment .
- ( DE ) In many cases it is children who suffer most from poverty .
Lack of food impairs not only physical development but also the ability to concentrate and achieve at school .
This can then also affect a child 's future success in life .
Within the framework of the planned food aid programme , what arrangements are being made in this problem area to work through schools , for example ?
( DE ) I am sure it will be a good proposal , especially as you have also mentioned the necessity of a balanced diet .
It is vital that this is a key focus .
In this connection , the Commission could also add another key point , and that is to concentrate on fresh organic produce .
Everyone has a right to eat products that may be slightly more expensive but are much healthier .
To what extent will you be taking this into account ?

Member of the Commission . - First of all , what we are doing just now is evaluating all the ideas and information that we have got .
In this context we are trying to judge whether we should target our money in a specific way .
We have not yet finalised our internal discussions , but I can say this regarding children : I think it is of huge importance that first of all we ensure that our young people are well nourished and therefore we will also publish this year an idea ( and I hope to get full support for it ) for a school fruit scheme in cofinancing with Member States that can offer children at a certain age the possibility to have a piece of fruit at school .
I think it is in general a good idea providing a good habit to young people that hopefully will follow them throughout their lifetime .
As to giving special priority to organic production : I think we have to choose between the devil and the deep blue sea , because if we choose organic we get less food and I think that is going to be a very difficult judgement to make .
Subject : Speculation and the food crisis
Financial speculation is a major factor behind rising prices and the world food crisis . The commodities market in particular is attracting growing interest from investment funds .
Is the Commission prepared to accept that , for the benefit of the few , commodities such as rice or wheat are becoming the focus of speculation while , at the same time , millions of people are dying of hunger ?
Does it intend to take practical steps to end all financial speculation which directly jeopardises the food security of millions of people ?
Does it also intend to promote the implementation at international level of a mechanism preventing countries from restricting exports of foodstuffs of which they hold large stocks and , more generally , from pursuing all policies that have the direct result of preventing the most vulnerable from exercising their right to food ?
Part two

Member of the Commission . - The Commission is actually very concerned about the impact of the current high prices , both within the European Union and also in the more global context .
Developing countries and the most vulnerable populations have actually been hit very disproportionately with the consequent risks of hunger , malnutrition and social unrest .
The communication that the Commission has presented today tries to analyse the root causes of these high prices .
The Commission has presented a series of initiatives to counter the short-term effects of the food price shock , to increase agricultural supply and ensure food security in the longer term , and to contribute to the global effort to tackle the effects of the price rises on poor populations .
Concerning the root causes , there are many factors which are simultaneously reducing global supplies : adverse weather conditions in key grain-producing and exporting countries , mainly Russia and Ukraine , which was previously called the bread basket of the Soviet Union .
We have had adverse weather conditions in Australia for three consecutive years .
We have had higher energy costs .
We have had slower increases in yields and increasing global consumption .
These direct impacts on supply and demand are significant contributors to agricultural commodity prices and to the increases that we have seen .
Against the backdrop of food price increases , and in the wake of the financial market crisis , there has been increased activity in commodity-related financial markets to hedge price risk or diversify investment portfolios .
These activities may have led to increased price movements and volatility on futures and spot commodity markets and have amplified the underlying price movements , but their influence on long-term price formation remains uncertain .
So in today 's communication the Commission commits to monitoring closely activities by speculative investors in commodity-related financial markets and their impacts on price movements .
The communication notes that some exporting countries have responded to the rising prices by actually restricting their exports .
India has introduced export bans , Vietnam and Thailand rice export limits , Indonesia export taxes on palm oil , and Kazakhstan a ban on wheat exports .
Such taxes and export bans are designed to protect the domestic markets from short-term supply shortfalls and price shocks .
However , they further tighten international agricultural markets to the detriment , especially , of the food-importing developing countries .
In a medium-term perspective , such restrictions clearly send the wrong market signals , reducing the incentive for farmers to invest and to increase their production , and contributing to an imbalance on regional markets .
The issue of the very negative impact of export restrictions should be raised at the relevant forthcoming meetings of the WTO and in other relevant international fora .
The Commission remains convinced that there are significant potential gains for developing countries from the Doha Round in terms of new market opportunities , which would help generate additional export income , stimulate agricultural production and facilitate access to foodstuffs , thereby alleviating the current food price hikes .
The Commission will therefore continue to work for a comprehensive and balanced Doha deal .
The Commission trusts that it can count on the support of this House for the policy direction presented in today 's communication as a basis for tackling the challenges that we are facing in this situation with prices that are actually going through the roof in some areas .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , thank you for this relatively long and interesting response .
Nevertheless , in relation to one of the elements that triggered this crisis of financial speculation on agricultural products , I would like to ask you whether , following the scandalous behaviour of certain European banks - KBC and Deutsche Bank in particular - which , as you know , conducted entirely ' unethical ' advertising regarding speculation on food products ... I would like to ask you what the Commission intends to do about this .
Along with my colleague Mrs Carlotti , I wrote a letter to President Barroso on 6 May , for which I have not yet received an acknowledgement , but I hope to receive a reply one day .
The letter requested and proposed taking every measure aimed at banning , and I will read from the text : ' the offering , dissemination or promotion of financial instruments within the European Union , including investment insurance and in particular insurance products associated with investment funds , if their yield is directly linked to speculation on the increase in the price of food raw materials ' .
Could you tell me what the Commission 's intentions are in this respect ?
Member of the Commission . - I shall be very brief because I touched upon this in my first intervention .
That might be the reason why it was fairly long .
In the communication the Commission presented today it commits itself to monitoring the activities of speculative investors closely in commodity-related financial markets and the impact of those speculations on prices .
( LT ) As consumers , we instantly feel the effects of any price increase .
However , throughout the price chain , with speculations being made , there are winners and there are losers , with producers of agricultural products finding themselves in the position of loser most often .
In your opinion , what could be done to ensure that the increase in the price of agricultural raw materials is in proportion to the general price increase - in other words , to ensure that commodity prices are fair and farmers can have a decent life ?
Madam President , while fully acknowledging the good motivation of the questioner and indeed the complexity of the issue before us , could the Commissioner confirm that she has no intention , nor do her other colleagues in the college of Commissioners , of interfering with the operation of the commodities market , which has the potential to do more harm than good if this particular avenue were taken ?
We agree on the end , but not on the means of how to get there , I would say to the questioner .
Member of the Commission . - I completely agree with the question raised on the consequences for the primary producer , for the farmer .
The situation actually is that we have seen increases , especially in the cereal sector .
When we talk about these extraordinary high prices , I always like to look back a bit in history to see how prices have developed ; and , taking the past 30 years , prices have been decreasing the whole time from the primary producer .
This has not meant that prices have not been increasing in the retail sector .
But if you compare prices on cereals in 1975 and today and look at fixed prices , the prices were twice as high in 1975 compared to today .
We see a situation where people are used to the fact that on average in Europe , I think it is only 14 % of the income that is spent on food , and this has been decreasing as well over the whole period .
When mention is made in the communication about what is going to be done , it is obvious that we have to look at the whole chain .
It is the competitiveness Commissioner who is in charge of surveying the situation and we do not know at this stage whether there will be a positive or negative outcome .
But we will keep an eye on all the reasons that are behind the increasing prices that we have seen since late August of last year .
Subject : Communication and the Lisbon Treaty
In the context of Plan D and the recently announced Communication ' Debate Europe - building on the experience of Plan D for Democracy , Dialogue and Debate ' , could the Commission report on their communication strategy vis-à-vis the ratification process of the Lisbon Treaty ?
What concrete measures has the Commission taken to ensure a smooth ratification of the Lisbon Treaty ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - On the question about Plan D and the communication about ' Debate Europe ' , let me say that I see it as our duty , together with Member States and the other EU institutions , to communicate with citizens about all our policies and positions .
While , on the Treaty , Member States of course have the main responsibility , the Commission must also stand ready to inform and explain .
Our recent communication , ' Debate Europe ' , aims at promoting active dialogue between citizens and decision-makers and , although not specifically referring to the Lisbon Treaty , or to the Lisbon Treaty only , actions taken under ' Debate Europe ' may be connected with communicating on the Treaty .
The Treaty is one of our communication priorities for 2008 .
Our activities have been decentralised and differentiated to fit the national realities in each of our Member States , and this is ' going local ' working in practice .
Our representatives have worked with each Member State and Parliament information offices to draw up national communication plans to respond to different needs , and the activities have included liaising with national stakeholders , training for journalists , information relays and multipliers , discussions with civil society and events at schools and universities .
We have prepared a broad range of support materials including PowerPoint presentations , elements for speeches , questions and answers , fact-sheets on different areas - all aiming to help communicators provide the facts on the issues .
And from Brussels , as you know , the Commission has also launched a website dedicated to the Treaty in the 23 official languages , and our on-line forum ' Debate Europe ' has recently been relaunched with discussions on the Treaty proving one of the most popular areas , with many thousands of submissions .
Thank you , Commissioner .
So , why is ' Debate Europe ' not working ?
In Ireland the exhaustive time spent counteracting a litany of issues - often important in their own right but totally irrelevant to the content of the Lisbon Treaty - which create fear and confusion , deliberately or otherwise , is seriously detracting from the positive message of Lisbon .
And knowledge matters in EU referendums .
Voters ' confidence in their knowledge of the issues involved in the Lisbon Treaty is crucial to the successful outcome of this referendum , for them to vote ' yes ' , having decided to vote at all in the first place .
' Levels of knowledge of the Treaty suggest public opinion [ in Ireland ] is more like Nice 1 than Nice 2 ' - the words of Professor Richard Sinnott , not mine .
Notwithstanding ' Debate Europe ' , Commissioner , as the Commission and Member States to date have failed abysmally to communicate Europe and how it works and an understanding of its present Treaties to over 90 % of our citizens , how do you advise us now to communicate amendments to those same Treaties , amendments to Europe , to ensure the necessary degree of knowledge for the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty ?
We have failed to communicate Europe ; how will we communicate amendments to a Europe that nobody understands ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - First of all , partnership is the key word .
We cannot do it from Brussels ; we cannot do it from the Commission side alone : we have to work together in communicating decisions we have taken together .
I think that there are different roles given to the Commission and the institutions , compared with , for example , ministers , who of course also have to be out there everywhere in Ireland as well as in all other Member States to help , to explain , to listen and to communicate what this is all about .
I think that if you start by communicating on amendments I am afraid that you have already lost the audience .
My experience is that if you communicate clearly on the substance issues then it is much easier , and this is exactly also what our representation office in Ireland is trying to do : to communicate on the different substance issues .
I know that , following a call for tender , they have engaged in , I think , about 20 different local meetings , where they also engage politicians , Irish politicians , to try to spread information and engage them on different substance issues .
It might not be enough but we have to continue along these lines .
I think , of course , that engaging with the media is one of the most important things .
At the same time , it is important to respect the very particular laws and regulations you have in Ireland when it comes to debate before a referendum , and we are of course trying to do that as well .
But we have an obligation to communicate and to engage with citizens on the policies and the positions that the institutions take , and I hope we can continue to do it hand in hand .
- ( DE ) Are there any market research findings and opinion polls that would show what information European citizens actually need regarding this Reform Treaty ?
Are politicians in Europe , from local municipality level up to European level , also being targeted ?
What information is required here , and what will you do in the information offices in the capital cities in order to be able to improve the range supplied ?
Madam Commissioner , you have mentioned the referendum in Ireland , and in three weeks they will have a very important , maybe decisive , vote in that country .
We all remember the outcome of the Nice Treaty referendum in that very EU-friendly country some 10 years ago .
What lessons have been drawn from this unfortunate experience , and how is the Commission participating in the pre-referendum discussion debate in Ireland ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Thank you very much for these relevant questions .
What about knowing public opinion ?
Well , we have our opinion polls through the Eurobarometer which give us a lot of guidance and where we can also identify some of the information needs .
On top of that , of course , different opinion polls are also carried out in every Member State to find out more of the details and to make it country-specific .
So I think we can say that we have a fairly good basis of knowledge of what citizens expect and what they need when it comes to information , although I also think that it can vary a bit from one Member State to another .
I think that one of the lessons drawn in Ireland was the need to engage on a very broad scale and that is why the National Forum was set up ; I think that , following visits from both myself and , most recently , President Barroso , we have tried to engage and listen to the National Forum and their needs and we are trying through our representation office to respond to those needs , while also respecting that there is always a very special situation when you have a referendum : for example , you also have to respect the McKenna legislation which is in place in Ireland .
This of course restricts or sets very clear limits on what ministers or the government can do .
At the same time we have a general obligation to engage and provide information , which cannot be taken away from us , and I think that this is how we have learnt how to engage with the National Forum and also how to do more using the media and with young people especially , but also with women because in our experience they are the ones who very often feel alienated and distant from the debate .
That is also where we have to use modern communication tools like the internet : another lesson learnt is that we have to engage through the internet .
Subject : Closer cooperation between European Commission and European Parliament representations
The Commission is seeking to increase citizens ' involvement in discussions on EU matters . At the start of April of this year , the Commission announced the ' Debate Europe ' initiative .
The intention is to broaden further the activities carried out at EU Member State level : consulting citizens , sharing information , knowledge and ideas about the EU , and providing opportunities for voters to meet EU officials .
In some EU capitals , it is said that Commission and European Parliament representations cooperate poorly when it comes to giving EU citizens a better idea of what is happening in the EU and acquainting them with its agenda , its institutions and its Member States .
Commission and Parliament representations often work separately , duplicating each other 's activities , and do not carry out large joint projects .
As the European Parliament elections in 2009 approach , are efforts being made to improve cooperation between Commission and Parliament representations in different countries ?
If so , what specifically will be done ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - 2008 is a crucial year for all of the institutions to prepare for the European elections next year .
It is in all our interests to work together to maximise turn-out in June 2009 .
The work launched by the recent communication ' Debate Europe ' , promoting active dialogue between citizens and decision makers on European issues , should contribute to this work .
But the Commission and Parliament already work in close partnership in these areas , both in Brussels and at the level of our representation and information offices in Member States .
Last month our services started a new working group to maximise the joint impact of our activities and also to seek closer cooperation between Commission and Parliament representations and offices .
We are looking to revise the 2001 Code of Conduct on the working relationship that will open up new ways for us to work together , as well as facilitating the common use of resources such as audiovisual or press monitoring tools .
We are also committed to the goal of shared premises in Member States - the so-called ' EU Houses ' - and already in 25 of the 27 Member States our offices share space in the same building .
As you know , we are in a pilot project in three of these European Houses - in Madrid , Dublin and Tallinn - with a common space which we call a ' European public space ' .
We have been able to broaden the scope of our activities to engage with cultural activities , and scientific and youth events as well .
We now have a first report on this pilot project with the European public spaces .
It seems to be very positive and we will continue along these lines .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your comprehensive and clear answer .
I am sure that you are an optimist by nature .
On the other hand , your position in the Commission also calls for optimism .
I am sure that you are counting on the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty in all countries this year .
I would like to ask what , in your opinion , would be the difference between the election campaign for the European Parliament in 2004 and next year , bearing in mind that most probably it will be after the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I shall be very blunt .
I think that we also need to engage much more from the Commission 's side , through our representation offices , in mobilising voters , to ensure that we have a higher voter turn-out .
We cannot be too cautious .
I think we all have to say that we want European citizens to exercise their right to vote and this is how we will engage with Member States - again in partnership , not taking a political position but really just to mobilise voters .
We are looking , together with the European Parliament , through the Interinstitutional Group for Information and Communication , at how we can do this .
Parliament has already presented a well-crafted and elaborate plan for the EP elections and we will contribute to that in the best possible way , using all our tools and especially our representation offices .
Together with Parliament we can make sure that we increase the voter turn-out .
( LT ) I would like to point out that it is immensely important for an information company to have its material prepared in all the languages of the EU .
I very much hope ...
I will speak in English .
Maybe you cannot hear me , as I see the Commissioner is busy .
I just wanted to say that it is difficult to receive information in Lithuanian , because I represent Lithuania here .
If you try to call the toll-free number for Europe Direct and ask a question in Lithuanian , you will be advised to wait for half an hour .
It is difficult to find books in Lithuanian even here in the Parliament office for visitors , because the booklets are only available in the main languages .
I do understand that there is a huge problem with interpretation and a financial problem , but maybe you have to set some priorities .
Would you be so kind as to check how Europe Direct centres operate in different languages as , for example , Commissioner Kuneva is doing ?
I think the situation is quite clear , that if you have something direct to say to citizens they will listen and hear .
We had a debate on European City Guides today but we got very little in terms of reaction from the Council and I think we need to bring more clear messages back to people about what we do here in the European Union and that we are actually here for them , not just to talk about them .
I would prefer that Parliament 's representation took the lead at the Member State level rather than the Commission , but obviously I would say that , and I would urge respect and caution on the ratification process in Ireland .
These are turbulent times and news emerging from the WTO is not assisting us in this regard .
I think we have to be mindful of the genuine concerns of our voters .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Well , of course this is a constant struggle to make sure that we can provide information - that we can provide interpretation and translation in all 23 official languages .
Sometimes we are not able to respond fully to that because we lack interpreters , for example , or we have not yet a full staff that can respond to this request , but I take note of your comment on that and we will look into it as well .
I will also make a visit soon to Lithuania and I am sure I will hear more about this , but this is not due to a lack of will from the Commission .
It is the starting point for any communication that you can communicate , hopefully , in your own language and understand what is being told , also in your own language .
Therefore , we will continue to endeavour to make sure we provide all the necessary resources for doing so ; therefore I fully respect your question and I think it is a very serious one .
Well the other point was of course a comment and it is a fact that we have to start where citizens are .
We have to respond to the questions they have , and of course the truth is that very rarely do they start by asking about the Treaty provisions or an amendment . They start by asking , What do you do about immigration ?
What do you do about climate change ? How do you fight the problems that we see as cross-border problems , and how do you deal with that ?
And this is how we have to respond , and in an everyday language .
I think that what has actually helped - and this is something I take credit for - is that we have now started with these citizens ' summaries to all the proposals that we present .
Also in our work programme , we will have an accompanying citizens ' summary , and I see that this is very useful , and we have to continue along these lines .
Subject : Commission 's Plan D for Dialogue , Democracy and Debate and ' Debate Europe '
The Commission 's Plan D for Dialogue , Democracy and Debate of October 2005 was a response to the EU 's ' period of reflection ' following the negative outcome of the referendums on the Constitution .
Two and a half years later , does the Commission believe that it has effectively attained the objectives of its plan ?
If not , why not ?
What were the obstacles ?
As regards the Commission 's recent communication on the ' Debate Europe ' project ( April 2008 ) to bring citizens closer to the Union and its institutions , can the Commission provide details concerning eligible expenditure , the amount that will be available per Member State and organisation , and the beneficiaries that will undertake the pan-European consultation projects with citizens ?
How will it provide a framework for cooperation among the EU 's institutions and , in particular , with the European Parliament ?
How will it contribute towards setting up electronic networks in which MEPs and members of national and regional parliaments will participate ?
How will it create European public spaces in the capitals of the Member States ?
How will it become more active at local level ?

Vice-President of the Commission . - I can say that Plan D played a key role in testing new methods for civil society organisations to involve citizens from all walks of life in debates on the future of Europe .
It gave us examples of consultation that we never had before , inviting randomly-chosen citizens from all Member States to sit down together and discuss the European Union 's agenda .
It was indeed a very exciting experience .
One of the key lessons from this experience was that we need to strengthen the interface between citizens and EU decision-makers because , if we promise to listen better , what do we do with what we hear ?
This is what they want to know .
We decided to prolong Plan D in the period leading up to the European parliamentary elections in June next year .
This new phase is called ' Debate Europe ' .
We have allocated EUR 7.2 million to Debate Europe , EUR 2 million of which to cofinance transnational projects and EUR 5.2 million to cofinance decentralised calls and actions supporting local projects administered by the representations .
We do not decide in advance how much money is available per Member State or which beneficiaries will run these pan-European consultation projects .
This depends on the results of the calls for proposals which the Commission is presently launching , both centrally and via our representations .
We think that Debate Europe should also provide an effective framework for interinstitutional cooperation .
One model was the concluding conference that was held on the first phase of Plan D last December .
Here not only the Parliament , the Commission , but also the Committee of the Regions and the European Economic and Social Committee were involved .
I think it proved complementary in addressing the specific citizens ' concerns and that this kind of cooperation should become the rule in the framework of Debate Europe , also at national or regional level .
We also hope that we can engage Members of the European Parliament much more in these local and regional activities .
I have just informed this group - the so-called ' IGI ' - about the request from this Parliament to engage in a pilot information network .
We have prepared and will present to the European Parliament the outcome of our project very soon : preparing for such a network , joining national and European parliamentarians and we hope also inviting journalists to take part in the debate on European issues .
I have already mentioned the public spheres , the European public spaces , in the pilot project .
Along these lines we can continue Plan D , learn from the experience so far and engage with citizens on a number of projects and models that we hopefully can establish permanently - not only as something that runs for six months or so - and ensure that we can involve decision-makers with European citizens in these ways .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the problem for all of us lies in the fact that Europe is cut off from ordinary people .
Despite all the good efforts made by the Commission and by us MEPs , we can clearly see that information is not reaching ordinary citizens .
I should like to ask which agencies will bring the citizen closer to Europe , as envisaged in the Debate Europe plan .
Vice-President of the Commission . - One of the new initiatives of course is that we need a European political culture , and that is what , as you know , we have presented .
And this has been adopted by Parliament as well to engage in political foundations which can contribute to the debate .
This is because we need to have it in the regular political discussions at all levels : EU issues have to be integrated better .
I think that this initiative , in allowing European political foundations , will help .

I think we need to do it through the media , to have a European media reporting on EU affairs , and that is why we have a new internet strategy , we have a new audiovisual strategy , where we will be better equipped to put European issues in media reporting all over Europe .
And I think we have to provide the meeting places , the public spaces , and this is where we have some pilot projects to allow for that .
These transnational projects where we have engaged in consultation with citizens can , I think , give us some useful lessons as well as some useful experience that hopefully we will be able to put in place permanently one day .
But we have to use all these channels to be effective in not cutting off , but in engaging citizens : listening to them , explaining to them and advocating what we are doing at EU level .
( EL ) Madam President , before the Internal Market Programme of 1992 there was the Cecchini Report on the costs of non-Europe .
Does the European Commission intend to prepare a specific communication on the costs of non-Lisbon ?
What will be the cost to Europe if the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon is not completed ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - This is always the most difficult thing : saying what happens if we do not do this or do that .
We would like to present proactively the advantage , why we think that a new Treaty is needed .
How can we be more effective ?
We have tried , on the Commission 's side , to designate and formulate questions and answers , our different background materials and what we have put on the internet in such a way that we argue proactively , on the offensive , as to why we need a new Treaty and what problems need to be solved .
That has been our starting point but we have engaged , on the Commission 's side , as well in trying to explain what the price would be of not agreeing , because I think it will also influence people 's confidence and trust in whether we can really address the big problems and challenges that we see in front of us .
Questions 35 to 39 will receive written answers .
Subject : Restrictions on competition by sporting federations
Given that the sporting federations of specific EU countries seek to impose rules on their members which restrict sportsmen 's and sports and women 's possibilities with regard to contracts and freedom of movement , in clear violation of EU law , has the Commission studied the consequences of such practices from the point of view of freedom of competition ?


Member of the Commission . - A number of cases coming before the Community courts have confirmed applicability of EC rules to the sports sector .
In the Walrave and Donà judgments , for example , the European Court of Justice confirmed that regulations based on nationality which limit the mobility of sportsmen do not conform with the principle of free movement of persons .
In the Bosman judgment the Court examined two types of restrictions which it found to be incompatible with the free movement of persons .
Firstly , it prohibits , on grounds of discrimination as to nationality , a UEFA rule which restricted the number of foreign players from EU Member States allowed to participate in national football championships .
Secondly , it condemned as an obstacle to the free movement of persons the FIFA transfer rule requiring the payment of end-of-contract transfer fees in respect of intra-EU transfers of players who are nationals of an EU Member State .
The Piau and Meca Medina cases were the first Court judgments to apply EC competition rules to the sector .
Since then the Commission has followed the methodological approach of that case-law in assessing whether a rule adopted by a sports federation or association infringes Articles 81 and 82 .
Therefore any sports rule which is capable of producing restrictive effects on competition has to be examined on a case-by-case basis in order to determine whether it pursues a legitimate objective .
At the same time the Commission must be satisfied that any anti-competitive effects resulting from such a rule are inherent to the pursuit of its objective and are proportionate to its achievement .
The Commission looked at the issue of international football transfers when it investigated the legality of FIFA rules on transfer fees for players who were still under contract .
That investigation was closed in 2002 after FIFA committed itself to modifying its transfer rules on the basis of certain principles which aimed at facilitating transfers .
In the Commission 's White Paper on Sport , which was adopted on 11 July 2007 , issues such as free movement of sportspersons were also exhaustively addressed , especially in the accompanying document entitled ' The EU and Sport : Background and Context ' .
In the same legislative package the Commission adopted the Pierre de Coubertin action plan which advocates sport-related action to be taken at EU level and contains a number of proposals to be implemented and / or supported by the Commission in numerous areas of sport .
One such area concerns the free movement of persons , with the goal being to combat discrimination based on nationality in all sports .
This goal shall be achieved through political dialogue , through recommendations , structured dialogue with stakeholders and , when appropriate , through infringement procedures initiated by the Commission against Member States .
In addition , the Commission applies EC competition rules to sport organisations in so far as those organisations regulate economic activities .
In doing so the Commission takes into account the specificity of sport .
( ES ) Madam President , thank you very much , Commissioner , for your extensive and very comprehensive answer to my question .
In short , as a complementary observation to the explanation given by the Commissioner , I infer that at the moment the Commission is not thinking of adopting any legislative measures , as it considers that the current legislation , including the Treaties and the case-law , is sufficient , and that therefore the path that is going to be taken is that of informal agreements with the federations , codes of conduct , and so on and so forth .
The Commission does not think that it is necessary at this time to have any additional measures , so all that is needed is simply to apply the existing legislation .
Member of the Commission . - That is correct .

The European Court of Justice - and the honourable Member has already felt the direction I am moving in - has ruled in the Meca Medina judgment that the compatibility of sporting rules with EC competition law cannot be assessed by way of declaring certain categories of rules a priori exempt from the application of EC competition law .
The Commission will therefore have to continue applying competition rules on a case-by case basis , referring to its adopted decisions and the existing case-law .
Finally , the Meca Medina judgment provides a clear methodological framework in that respect .
In order to assess whether a rule breached EU competition rules , its effect must be proportionate to the legitimate genuine sporting interest pursued , so this proportionality test can only be applied on a case-by-case basis .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , in all the Member States , the national sports federations , particularly the football federations , complain vociferously on the basis of international sports federation statutes ( FIFA , UEFA , etc . ) every time their activities are investigated by the government .
While we recognise the independence of the federations , does the EU agree with statutes that infringe and are considered to be above national legislation and a country 's constitution ?
Does the Commission agree that the UEFA home-grown players ' scheme is compatible with the Treaty ?
It encourages football clubs to have a proportion of their players coming up through their junior teams and their youth academies without a link to nationality and that therefore , quite unlike the FIFA scheme of 5 + 6 - which is based on nationality and would clearly be illegal - the UEFA scheme is something that is proportionate , legitimate and will force clubs to invest in training their young players rather than just relying on their financial muscle in the international transfer market .
Member of the Commission . - I will try to combine the two questions as it is an area that clearly shares the same type of thinking , the goal being to combat discrimination based on nationality in all sports .
I think that is the main thing and that is a principle , so to say .
That goal should be achieved through political dialogue , recommendations , structural dialogue with stakeholders and , when appropriate , through infringement procedures .
Therefore , I think that what we have to take into account is that this competition line that I was explaining earlier is quite clear and that it should not be attacked by other ways of thinking .
Subject : Price rises and competition
Major price rises have been recorded in recent months in many Member States , particularly for foodstuffs , which has severely reduced the European public 's purchasing power .
Numerous observers have suggested that , besides the increase in the price of raw materials , there have been some excessive mark-ups by distribution channels and , moreover , possible breaches of free competition .
Can the Commission state whether it has any permanent indicators that can alert it to an explosion in certain consumer prices , and also whether any investigations have been conducted recently into distribution channels , following the sudden price rises recorded in certain Member States ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is of course concerned about the recent wholesale and retail price increases in food and food products .
This has implications for the people of Europe and , even more seriously , implications for billions of others around the world .
Indeed , EU food price inflation accelerated in the last quarter of 2007 .
The observed price increases at consumer level reflect recent developments in product value , cost and profit along the food supply chain .
It should be noted that prices for major agricultural raw commodities had been rising for several months and continuously breaking record levels .
That development mainly resulted from a combination of structural drivers : a steady rise in global food demand , the emergence of the biofuel market - only for a very small part - and more short-term factors such as adverse climate conditions , which provoked a decrease in the output volume of cereals in most of the EU Member States in 2007 and the restrictive export policy of some key world market suppliers and in general an increasing engagement of investment funds in agricultural commodity markets .
Nevertheless , it should be underlined that prices of raw materials do not constitute a strictly proportional part of food prices , especially as it becomes more processed .
Thus some other components of the sale price , and I am thinking of energy and labour margins , have also influenced recent increases in food prices in the European Union .
It must be noted that these price increases are not necessarily linked to a deficiency in the application of competition rules .
As the honourable Member knows , the primary objective of EC competition policy is to make markets work better for the benefit of consumers in the EU .
As mentioned in several replies to recent parliamentary questions , the Commission , together with the national competition authorities forming the European Competition Network , monitors markets in order to prevent and sanction distortions of competition to the extent that these distortions can potentially harm consumers .
The Commission only acts when it is better placed than national competition authorities to take action .
They will act first , but when they are not in a position to do so , we will jump in .
Indeed , since the issues related to the retail sector are frequently national in scope , the Member States are well placed to address them .
However , the Commission would like to reiterate that , should any specific breaches of competition rules be confirmed and supported by legal and economic evidence , we will not hesitate to take action .
It is of course important to consider all relevant factors affecting these markets and the Commission will continue to monitor consumer prices , retail market concentration and any allegations of anti-competitive conduct .
The Commission considers market monitoring to be a very important task .
In the framework of the Single Market Review , the Commission will analyse the possible reasons for the malfunctioning of retail services , seen both from consumers ' and suppliers ' perspectives .
The levels and differences of consumer prices between the Member States are also monitored in the annual report of the Consumer Markets Scoreboard .
The first edition - as you are aware - of the Scoreboard was published at the beginning of 2008 and the exercise will be carried out yearly .
Prices are among the main screening indicators .
Some price differences , especially in the case of non-tradable goods and services , may clearly be due to differences of income between the Member States .
Nevertheless , particularly large differences between the Member States may suggest the need for further scrutiny .
Additionally , the Commission will touch upon the issue of market power in the distribution sector in the framework of a High Level Group on the competitiveness of the agrifood industry .
That initiative will be launched by the Commission in order to analyse the food industry , which in recent years has faced new risks and challenges which question the sector 's competitiveness .
The Commission will also in the weeks to come formally transmit a response to the European Parliament 's written declaration on investigating and remedying the abuse of power by large supermarkets in the EU .
The Commission 's response will provide , among other aspects , certain clarifications in relation to buyer-power-related issues .
( FR ) As you know , this morning in Kehl , the French and German consumer ministers met to discuss the price differences between the two countries .
These discrepancies can reach 30 % for some high-consumption products .
Among the causes discussed , they mentioned the differences in retail trading structures , and in particular the imperfect competition in some countries .
Internet sales should allow consumers to take advantage of these differences by buying from the most advantageous countries .
However , mail order on the Internet sometimes poses problems .
For example , French people cannot buy from some German sites .
Do you intend to take appropriate measures so that the European internal market will finally be a reality for citizens ?
Member of the Commission . - I am absolutely aware of the importance of your question and of getting in line with one single market .
You can be absolutely sure that the Commission will do its utmost to make it a real single market also in the retail sphere .
( LT ) From your report I understand that the Directorate-General for Competition works in cooperation with the competition authorities in the Member States .
However , we citizens can see certain agreements taking place , resulting in price increases in all the countries simultaneously , yet the competition authorities fail to find any transgression .
What would you say from your experience - is it a case of a lack of qualification in the Member States or one of abuse ?

Member of the Commission . - So far the answer is a clear ' no ' , but we are aware that it is calling for our attention , and not only our attention , in terms of monitoring what is going on .
What we have done is to put it on the agenda in the European competition network , and we are gathering information from all the Member States that have experience - some have inquiries , others are analysing , others are just trying to find out what is going wrong in the retail area .
France , Germany , the UK , Belgium - they all have different approaches to today 's situation .
So far , there is no reason to say that there is a cartel .
As soon as we become aware of a cartel we will act , I can assure you , but , by the way , I think it is not that bad , as national competition authorities are active and following the whole situation in this sector .
Questions 35 to 39 will receive written answers .
Subject : Accession negotiations with Croatia
Does the Commission think that the accession negotiations with Croatia can be completed by the end of the year ? What is the exact timetable for the rest of the year ?
Subject : Progress of the accession of Croatia into the European Union
Can the European Commission give a statement outlining the state of play with regard to Croatia 's application to accede into the European Union ?
Subject : Conclusion of the accession negotiations with Croatia
Since the opening of accession negotiations with Croatia the country has already made substantial progress , leading to the opening of many negotiation chapters , and is well on the way to meeting the benchmarks for opening and closing further chapters .
Above all , there have been positive developments in connection with the alignment of Croatian law with EU standards , protection for minorities and efforts to bring about judicial reform .
In addition , through its recent decision not to introduce the Ecological and Fishing Protection Zone Croatia has cleared the way for faster progress in the accession negotiations .
These welcome developments are acknowledged in Parliament 's report on Croatia 's 2007 progress report , paragraphs 31 and 32 of which call for enhanced support for Croatia from the EU , and in particular from the Commission .
How will the Commission step up the support it provides ?
Provided that Croatia meets the relevant criteria , will the Commission put forward , in autumn 2008 , a provisional timetable for the conclusion of the accession negotiations in 2009 ?


Member of the Commission . - Madam President , Mr Posselt , Mr Crowley and Mr Ebner have all asked about the state of play of accession negotiations with Croatia and I can respond to them jointly .
These negotiations with Croatia are progressing well overall .
So far negotiations have been opened on 18 chapters out of 35 and we have closed two of these chapters .
As regards opening benchmarks , 11 sets of benchmarks have been set .
The Commission has assessed the benchmarks as being met in seven of these 11 cases .
In these cases our recommendations are now under discussion among the Member States in the Council or negotiation positions are being prepared .
In the remaining chapters , such as competition policy and public procurement , opening benchmarks were already set by the Union in the first half of 2006 - that is two years ago .
But Croatia has been slow in taking the necessary measures to meet these opening benchmarks .
Croatia is still working on opening benchmarks for the chapter on the judiciary and fundamental rights , where there are many difficult challenges in areas such as judicial reform , the fight against corruption and refugee return .
While Croatia has done plenty of good work aligning with the key 16 chapters where we have closing benchmarks , Croatia has not done enough at this stage to meet all closing benchmarks in any of these 16 chapters .
With the remaining conditions still to be met by Croatia it unrealistic to assume that accession negotiations could be concluded this year in 2008 .
Croatia has nonetheless made good progress overall and therefore 2008 could be a decisive year in Croatia 's EU accession negotiations .
Provided a number of conditions are met by Croatia , the Commission will in this autumn 's enlargement package present an indicative timetable or a conditional roadmap for the conclusion of other technical negotiations in the course of 2009 .
The first condition to be met is that Croatia should meet all opening benchmarks by June this year , i.e. next month .
Secondly , Croatia must comply with all legal obligations under the stabilisation and accession agreement and it must also continue to comply with the general conditionalities of the stabilisation and accession process .
And thirdly , Croatia needs urgently to improve its management of EU financial assistance under the PHARE and IPA programmes .
The President of the Commission will continue to provide substantial financial and technical assistance for Croatia in order to help it fulfil the requirements of EU membership .
Once sufficient progress has been made by Croatia in meeting opening or closing benchmarks , the Commission will prepare and submit in good time the necessary recommendations to the Member States for the positions to be taken in the intergovernmental conference .
So , in a nutshell , ultimately the pace of progress of Croatia towards the European Union will be determined by its own ability to meet all necessary conditions .
Thus we can work and progress on the basis of Croatia 's own merits .

- ( DE ) Commissioner , you know my position - that Croatia should have become a Member long ago , if justice prevailed .
However , I am not expressing my personal point of view here , but that of this House .
Parliament said that negotiations should be completed by 2009 at the latest .
At its meeting in Croatia a few weeks ago , the Joint Parliamentary Committee said that all chapters should be opened under the Slovenian Presidency and closed under the French or , at the latest , the Czech Presidency .
Does the Commission believe that this schedule is realistic and what is it doing to speed things up ?
Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response .
Two points .
First of all , with regard to the judicial and fundamental rights chapter where there appears to be a lot of difficulties concerning the negotiations : how best can we help Croatia to advance on that side of it ?
Secondly , concerning the distribution of the PHARE programme money and the management of those monies : where are the biggest pitfalls that the Croatia financial management system has to overcome ?
Thirdly , going back to what my colleague Bernd Posselt said , we thought there was an agreement that this would be concluded very quickly .
If there are still 17 chapters which have yet to be opened for negotiation , how can we proceed at the pace that we want to see happening ?

Member of the Commission . - Thank you for these very pertinent and important follow-up questions .
The Commission is working with Croatia as it would with any other candidate country so that we follow the negotiating framework adopted in unanimity by the Council and by the Member States .
It is our task and responsibility to monitor progress in meeting the benchmarks on the basis of our rather new benchmark methodology , which was created and adopted at the end of 2006 - with very strong support by Parliament - in order to improve the quality of the EU accession process .
This means that once a country is able to open one benchmark and then close the same benchmark it has proved that it has made sufficient progress in the issues concerned .
I give you one very concrete example : that is the shipbuilding sector in Croatia .
We expect that Croatia will provide a very concrete restructuring strategy for the whole sector , as well as for all the individual shipyards concerned in this sector .
There was a meeting recently between the Deputy Prime Minister of Croatia and my colleague Neelie Kroes , the European Commissioner for Competition , to scrutinise the state of affairs in this regard .
We are still waiting for somewhat more convincing efforts by the Croatian authorities to show that Croatia will be able to restructure its shipbuilding sector properly so that we can move forward in the field of competition policy where state aid is a very critical benchmark .
This is to prove that it really is in the hands of the Croatian Government and the authorities to meet the benchmarks .
We always knew that some of the benchmarks were more challenging than others and the Commission has encouraged Croatia to work diligently in order to meet these difficult benchmarks , especially in the area of judiciary reform that Mr Crowley referred to , as well as in the other area I mentioned , the shipbuilding sector .
Concerning judiciary reform , we are providing legal and technical assistance for Croatia under the institution-building part of the instrument for pre-accession .
We are encouraging twinning exercises and of course we provide our own expertise for Croatia .
Member States are also providing their peer reviews which are important in order to benchmark whether or not Croatia is making good progress in this field .
So all in all , we are doing well overall in the negotiations .
The pace of the negotiations essentially depends on the pace of these critical reforms in order for Croatia to meet first the opening and then closing benchmarks .
Subject : Progress of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) towards accession to the European Union
At a press conference held at the NATO Summit in Brussels on 5 March 2008 , the Commissioner responsible for enlargement , Mr Rehn , stated that the failure of Greece and FYROM to reach an agreement on the name of the latter would adversely affect FYROM 's accession to the European Union .
The EU wishes to encourage the continuation of negotiations under the auspices of the UN in order to find a mutually acceptable solution in the near future to the question of that country 's name . What measures will the Commission , therefore , take to facilitate the resumption of negotiations and find a mutually acceptable solution ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , please allow me to clarify that on 5 March I did not attend a NATO Summit .
I might have wanted to but I did not attend the NATO Summit as is mistakenly indicated in the question .
Instead , I took part in the meeting of the Commission - our weekly meeting - and in that meeting we adopted a Commission communication entitled , ' The Western Balkans : enhancing the European perspective ' .
Subsequently I made the statement at the press conference on this issue to which the honourable Member is referring .
In that context , in the press conference , I noted that the main issue was consuming much political energy .
I encouraged the leaders of both countries to find a formula which is acceptable to both sides .
I have done this publicly and privately .
In reply to a question I explained that the decisions relating to the EU accession process are taken by Member States on the basis of unanimity .
In this context I expressed my concern that the lack of a solution to the main issue could have a negative effect on the country 's accession process .
I can assure you that the Commission will continue to call on the parties to engage constructively to resolve the main issue .
However , the Commission has no competences , no powers on such measures and therefore efforts should continue under the auspices of the United Nations within the framework of the two important UN Executive Council resolutions which date from the year 1993 .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , thank you for your answer , which confirms the statement you made in Brussels .
I also thanked you in my question on 5 March at the press conference on the matter .
Given that in a resolution on the accession prospects of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) the European Parliament has recently recognised the need to speed up negotiations in order to reach a generally accepted solution , let me ask you this : do you intend , together with Parliament , and by exercising your powers , to take any steps before your report is drawn up in the autumn ?
Member of the Commission . - We continue to encourage both countries concerned to find a solution to this long-standing - I should say too long-standing - problem .

We have full confidence in the United Nations Mediator , Mr Nimitz , who has a clear mandate to facilitate talks between the two parties in the framework of the two critical resolutions of the UN Security Council from 1993 .
The Commission cannot therefore play the role of mediator .
We have no powers , no competences , but we encourage both sides to take a very constructive approach , to engage and finally find a solution to this matter .
- ( DE ) Commissioner , the Commission has a responsibility : it is the guardian of the treaties .
The Interim Agreement states that bilateral issues must not be allowed to become a barrier to accession .
I wanted to ask you to confirm that and to ask whether you have observed any efforts on the part of the Macedonian Government to resolve the issues and whether , in your opinion , Macedonia has made progress in recent months .

Member of the Commission . - In my view you are indeed right that the country has made good progress for the past half-year or so in terms of some critical reforms such as the judiciary reform and the reform of public administration , as well as on the implementation of the police law .
In fact , in the March communication we have set eight benchmarks based on key criteria , key priorities , of the Accession Partnership which reflect the necessary reforms we expect the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will be able to undertake , thereby achieving sufficient progress to allow us in our autumn report to propose a recommendation to start accession negotiations .
This will depend upon concrete results in the reform work and we will of course reflect that in our progress report which is currently under preparation .
I would like to point out that in order to start accession negotiations , in order for the Commission recommendation to be accepted , in the Council there is a requirement of unanimity of all EU Member States and therefore , even though we see this as a bilateral issue , we have to take this into account as a political reality .
As regards our recommendation , that depends solely on the progress achieved by the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on the implementation of the reforms on the ground .
Subject : European funding for the Turkish army in Cyprus
Media reports allege that the EU has provided the Turkish army with funding to the tune of EUR 13 million .
Can the Commission confirm that the Turkish army in fact been financed out of European funds ?
If so , which funds and projects were involved and over how long a period ?
How much money did the Turkish army receive in total ?
Who took the initiative of authorising this funding ?
Does the Commission plan to continue funding the Turkish army in future ?
Member of the Commission . - I am very glad to respond to this question because I can do it very briefly .
There is no fund provided by the European Union to the Turkish army in Cyprus as suggested in the title of the question by the honourable Member .
Under the pre-accession programme , IPA , the European Union supports in Turkey a project which is called ' Civic training for conscripts ' , and this project indeed is run in Turkey , not in Cyprus .
The purpose of this project is , through the Turkish armed forces , to educate conscripts who are doing their military service on the issues of human rights , gender equality , women 's rights , children 's rights , protection of the environment , general health care and the fight against drug addiction : in my view all very worthy causes , and this is what this programme called ' Civic training for conscripts ' in Turkey is aimed at achieving .
( NL ) I should like to thank the Commissioner for his response , but I have two brief questions in this regard .
First and foremost , how does the Commissioner explain the broadcasting of such affairs by the press ?
This information came from a press review and I believe that it was stated in a Turkish-Cypriot publication .
Secondly , how can the Commission ensure that the Turkish troops occupying Cyprus do not somehow come by a portion of the funds and thus that these funds are not being used for anything other than their intended purpose ?

Member of the Commission . - It is indeed important that we correct myths with facts and that we correct misunderstandings by providing concrete and objective factual information .
Therefore , I am very grateful that the honourable Member has asked this question .
In fact , by answering your question which I just did , I am sure that we can now provide facts which will correct these misunderstandings in the media which were referred to by Mr Claeys .
As I said , this project is run in Turkey by the Turkish armed forces and therefore this should clarify the point made by the honourable Member concerning where this project and programme is being run .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.55 and resumed at 21.00 )

Announcement by the President : see Minutes
Composition of political groups : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Mobile satellite services ( MSS ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Hall , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the selection and authorisation of systems providing mobile satellite services - C6-0257 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I first of all should thank Parliament for having addressed the Commission proposal as a matter of urgency and I know this is not easy at all .
Parliament has done more than the impossible in order to get there , and it has done well .
Mobile satellite services constitute a sector with high potential for Europe with applications ranging from high-speed internet access , through mobile broadcasting , to emergency services .
The development of a competitive internal market for mobile satellite services will produce significant economies of scale and a more efficient use of spectrum , and all this for the benefit of businesses and consumers throughout Europe .
However , timing is of the essence if we do not want to miss the current window of opportunity for mobile satellite systems .
This initiative puts in place a pan-European , binding selection process of specific satellite operators , and it is very innovative indeed in several respects .
I am therefore very grateful for the efforts made by the rapporteur , Mrs Hall and for those made by all the other colleagues in the European Parliament to promote consensus in Parliament and in the Council within what remains a very short time-frame .
There are many amendments in the report aimed at including in the legislative decision details initially meant to be addressed during the implementation of the selection process .
These include a detailed description of the selection criteria , the respective weighting of these criteria , the duration of the authorisations to be delivered by the competent national authorities and so on and so forth .
In normal terms such level of detail is not present in legislative texts .
But the Commission is ready to accept the amendments by Parliament .
These amendments will of course contribute to a level of transparency which is even higher than the one in the proposal , and in addition the main elements of the proposal , in particular the competitive nature of the selection mechanism , the basic structure of the selection process and the main milestones and selection criteria , have remained largely unchanged .
Despite these additional details , Parliament and the Council have asked for specific comitology procedures for several steps in the implementation of the selection programme .
These procedures , which can be either regulatory or with scrutiny , are , I have to say , less flexible and more time-consuming than what the Commission has proposed .
While the Commission is ready to show flexibility on this , and to accept these amendments , it should also be clear that this might have an impact on the overall timing of the selection process .
This is of the essence and that is why I really call on all parties involved in the implementation to show flexibility in the practical arrangements that will be needed in order to bring the selection of satellite operators to a successful end as soon as possible .
In this sense I also invite the Council to make all necessary efforts to finalise the agreement before the June TELCO Council so that a decision can be taken .
So I know that there is a lot of work which has to be done now by our legal specialists in the Commission , Parliament and , most of all , in the Council .
In conclusion , the Commission can support the amendments put forward by Mrs Hall .
They correspond to the Slovenian presidency 's compromise text and they pave the way for a first-reading arrangement .
I am very confident that this sound compromise will receive broad support from Parliament .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I want to begin by thanking everyone who worked on the MSS decision .
I say that not just as the usual courtesy , but because the decision has come to plenary this week as a first-reading agreement thanks to much support from my parliamentary colleagues and the help of the Commission in supplying additional text .
I would also like to give warm thanks to the Slovenian presidency , who shared Parliament 's determination to reach an early agreement in the interests of European competitiveness .
In February 2007 , Member States agreed to make radio frequency bands in the 2 GHz region available for a harmonised approach to mobile satellite services in order to avoid interference and fragmentation of the internal market and open up the possibility for European MSS technology to become globally competitive .
The purpose of today 's MSS decision is to select and authorise the operators of these pan-European mobile satellite services .
In the debate and negotiation on this decision , the differences to overcome have been institutional and geographic , rather than party political .
Firstly , MEPs were concerned that in the Commission 's draft proposal there were elements of the selection and authorisation process which were of a political , rather than a purely technical , nature and that it was therefore not appropriate to use comitology to decide the details .
In particular , MEPs and ministers from Member States on the periphery of the EU were very concerned that the selection criteria might favour operators who could only provide a service covering the centre of Europe .
MEPs were also concerned that the selection criteria might not reflect Parliament 's frequently expressed commitment to public interest services and to the inclusion of rural and less-developed regions .
These difficulties were resolved by bringing into the text detailed and transparent wording on the weighting to be given to geographic coverage , public safety and protection services and the range of services provided to consumers in rural and remote areas .
Particularly important was the compromise reached before the vote in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , stipulating that all applicants must commit to services covering at least 50 % of the population and at least 60 % of the aggregate land area of each Member State .
While this falls short of the 100 % coverage which I know some colleagues would have preferred , I think it offers a realistic compromise given the technical and economic constraints that the industry is under .
Furthermore , Member States retain the right to use the spectrum for other purposes where and when it lies outside the mobile satellite service area , and Member States may impose emergency service use of mobile satellite systems during major disasters .
To conclude , I think we have reached a very good and swift agreement which will benefit both citizens and industry .
I trust that the final signatures can be put on the deal in June to allow the first call for applications to go out before the summer , and I hope that , next time Member States and the Commission decide they need a pan-EU service in a particular frequency band , they will look to the MSS decision as a model of how to reach a speedy agreement by involving Parliament in the detail of the text .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( DE ) Mr President , I too , would first like to thank Mrs Hall for her extremely ambitious efforts to achieve a timely result for this difficult report .
She did it !
The report was difficult because it had to establish rules for the special case of Europe-wide mobile satellite services before the Telecom package was revised .
It is to Parliament 's credit , and most especially to the credit of its rapporteur , that we have succeeded in finding ways to make a preliminary ruling like this , which nevertheless makes a sufficient degree of transparency possible and actually links exceptional decisions to exceptional circumstances .
I am very glad about this , therefore , and can say on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education that we support the result that has been achieved , because it includes three points that are important in our committee 's view : firstly , the decision respects the competence of the Member States to decide how to allocate frequencies .
Secondly , the decision is also linked to the Audiovisual Media Services Directive , and thirdly , this will also strengthen media pluralism and cultural diversity within these services .
All we can do now is hope - and this is our wish - that this work is also worthwhile and that there really will be pan-European mobile satellite services , as this decision leads us to expect .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my first words will be to congratulate my fellow Member Mrs Hall , the rapporteur on this complex matter , for her willingness to cooperate with the rapporteurs from the political Groups .
I include in this my excellent colleague Mrs Niebler , Chair of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , the committee responsible , which does a superb job .
The compromise proposed is satisfactory .
It is the fruit of long discussions that we had with the Slovenian Presidency , which I congratulate on the quality of its work , and should enable us to reach an agreement at first reading so that mobile satellite services will be provided quickly .
This matter is a great European success , and well done , Commissioner , because in the future , systems supplying mobile satellite services , such as high-speed data transfer or mobile television , will be selected at European level .
This is evidence of efficiency , better economy and Community preference .
We are aware of the compromise .
We have come a long way , and I welcome the fact that the Commission has accepted an increase in the services provided to citizens , as each system will have to cover 60 % of the territory of the Union from the start and the whole of the territory at the latest seven years after the launch .
I am pleased that the major criteria for the coverage required was territory and not solely population , which means that our rural and outlying areas can be served .
This is something that is close to my heart , as I come from a rural region that took a long time , and is still taking time , to benefit from the technological infrastructures as have the large urban areas , and it is about equal opportunities for citizens wherever they are in European Union territory .
Once the text has been adopted in Parliament and approved by the Council , I ask the Commission to do everything to quickly establish mobile satellite services according to reasonable pricing that needs to be monitored .
These services are major financial and technological challenges , but they mean that Europe has the opportunity to equip itself with an advanced sector in terms of satellite services .
Finally , I hope that the boldness and brilliance of our European manufacturers will enable them to submit to this political compromise , proving once again their huge capacity for technological adaptation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , finally we have arrived at the eve of the vote in Parliament regarding the S band , which has been so highly anticipated by the operators and by the majority of the Member States .
We note the significance of these frequencies , which so far have not been used and whose capacity to transmit mobile television , data or emergency services is now recognised , and which Parliament has expressed its particular commitment to .
It is true that the method cannot be optimal .
This somewhat ' impressionist ' approach , which has consisted of establishing a frequency plan in small brush strokes , has shown some limitations .
We will seek to remedy this when we examine the Telecommunications Regulatory Package .
With regard to mobile satellite services , fundamentally the final result offers a balance between political ambition and economic feasibility .
In particular , Parliament insisted on the degree of geographical coverage in order to protect against the risk of a digital gulf being created between Member States , but also within them .
The weighing up of the criteria for the ' beauty contest ' is a true reflection of the respective weight of the concerns of Parliament and of European citizens , in particular in relation to public services .
Finally , the possibility of to some extent requisitioning the frequencies allocated in the event of a disaster is in line with the current discussions within the ITU , where the contribution of telecommunications to protecting human life was examined last year at the global conference .
As shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group , I must stress how pleasant it was to work with Mrs Hall , our rapporteur , whose utter determination was clear .
I also commend the Slovenian Presidency for its effective contribution .
It was given a baptism of fire by being faced with a really thorny issue .
Finally , I would like to commend the willingness of our Commissioner , Mrs Reding , the technical cooperation between the Commission services , the Secretariat of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , and the legal and language experts from the two joint legislators who enabled us to produce a quality text .
I am also happy to have chaired the two trialogues that helped to clarify the points to be debated and resolved .
Parliament was conciliatory in the finalisation of the agreement with the Council in view of the short timescale in relation to satellite programming and the economic and industrial stakes .
The financial investment to be made is sizeable and risky , and we all want it to succeed .
This is why I am concluding this intervention by calling on the Presidency and the Commission so that we can hear them make a commitment that the timescales for the adoption of the text and the publication of the call for candidates before the summer will be respected .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is at present one of the key partners in spatial matters .
The ambitious plan to launch a satellite system for the Galileo navigation satellite system is sufficient proof of this .
All satellite-based systems should use in communications the same radio spectrum from 1980 to 2010 MHz and 2170 to 2200 MHz .
It makes sense that this resolution is trying to unify the fragmented regulations of the individual countries in a uniform framework , and to set up a unified operating methodology for communication frequency assignment .
For the given satellite , the frequencies should be the same for all EU Member States .
This should both eliminate harmful interference and at the same time enable uniform development of this part of the sector , namely satellite communication .
Taking into account that in the area of satellite communication the European Union at present covers 40 % of the world market , we can clearly see that a common non-discriminatory policy can significantly strengthen the important role of the Union in this sector .
In our opinion , the proposed solution will lead to much better development of the technical and economic communication elements .
Only a uniform solution across all 27 states can overcome the existing national administrative barriers .
This sector offers opportunities for qualified labour and it is therefore advisable to support this sector .
The entire GUE / NGL Group supports this resolution .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by saying how proud I am of the work we are doing in the European Parliament on the report under debate .
This is not just a matter of new technologies .
We are talking about the important role played by a whole range of new technological applications , both in strengthening the social , economic and territorial cohesion of the EU , and in transforming its conventional economy into a knowledge-based economy .
In particular , the message we are giving to European citizens today , ladies and gentlemen , is that within seven years of implementing the MSS systems , every last inhabitant of the most remote village in the Union will be able to enjoy satellite and mobile terrestrial services .
This means very fast Internet connection , mobile television , satellite telephone , and above all , state protection and relief in the event of natural disasters .
We have fought hard in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy to ensure that no regions should be excluded from these services .
If this happened , the digital gap between the metropolitan centres and outlying regions within each Member State , and generally between different regions of the EU , would widen .
To conclude , I sincerely congratulate and thank the rapporteur , Mrs Hall , and the shadow rapporteurs for the campaign they have fought in Parliament and with the Council to ensure that these very important requirements are included in the final legislative text on which we will be voting tomorrow .
( BG ) Mr. President , I would like to congratulate Mrs. Hall , the rapporteur , for her efforts to ensure that all EU citizens from all Member States have access to mobile satellite services .
Thanks to the efforts of this House , the criterion for pan-European coverage has the biggest weight .
Other criteria will also include whether systems offered by operators provide services in the outermost and sparsely populated areas or other services of general public interest such as civil protection and disaster recovery .
The resolution is a basis to create real opportunities for individual and corporate service users from countries such as mine , the Republic of Bulgaria , which are not located centrally within the territory of the EU , to have access to pan-European mobile satellite services , including access to broadband Internet , mobile multimedia applications , services related to civil protection in the case of natural and industrial disasters and , of course , this facilitates improvement in the competitiveness of countries lying in the periphery of the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , as the radio frequency spectrum is a public good , market forces alone cannot secure the world of communication for everyone .
A dual approach of politics and consumer economy is needed .
When apportioning the spectrum one must focus on its social , cultural and economic value , rather than just increasing the MSS providers ' income or government revenue .
Commissioner , I admit that at first I was disappointed with the criteria for selecting MSS providers , and particularly with the paltry 60 % geographical cover of the Union , in view of the pan-European geographical cover and pan-European provision of mobile satellite services .
In countries such as Greece that have many mountains and islands , it is difficult to invest in fibre optic networks everywhere , which is why MSS provision assumes great importance .
With MSS , it is possible to provide complete cover throughout the Member States .
This facilitates viable economic development , in line with the aims of the reformed Lisbon Strategy .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Hall , and the shadow rapporteur from my group , Mrs Trautmann .
Thanks to their contribution and effective cooperation with the Council , we have arrived at a distinctly improved motion for a resolution .
( PL ) Mr President , the objective of the European Commission 's decision that Parliament is assessing is to put forward harmonised principles for access to mobile satellite services in all Member States .
The need for Community solutions is obviously justified by the cross-border nature of satellite communications .
We must not , however , forget the particular significance of this solution , which requires us to maintain due care during the subsequent procedure .
We must take special care that the frequency bands in question constitute a perceptible supplement to land-based mobile communications networks , chiefly in areas threatened by the phenomenon known as the digital divide .
We must not simply allow excessive fragmentation of use of this section of the spectrum , and , what is worse , squander the anticipated economic benefits .
Mr President , quite simply thank you , thank you to Parliament and thank you to its rapporteur , Mrs Hall .
I think that they have been worthy of the satellites sector , which is an economic sector , but above all they have been worthy of the European citizens who will benefit from mobile satellite services : telephone , Internet , television and also security services , especially in the event of a disaster .
Here , therefore , we have a service that is going to be very important for our great Europe .
The Commission , meanwhile , is going to do its best to publish a call for candidates as soon as possible , and as soon as possible means before the end of the summer .
I therefore ask the Council to move quickly , very quickly , so that the Ministers can decide by June , so that , afterwards , we will be able to put everything in place so that the decisions that will be taken tomorrow by the European Parliament at what I must say is a breathtaking pace can be put into practice in the interests of our industry and our citizens .
Thank you for this exemplary work !
rapporteur . - Mr President , it was very good indeed to hear the Commissioner say that the Commission has every intention of moving forward on this before the summer .
That would be very welcome news , both to citizens and to the industry itself .
Otherwise , I would simply like to thank everybody for their comments in this debate and to say once again that this would not have been possible if it had not been for the extremely good level of cooperation between everybody who has been involved in negotiating this decision .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Women and science ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Thomsen , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on women and science .
Mr President , let me first of all express my gratitude to the European Parliament and especially to the rapporteur , Mrs Thomsen , for their support for the Commission policy on women and science .
I should also like to thank the rapporteur from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , Mr Dover , for his constructive approach .
We agree with Mrs Thomsen 's explanatory statement that the elimination of gender discrimination in science heralds a new era of excellence for European research and academic growth , and a boost for innovation .
The Commission is well aware that there is a serious imbalance between female and male researchers .
The latest available statistics show that whereas women represent more than 50 % of graduates in all university departments , only 15 % of professors are women .
In the field of science , engineering and technology , the corresponding figures are 34 % female graduates and 9 % female professors .
The Commission agrees that this is a serious waste of talent and resources , as it is contrary to the principle of equality .
Since 1999 , the European Commission has been attending to the issue of the lack of women in research .
In the Fifth Framework Programme , the Commission gave financial support to studies and projects in the field of women and science .
Since 2003 , the Commission has also been publishing the ' She Figures ' statistics , which show the participation of women in European research .
The next issue will be published in 2009 .
More to the point , in her report , Mrs Thomsen supports the target of at least 40 % women and 40 % men on the various committees under the Framework Programme .
This non-binding target has been in place since 2000 and has brought very good results .
For example , women 's participation in committees evaluating research work has increased from 10 % in the Fourth Framework Programme to 34 % in the Sixth Framework Programme .
This shows that when the issue is adequately highlighted , progress can be achieved even when there are no binding targets .
Indeed , the existence of binding targets could , in the long term , prove counterproductive , as it signals discrimination against men , and most men and women do not agree with such targets .
The report underlines the negative impact of an interruption in employment on women scientists ' careers .
In the context of the European Research Area , the European Commission shares these concerns and supports the adoption of policy measures facilitating greater coordination between professional and family life .
Networking among women scientists may also contribute substantially towards attracting more women into science and key jobs .
This is why we have created the European Platform of Women Scientists , which serves as a catalyst and creates role models in scientific research .
One of our main targets is to increase the number of women in key research posts .
This is directly linked with the target agreed by the Member States in 2005 : 25 % of senior posts in public research organisations should be occupied by women .
A report on this issue was recently published under the title ' Mapping the maze : getting more women to the top in research ' .
It concludes that transparent and fair assessment is not in itself enough to increase the representation of women in decision-making mechanisms .
We need a change in the prevailing perceptions .
Specialists make proposals about how existing scientific mentality and culture can be broadened and made more open , but the challenge now is to put that into effect .
These projects are continuing in the Seventh Framework Programme ; they are now linked to the implementation of the European Research Area .
The conference to be held in May 2009 under the auspices of the Czech Presidency of the EU will undertake a survey of the successes of the last 10 years and will also identify the areas in which further efforts are needed .
The European Parliament 's contribution here will be invaluable .
In March 2006 the Commission adopted the Roadmap for equality between women and men 2006-2010 .
This roadmap forms the framework for action by the Commission and is an expression of our commitment to promote gender equality in all our policies , both internally and externally .
Our priorities are : reconciling private and professional life ; promoting equal participation of women and men in political and economic decision-making bodies , as well as in science and technology ; and eliminating gender stereotypes in the fields of education , training and culture , and also in the job market .
Mr President , thank you for the opportunity to speak .
I am glad that today we can put women and research high up on the agenda , as I believe that it is a pivotal issue for Europe with regard to fulfilment of the Lisbon Strategy .
Europe must create more jobs ; we must create better jobs and we must become stronger in research and innovation .
In each of these three tasks , women are an essential part of the solution .
We must have more women in work , and we must have more women in managerial positions and decision-making bodies .
If we in Europe are to create up to 700 000 research positions in the coming years , we must also become better at utilising our female talent base .
At a general level , I had two objectives in drawing up this report .
Firstly , I wanted to set out the status of the current situation .
What is the proportion of women in research and why are things so bad ?
Secondly , I wanted to look ahead and come up with solutions and suggestions as to how we can improve this situation .
The situation is not satisfactory at the present time .
Women comprise an average of just 35 % of researchers working in the public sector and 18 % of researchers working in the private sector .
Furthermore , even though women make up more than 50 % of EU students and achieve 43 % of doctoral degrees , they hold only 15 % of senior academic posts .
We can therefore see a marked distortion in relation to the representation of women in decision-making and managerial positions .
Our own recently created institutions such as the European Research Council are also failing to meet any equality criteria .
Just 5 of the 22 members of this research council are women .
I have also emphasised the fact that in most European countries there is a still a marked under-representation of women on scientific committees - yet another example of women 's lack of representation in decision-making bodies .
I would like to say a little more about the second , and perhaps more interesting , part of my report , namely the forward-looking solutions and proposals .
I listened carefully to the input that was given during the consultation process held in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , and one of the clear points that arose was that it was first and foremost a matter of drawing up policies for the area .
If this problem area is ignored at both national and institutional level , nothing will happen .
In my report I therefore included a requirement for the Member States and the Commission to set a target of at least 40 % women in all recruitment and evaluation panels .
I believe that this is absolutely essential .
If we are to change the situation , we must ensure that there are more women in decision-making bodies , so that efforts can be made from the top down to create a new culture . I have also called for more open recruitment procedures .
Experience shows that closed recruitment procedures very much favour men , who point to each other as being the best qualified .
I have also made it clear in my report that we must not shrink away from positive action if we are to harbour hopes of correcting the situation relatively quickly .
After all , our own figures indicate that there are currently no naturally positive developments .
I have therefore recommended that special funding be set aside to promote female researchers and to focus on the importance of networks and role models as simple initiatives , which have produced positive results in the Member States .
Very simple initiatives such as a sentence stating that women in particular are encouraged to apply have also produced good results .
My work on this report therefore shows that there are many barriers .
It is of course important that there are good opportunities to combine life as a researcher with family life , with the opportunity to take maternity leave even if you are a PhD student , but it is also a matter of culture .
Cultural barriers are of course more difficult to express in a formula , but in reality - like the more concrete barriers - it is a matter of focusing on some of the distortions .
I will say no more here , but I look forward to hearing your comments on the report .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - Mr President , it gives me the greatest of pleasure to welcome every word that the Commissioner spoke this evening and also to congratulate Mrs Thomsen , who has done a wonderful job as rapporteur on this most important subject .
It is a delight for me on the centre-right of the Chamber to be applauding a Socialist from the other side and from another country than my own and to wish her well because she has balanced the whole approach ; she has highlighted the most important factors relating to the fact that ladies come to their teenage years ahead of males .
They are more intelligent ; they are more hard-working ; they can apply themselves and yet , even when they go into higher education , into the start of a research career , they sometimes fall away .
This is often because of pressures at home , in their personal lives .
Mrs Thomsen is right in her report and this evening to concentrate and focus on those problems .
The report has constructive ideas .
The only thing I hold back from is setting specific objectives for the percentage of women that should reach this grade or that grade or that position or another position .
That is too prescriptive .
But , on the other hand , this report has my total support .
I was honoured to produce the opinion from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
I thank those shadow rapporteurs on the main report and on my opinion for their full cooperation .
This is an example of a piece of legislation and a report here in the European Parliament ensuring that we are seen at our best , in cooperation , focusing on the needs of the research industry .
I close by saying that last Thursday evening I went with one of my colleagues , Lambert van Nistelrooij from Holland , to Oxford University .
All of the scientists , the researchers , there were female .
I greatly welcome that .
Thank you very much , Mr Dover .
I thank you particularly in view of the fact that , apart from Commissioner Dimas , you are the only man who has signed up for this debate tonight .
I have only female speakers .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SK ) Thank you very much , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
Allow me to congratulate Mrs Thomsen , on behalf of the shadow rapporteur for the PPE-DE Group , Mrs Sartori , and on my own behalf as well .
I want to say that the situation regarding women and science is comparable with the situation of women and politics , although in the field of science women are slightly better represented .
This is in spite of the fact that women make up approximately 60 % of university graduates .
A scientific career is more than a nine-to-five job .
There is also a strong competitive angle : women often must perform higher than men in order to become successful .
An older female colleague alerted me to this fact at the start of my scientific career many years ago .
Is the question why women are so under-represented in science , why after a period of time there is a decrease in the number of young female scientists and therefore why we consequently lose gifted scientists , the correct question ?
Creating conditions for combining working and family life is of vital interest for female scientists .
In this respect , achieving the Barcelona goals is especially important .
If women are supposed to be successful scientists , the facilities available to them should be reliable , accessible , first-rate , appropriate to the character and requirements of the scientific work , and sufficiently flexible .
However , we also have to consider the question of general support for science and development .
If the salary fluctuates between low and lowest , no one can expect such professions to be attractive for young women or even for young men starting families .
This is a real problem in some countries , namely the new Member States , where support for science and research does not account for even 1 % of GDP .
Let me finish by saying that the situation should be solved by changing the conditions rather than by setting quotas .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , women 's participation in higher education has increased dramatically over recent years .
This has not , however , resulted in an improvement in the ratio of women to men in the sciences .
The number of women in engineering has also risen in the past twenty years , but not by nearly as much as in other occupations and scientific disciplines .
As a result of the difficulties , a large proportion of women scientists abandon a career in science , and this is unacceptable and irrational . It is more difficult for women to get ahead in their profession .
This is particularly apparent with regard to wages .
Women are less well represented in scientific institutions .
Female researchers are forced to choose between career and family .
The temporary breaks in women 's careers in science due to family reasons make promotion of women difficult .
We must look at methods aimed at establishing a balance between working life and private life and apply best practice .
The Lisbon Strategy also requires us to apply the principles of gender equality in the field of research and development .
We must take more effective action in all areas of science , making recruitment procedures and promotion requirements more transparent .
We must strive to ensure gender equality in university and non-university research and in the governing bodies of these institutions .
The report is excellent , and I recommend its adoption .
I also congratulate my colleague Britta Thomsen who , as a researcher , has studied this subject in considerable depth .
Thank you for doing this .
on behalf of ALDE . - ( ET ) Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , life in today 's world is increasingly bound up with science and technology through both new or improved products and services and technological development .
Europe 's women scientists undoubtedly contribute to this process .
It has already been stated here that there are more women undergraduate students in universities than men ; this is also true of Master 's and Doctoral degree students - there are more women .
However , there are seven times fewer women than men working at a senior level in scientific and educational establishments : the average is 15 % .
Why is this ?
The scientific world throughout the ages has always been comprised predominantly of men .
This has been justified with the argument that genuine knowledge is attained using precisely the objective methods and logical discussion which come less naturally to women than to men .
The fact that the scientific body is comprised even today predominantly of men is in itself more down to the assimilation of masculinity into scientific thought than to the above justification .
Academic science has shown that the notion that objectivity can be equated with masculinity is a myth .
The reality today , however , is that that myth unquestionably influences the distribution of employment and the decision-making process associated with the funding of scientific research .
This belittling attitude also gains strength through the media , where women are portrayed in a one-dimensional , tendentious way .
Often women are portrayed in the media in any old position , chiefly as members of women 's groups , and not as professionals in their fields .
At the same time we have done little to change the situation and increase women 's opportunities for better employment .
To change this view , which is widespread in society , we must start to advocate science to both sexes as an interesting and attractive area from the earliest stages .
The pictures in children 's books depicting women in aprons and men in spacecraft must disappear .
I support the positive measures proposed in the report to encourage and support women scientists , whether in the form of careers advice aimed at women scientists or special programmes to support girls ' and women 's interest in science-based careers .
I cannot , however , support mechanistic quotas based on gender as they tie us to a specific time-period and may result in quantity instead of quality .
I thank the rapporteur for a concise piece of work and apologise .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , gender equality is a value and objective of the European Union .
However , although much has been written about it , discrimination occurs on a daily basis .
Sadly , perceived equality also exists in science .
We know that more girls than boys leave secondary school with higher education entrance qualifications , and more young women than young men have a tertiary qualification .
Women are therefore very well educated , but they hit the glass ceiling upon graduating from university .
The figures are sobering : only 15 % of all professors are female .
Only 15 % of the top positions are occupied by women , even though the majority of university graduates and half of all those completing a doctorate are women .
Wage discrimination also occurs in science : the committees that make decisions about research projects comprise fewer than 20 % women .
One could almost hypothesize that the greater the amount of money spent on a research project , the less likely it is that women will be involved .
What we need , then , if we are to do more than simply pay lip service to equality , are quotas - but they must be ambitious quotas , so that they really achieve something .
Gender equality must apply in all areas of science , and this equality should apply to at least 40 % of the underrepresented sex , i.e. women , and not merely to 25 % .
Therefore , for change to happen , we must set ourselves precisely this ambitious goal .
To close , let me to mention another matter close to my heart : we know that by 2010 , the European Union will be short of 700 000 researchers .
We must therefore make every effort to prevent the European Union becoming a scientific wasteland .
Yet highly gifted girls are being overlooked very early on .
Encouraging highly talented young women is a matter that is very close to my heart and I would ask the rapporteur to place more emphasis on this .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , in my country , Poland , the average level of education among women is higher than the average level of education among men .
As a physicist by profession , employed at Warsaw University , I did not experience any discrimination on gender grounds .
I would have felt demeaned if my professional status had been decided not by my knowledge and intellectual capacity , but by some secondary feature , such as gender .
Through her work and her passion for discovery , Marie Skłodowska-Curie obtained results for which she was twice awarded a Nobel Prize .
The rector of my university , ranked number one in Poland , is also a woman , a professor of physics .
The reality that governs the situation of women in the world of science is not the same everywhere , though .
Problems are evident when you learn that women make up only 35 % of scientific workers employed in the State sector and higher education in the European Union , and only 18 % in the private sector .
Sometimes this is a result of family duties being placed above the call of science , but not always .
The findings of paragraphs 2 and 3 of this report are important , in my view .
It is in fact during the first period of education that it is easiest to show that while science may be hard , it is always involving , and it is therefore worth making an effort to discover what we consider to be interesting , and what we cannot reach other than through scientific study .
It is worth encouraging anyone who is up to it to take up scientific work ; many women have such capabilities , and it would be a shame to miss out on this potential .
The examples referred to in paragraph 3 are of some validity here , indicating as they do that this effort brings results .
Under the Lisbon Strategy , but independently of it , it is immeasurably important to invest in people and in their education .
This increases a person 's opportunities in the labour market .
This is also true of the very specific labour market that is the sphere of science .
It is therefore important in all traineeships , exchanges between educational institutions and other such opportunities for improving one 's occupational standing that access criteria should not be discriminatory .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) My thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Thomsen , for highlighting the problem of inequality in science and research .
Inequality pervades society .
Through commitment and opinion-forming by women 's organisations among others , however , awareness of inequality in many sectors has increased and many have realised its negative consequences for society as a whole .
But precisely in the scientific community it has long been hidden .
Hence this report is of special importance .
While the EU emphasises the role of research in economic development , research continues in many cases to be reserved for only one gender .
In the public sector 35 % of researchers are women , in the private sector just 18 % .
The Scientific Council of the European Research Council has 22 members , of whom five are women .
This report focuses attention on the problem but , in my opinion , it is not enough .
We must raise the level of ambition still further .
I have a comment to make in the discussion on equality : we must continue to defend the demand for equality by saying that it is needed for economic growth and development .
When shall we be able to say that equality is an objective in its own right which does not need to be defended in economic terms ?
Equal rights are human rights !
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the role played by women in science appears to differ among the individual EU Member States .
In the very difficult times under Communism , women in Poland had access to science and political rights significantly earlier than in many countries of the old EU .
Previously , the problem was - and it still is today - more one of a poor economic situation and opaque criteria for allocating resources to scientific research , usually regardless of gender .
Despite these obstacles , there are many women who , as wives and mothers , fulfil important social functions , working as ministers , directors , deans and professors at higher education institutions or as doctors , without feeling that they are being discriminated against by men .
Contrary to what strident feminists say , in my country women are generally respected ; they do not have complexes but rather an awareness of their own value and strength , in the knowledge that , in cooperating with men , they are playing an important role in all areas of life , while , however , placing the highest value on defending life , protecting marriage and the family and other supreme values .
The percentage of women students is constantly on the rise , and by the 1990s it was already 51 % .
According to reports , women make up 38 % of scientific workers in EU countries in Central and Eastern Europe , although a large number of them are employed in fields in which expenditure on scientific research is low .
It therefore seems right to suggest that more funds be made available , accompanied by encouragement to take up scientific work , alongside the further strengthening of the position of women , especially through legal regulations enabling family and professional life to be reconciled , including financial and social recognition for domestic work with the aim of offering a genuinely free choice , but without parities or any change in the definition of excellence .
The percentage differentiation in management positions may be linked to the significant mental and physical effort being too much of a burden , so the representation of women should be put into practice by recognising and utilising knowledge and individual predispositions along with improving legal and economic conditions and aid infrastructure , which make it easier to reconcile family life with one 's occupation .
( SK ) In order to meet the goals of the Lisbon Strategy , the priority for the European Union must be to create a wide base of scientists capable of implementing quality research at the highest international level .
Women 's participation in science does not correspond to the needs of research , even though women achieve higher education than men , and even though there are more women in higher education than men .
It is thus necessary to concentrate on educating and supporting top female scientists and to motivate talented women to take up a scientific career by creating good opportunities for quality scientific work , by providing an adequate career and salary .
Obstacles preventing women from participating in scientific work still exist today .
Psychology and at times insufficient solidarity among women also play a role .
The fact is that female researchers find it more difficult to reconcile working and family life than men .
The breaks women take in scientific careers for family reasons have a negative impact on their career prospects .
Since scientific work is non-stop , it would be to women 's advantage to work from home as well , unless their presence at the workplace is inevitable .
The majority of those who experience mobility problems are women because it is generally a woman 's task to look after children , older people or other family dependents .
Women would welcome child-care facilities at scientific institutions .
I think that quotas will not solve the problem of the lack of women scientists if women themselves do not wish to change this status quo .
They must have suitable conditions , be more confident and show solidarity with one another .
I trust that the Seventh Framework Programme and scientific research programmes will support projects that encourage women to take up scientific careers .
It is important for the project selection systems to be transparent , which is why women should have equal representation on assessment boards and selection committees .
( PL ) Even though women make up more than 50 % of EU students and achieve 43 % of EU doctoral degrees , they hold , on average , only 15 % of senior academic posts and are in a minority among researchers .
In the government and higher education sector they comprise an average of 35 % of researchers , and in the private sector just 18 % .
Analyses have shown that existing recruitment systems are not gender neutral .
The existence of a ' glass ceiling ' for women trying to progress to senior positions is well documented and affects all areas of the economy , especially those related to science and technology .
The Commission and Member States should introduce transparent recruitment procedures as soon as possible to ensure a gender balance in recruitment bodies .
Since research represents a crucial sector for the economic development of the European Union , and Europe needs to recruit 700 000 additional researchers as part of the fulfilment of the Lisbon Strategy for growth and development , it is very important to programme science as an area that is open to both genders and to ensure that women are properly represented among scientists .
In order to achieve this aim , it is essential to provide appropriate working conditions that will suit a female scientist along with an infrastructure that enables a smooth interface between professional and family life .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Thomsen , on an excellently drafted document .
( LT ) Regretfully , despite the legal acts adopted by the EU and all the declarations and discussions we have had , the gender mainstreaming dimension in the sphere of scientific research , among others , remains unsatisfactory .
Although there are a large number of female students in the universities of the EU , only 18 % of researchers working in the private sector and only 15 % of researchers in senior academic positions are women .
In the government and higher education sectors women account for just 35 % .
Moreover , women working in scientific research are paid much less than their male colleagues and their work usually consists more of teaching than of research , which seldom allows them to achieve recognition .
I urge the Commission and the Member States to increase their efforts to support women aiming to forge a career as scientists .
In considering how to support them , we cannot overlook the family dimension , the flexibility of working hours and the improvement of child care institutions and family flexibility .
Mr President , coming from a science background myself , I welcome this important discussion on women in the field of science and technology .
In principle I agree with Mrs Thomsen 's report , which seeks to identify the barriers that account for the under-representation of women in science and I agree that most education systems in Europe continue to sustain gender stereotypes .
Her report notes other factors that contribute to the under-representation of women in this field and regrettably in many other professional fields as well .
These factors include the negative impact of career breaks for family reasons and restrictions on mobility due to family responsibilities .
I applaud its call on the Commission and , more particularly , Member States to take positive action on a number of fronts - education , childcare , social security , parental leave - as well as making available adequate funding in order to improve the prospects for women seeking to further careers in or to re-enter science after rearing a family .
We need competent women at all levels of society - and indeed we need women with scientific backgrounds in politics also - but I believe we will never achieve this by setting quotas on gender participation .
Instead , we should aim for more transparency on recruitment , for mentoring schemes , strengthening the networking among women scientists , the promotion of female researchers as role models and of course the adequate availability of funding to encourage women in science , while maintaining fairness and equality .
I believe that most women scientists would agree with this .
In 2003 in my own country , Ireland , a Science , Engineering and Technology ( SET ) Committee was set up to make recommendations on strategies to increase the uptake among women and girls of science subjects and higher level-mathematics at second level and to increase the number of females choosing science engineering and technology courses at third level .
This committee is chaired by Professor Jane Grimson of Trinity College , Dublin , an eminent academic in her own right .
We also have an organisation known as WITS - Women in Technology and Science , which was inaugurated in 1999 .
We have the Wiser Workforce Project , which is a return-to-work initiative for women scientists .
We have Science Foundation Ireland , which has launched four programmes to address under-representation of women in Irish science and engineering .
Finally , these schemes aim to encourage and support the development of sustainable mechanisms and practices which will ensure that women researchers have an equal opportunity to compete on the basis of their scientific expertise , knowledge and potential .
( BG ) President , Commissioner , the report on Women in Science is very well scoped , and it deals with the participation of women in one of the most important development processes , scientific research .
Its importance is determined by the fact that it outlines the structure of scientific development and provides solutions in a key aspect , the make-up of human resources in science .
Women play an important role in universities , research institutes and the private sector .
The unsatisfactory level of women 's involvement in management and decision-making in science , the low percentage of women holding PhDs , or who are professors or members of academies has to do with public stereotypes and difficulties on the path of women in their pursuit of careers in science .
What we need is to apply flexible working hours , to develop provision of services which support women and provide opportunities for choice and self-fulfilment .
An enhanced role for women in science should not be considered as just another gender policy .
It is a mission that makes better use of the high potential of women without falling into the other extreme .
Because of their devotion to science , women should not give up their natural purpose of creating a family and being mothers .
For young women in science , the principle of double priority should apply : both family and career .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I think that our goal is the same , we want to achieve parity , but we are not unanimous about how to achieve it .
Commissioner , your statistics are well put together , they prove that the road is long and laborious and that you have done the right thing by introducing quotas for nominations in committees , because , without a proactive policy , we will not find women , because in order to find them we first need to have the will to find them .
So the higher up the ladder we climb , the more reticence there is about appointing women , and what is entirely ill adapted and illogical is that in the education sector women are largely in the majority , but in academic environments they are absent .
So why is this the case ?
I think that an analysis needs to be done .
We need to invite the Member States , and perhaps the Commissioner could put some pressure on the Member States to establish a degree of benchmarking to clarify the situation in their universities .
Often selection processes for professors do not have the same criteria .
Women are always asked the question : ' What childcare arrangements will you make ? '
Men are never asked this question and therefore in this debate we are all talking about out childcare responsibilities .
Would this also be the case if we were talking about men ?
Why is it that we do not turn the problem around , and , moreover , it is not a problem .
Having a family is a great joy , it is a treasure , for men too ; why should we not change our views ?
I think that the appointment of professors should be reviewed , along with the process and the questions that are asked and , in order to make progress in the fields of new technologies , the Commission should take targeted action .
Regarding the excellence criteria , I do not think that we can make any allowances .
( RO ) Dear colleagues , I will present three issues very briefly .
In former socialist countries , the situation seems even more dramatic since the previous gender policy led to the development of a significant segment of women who were active in the field of science .
On the contrary , transition has generated the brutal decline in funds allocated to research and the decrease in the number of researchers .
Today , yesterday 's women researchers sell insurance policies , are civil servants or have left their countries of origin , with multiple negative consequences : waste of human resources , high dissatisfaction and obstacles to development .
The second issue is that , today , the activities of mass communication , public relations , and advertising companies play an important role , including economic , in the gross domestic product .
They rely on the research in human and social sciences where many women work .
Nevertheless , a traditional hierarchy of sciences does not provide them with sufficient social recognition and works as indirect discrimination against the women researchers in these fields .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Thomsen 's report has touched on a sensitive aspect of my own experience .
I received my doctorate from the Sorbonne when I was already the mother of three children and my husband had four .
I had to cut myself off from the world of further research .
The pursuit of academic excellence gets into your blood and you feel wretched when forced to abandon it .
Now I must admit that much later , after I had had more children , a German university offering a programme specifically for mothers gave me the opportunity to continue my research , which I have been continuing voluntarily until now .
Therefore , possibilities do exist , and for this reason the family aspect should be included in the planning of research programmes and research posts , so that human resources are made full use of .
I think that binding targets will thus no longer be required and the perception of women 's contribution to research will change .
For this reason , planning is necessary so that women can be accepted according to the particular stage of their professional life .
Because of the few years in which a woman has no choice but to be excluded , she is deprived of the joys of academe for the rest of her life and society loses out on what she has to offer .
Women researchers should therefore be given the opportunity to take part in programmes .
At a later stage , the participation of women in research programmes should be a criterion for assessing the quality of universities .
May I also remind you of the report that we presented last year , in which we said that it ought to be possible to combine professional and family life from undergraduate level onwards .
( PL ) Mr President , I congratulate my fellow Member on a very good report .
An increased involvement in scientific research is essential if the principles of the Lisbon Strategy are to be achieved .
As the rapporteur emphasises , Europe needs an extra 700 000 researchers if the Strategy 's principles are to be put into effect .
I believe that the involvement and potential of women themselves will mean that they make up a high percentage of this group .
I am , however , concerned at the proposal to ensure a gender balance in evaluation and recruitment committees .
As a woman politician , I would not like my activities to be assessed solely through the prism of my gender .
I would prefer the quality and results of my work to determine how I work .
There is an interesting proposal to increase interest among young people in taking up further education in specific and technical fields .
This should be accompanied by action to promote science as an area that is of interest for work and professional development among both women and men .
I feel that proposals enabling a professional career to be combined with family life are worth considering .
They should be viewed in a broader context - in a context where women 's participation in the labour market is supported and encouraged .
( SK ) As my colleague just said , Europe needs more than 700 000 researchers today .
I consider this alarming .
Women could close this gap .
Current statistics show that although women achieve higher education than men , they comprise only one third of researchers working in the government sector and only 18 % of researchers working in the private sector .
I believe that first of all we have to do away with gender stereotypes that influence not only the choice young women make regarding their field of study but also the job allocation process , research funding and hiring criteria .
Although I agree with the need to ensure that women participate in the EU and national programmes , I do not think it should be done through quotas .
I support the idea of providing innovative forms of flexible working time for women that will allow them to continue research work after becoming mothers .
This can significantly contribute to greater participation by women in top scientific posts .
Mr President , as one of a very small number of men attending this important debate , and as a scientist myself , I feel the need to say this :
In my long experience as a medical practitioner I found that women scientists were just as good as , if not better than , men .
The only problem for women in achieving top positions has , in my view , been the very hard choice they have had to make in deciding whether to be a full-time mother and a part-time scientist or the reverse .
Women have always made the choice to be full-time mothers .
I therefore feel that this report is very important .
I congratulate the rapporteur , but we need practical ways of helping mothers achieve top positions and not just theoretical ideas .
Mr President , thank you for the opportunity to speak .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your comments .
I am pleased to hear that you share my concerns and visions for the future of European research .
With regard to the aforementioned quotas , I believe that I have been a little misunderstood .
I am not talking about quotas for researchers , but it is very clear that one of the most important barriers to employing and utilising the female talent base lies in the composition of recruitment committees .
This is because they are not gender-neutral , and I therefore believe that we must do something about that .
We cannot continue to ignore this problem and hope that tomorrow will be brighter and that it will happen all by itself .
We must demand political action now .
The Commission has of course been the progressive player in this matter , as a unit for women and research was created several years ago in the Directorate-General for Research .
It is the Member States that are lagging behind .
It is their commitment that will be essential in relation to securing change within the university and research institutions .
I would like to thank my fellow Members , the Secretariat and the Commission for their cooperation .
I was very pleased with the cooperation of researchers and the European Platform of Women Scientists in particular - special thanks must go to them .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) As a teacher of mathematics , I have dealt with the phenomenon of young women 's ever decreasing access to science directly .
Taking into account the statistics that show that ever fewer young women chose science faculties , where mathematics , physics , biology or chemistry are intensively taught , I consider the draft report of the European Parliament on women and science to be opportune .
The experience I have in the educational field makes me say that the ever decreasing involvement of women in science is a matter of mentality and under no circumstance of capacity .
For this reason , I consider it important for the European Union to initiate more programmes that promote equality of chances and change of mentality regarding young women 's access to science .
Organizing experience exchange programmes and competitions at European level , even from an early age , can give confidence and courage to young people , encouraging them to go to science schools .
We need as many European programmes as possible to contribute to the equality of chances by stimulating creativity , logical thinking , intuition and ideas exchange at a European level .
Banning of exports and the safe storage of metallic mercury ( debate )
Mr President , let me begin by thanking the shadow rapporteurs from all the political groups .
Without their assistance and contribution , I could not have achieved a satisfactory compromise with the Council .
If approved exactly as agreed with the Council and without amendments invalidating it , the compromise text may represent a significant step towards implementing the Community Strategy Concerning Mercury .
The text will put an end to the export not only of metallic mercury , but also of certain important mercury compounds that are produced in large quantities in the EU .
The EU is a major exporter of mercury ; every year it supplies about 1 000 tonnes of the current world total of 3 600 tonnes .
The proposed Regulation under discussion deals mainly with 12 000 tonnes of mercury which will become surplus in the coming years , and it will pave the way for further measures to be taken at international level .
Let us not forget that mercury is a worldwide pollutant which knows no bounds .
Dealing with it is a matter of priority and international concern .
The Regulation will contribute significantly towards strengthening the EU 's leadership role in the talks being held under the auspices of the UN Environment Programme , and also towards the adoption of an international treaty on mercury .
The most important provisions of the compromise text are as follows :
It broadens the scope of the ban on exports covering not only metallic mercury but also cinnabar ore , mercuric chloride , mercuric oxide and mixtures with a mercury content exceeding 95 % by weight .
An express prohibition has been imposed against mixing metallic mercury with other substances for export .
The ban on exports of mercury and certain mercury compounds has been brought forward .
An obligation has been placed on companies operating in the chlor-alkali and gas cleaning industries to notify the Commission and publish information on the quantities of mercury in storage or being dispatched for disposal .
A review clause has been included requiring the Commission to re-examine the situation and submit a report on the matter to the European Parliament and the Council no later than 15 March 2013 .
The clause contains proposals for additional measures .
It has been agreed that arrangements should be made for an exchange of information by 1 January 2010 , with an export ban being considered for any products containing mercury .
Lastly , according to the agreed text , mercury no longer used in the chlor-alkali industry or produced in other industrial enterprises will be regarded as waste and put into safe storage .
We have also succeeded in introducing conditions for the acceptance of metallic mercury prior to its final disposal on the basis of research into its solidification .
Ladies and gentlemen , let me say in conclusion that I think the compromise text we have achieved with the Council is an important one if it is approved without amendments , which would send us back to square one and considerably delay measures to protect the environment and public health .
I believe that with tomorrow 's vote we will be taking a step forward , which will ensure a satisfactory level of protection for public health and the environment .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my thanks and congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Papadimoulis , on his excellent contribution to the Regulation on the banning of exports of metallic mercury , and also to the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , for their positive and constructive input .
This Regulation implements two of the procedures mentioned by the Commission in its communication of 2005 to the Council and the European Parliament on the Community Strategy Concerning Mercury .
The adoption of this Regulation will be a milestone in the implementation of the strategy , since it will prohibit exports from the Community of metallic mercury , -which account for at least 25 % of global supply .
The main aim of the proposed Regulation is to limit the global supply of mercury by banning exports of metallic mercury from the EU and putting it into safe storage .
The Regulation is concerned mainly with 12 000 tonnes of mercury that will become surplus in the coming years because mercury cell technology in the chlor-alkali industry will be progressively phased out .
The Regulation will prevent the export of surplus mercury to third countries and its use in gold digging and similar unlawful activities , which contribute significantly to the accumulation of mercury in the environment .
Parliament 's efforts to further increase the scope and improve the text of this legislative initiative have been fruitful .
They have ensured that the Regulation in its agreed form will become an effective means of protecting public health and the environment .
I should like to thank the institutions and all those who took part in the process with a view to achieving agreement at second reading .
In particular , I should like to emphasise the constructive role of the European Parliament in shaping this satisfactory agreement .
On some important points , Parliament has insisted on going beyond the scope of the Commission 's initial proposal .
In particular , let me underline three points that were at the centre of the negotiations :
· The scope of the export ban .
· The date of its entry into force .
· The safe and economically advantageous final disposal of metallic mercury .
The Commission understands Parliament 's aim to secure optimistic targets for these fundamental points and is in a position to accept the proposed changes .
The Commission will , of course , keep a close eye on the correct enforcement and observance of all the Regulation 's provisions , and will also re-examine the need to take further measures .
This proposal contributes significantly to the aim of reducing exposure to mercury .
It paves the way for taking further measures at international and global level .
International negotiations are in any case in progress under the auspices of the UN Environment Programme .
Adopting this Regulation will send out a strong message regarding the EU 's commitment to addressing the problem .
In addition to Amendments 42-63 , which have already been agreed , five new amendments have been tabled on the use of the Almadén district in Spain as a priority area for the safe storage of metallic mercury .
The Commission understands the likely economic impact on the region if the mercury mine is closed .
A research programme coordinated by the company MAYASA , which owns the area , is receiving more than EUR 2 million in funding from the LIFE Fund .
This programme is examining safe disposal methods for metallic mercury .
Its findings will be useful for setting acceptance conditions for the final disposal of mercury , as provided for in Amendment 56 to the proposed regulation .
The Almadén district could obviously be considered for the safe storage of mercury , provided it meets the conditions to be imposed , and provided it has the necessary permits .
However , the Commission cannot justify the proposed priority in Amendments 37-41 of only one region , and therefore cannot accept those amendments .
To sum up , the European Commission can accept the compromise package as agreed in the tripartite discussions , namely Amendments 42-63 .
It is satisfied with the agreement on the regulation at second reading .
However , Amendments 37-41 have not been agreed and cannot be accepted .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , can I first of all offer my thanks to Mr Papadimoulis for guiding this report through Parliament .
I fully understand that this must have been a very difficult and time-consuming process .
However , I must express my dissatisfaction at the final stage of this process , namely the informal meetings that were held with the Council with a view to reaching the second-reading agreement .
They were conducted by Mr Papadimoulis alone without the other shadow rapporteurs being invited .
I think that is a regrettable situation .
My group has been generally supportive of the common position originally adopted by the Council , as I am well aware of the need to try and agree a speedy implementation of this regulation .
My group agrees with the major points that were a matter of concern for some Member States , particularly the need to retain the possibility of safe permanent storage and the need to adhere approximately to the agreed date of implementation .
Most of those issues were addressed and resolved .
However , two specific issues were not .
First of all there is the position of Almadén that the Commissioner referred to .
We do not think that the compromise amendments go far enough : we think there should be specific references to the problems caused in Almadén , one of the primary mercury-mining areas in the Community , and we think they should be addressed .
They were addressed by Parliament at both stages and we think they should be in the common position .
The other issue about which I am disappointed is the specific inclusion of a reference in the compromise package to a possible ban on the export of barometers .
This was not present in the common position and was not supported by my group .
I am disappointed that the Council conceded that point to Mr Papadimoulis during the negotiations .
Therefore I have retabled an amendment to delete it from the final package .
Finally I would like to thank the Commission and Mr Papadimoulis and particularly the Slovenian Presidency who I know have worked hard on this .
It is not their fault that our parliamentary procedures , in my view , need serious reform on these matters .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Spanish Socialists are going to vote in solidarity and coherence with the district of Almadén , Spain , which is going to be seriously affected by the text that we are discussing and that we are to vote on tomorrow .
The district of Almadén and its people , my compatriots , have lived for centuries from the mercury that was extracted from their mines , which are the largest for this metal in Europe and the world .
Over recent years they have suffered a considerable economic and social recession , as for various reasons , mercury mining has been gradually limited .
We are now deciding to ban its export .
Not only have we not opposed this whole process , but , as we understand the health reasons behind it , we have focused our efforts on the one hand on raising the awareness of the population regarding the need to take on board the new situation and , on the other hand , on developing mechanisms to enable Almadén and its surrounding area to move forward by restructuring its activities based on the experience and working capacities of its people and taking advantage of an exceptional natural environment .
In Almadén we have been talking about the European Union as a context of solidarity .
We have explained to the people that the Community institutions would continue to look after them , that they would receive help to continue with the efforts that they are leading with the help of the Spanish Government , the Regional Government of Castile-La Mancha and Ciudad Real Provincial Council ; and this commitment has been confirmed by all the pronouncements made by Parliament .
Firstly , it has always been recommended that resources and mechanisms should be made available by the European Union and its Commission to support Almadén in restructuring its activity , so that the people will not suffer as a result of the closure of their traditional mining industry .
Secondly , it has been recommended that , when considering a location for the mercury storage provided for in the Directive for all the metal that has or will appear in Europe , Almadén should be considered as a priority .
The logic was based on both the experience that has been accumulated here in handling mercury and on the fundamental fact that the majority of the mercury in Europe is already entirely safely stored in Almadén .
This is something that was decided at the time and will not in any way be altered by what we adopt tomorrow , but rather , without naming Almadén , the consensus amendment that the parliamentary groups reached , which also appears to have the support of the Council and the Commission , means that the previous commitments remain fully in force .
Although we would have preferred it to have been cited more expressly , and we will therefore vote for the amendments that do so , we understand that the text that will be adopted is sufficiently committed and will continue to support the interpretation of that text which will enable the district of Almadén to consolidate the socio-economic recovery that is already underway .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , I want to thank Mr Papadimoulis for facilitating good cooperation .
I also think that cooperation with the Council went well , although we had disagreements over content .
We must first note that mercury is a toxic and dangerous heavy metal .
To begin with , some criticism .
I think that it odd that , while we ban the export of hazardous waste and ourselves practically cease to use mercury at all , we seek to delay an export ban so that industry has time to run down its stocks before it is defined as waste .
It is a hazardous chemical which we know will be dispersed in nature by gold washers and which will destroy the environment in other countries .
I actually wanted a much earlier date for the ban to take effect .
But a compromise is a compromise .
I can instead be glad that the voluntary measures of the industry are now included in the legislation , so that they will actually be implemented , and that all the necessary adjuncts will be covered by the export ban , for example cinnabar , oxides and calomel .
In that way we have at least got a comprehensive piece of legislation .
As regards how we are to deal with the waste , we are talking about quite small quantities .
Imagine 10 000 tonnes of liquid mercury .
It would not take up much room , in fact it would fit in the space here in front of the podium - it corresponds to a volume of 10 cubic metres .
No more than that .
Yet it is a huge amount of mercury .
Many molecules , in fact .
We must not release a single one of them into the environment .
The only way of actually implementing the EU 's waste legislation is not to dump mercury for permanent disposal in liquid form .
For my Group , therefore , Article 7 was crucial to a resolution of the matter , in other words the article in which we are to return to the question of waste solidification .
We cannot achieve any permanent disposal without looking again at that method .
I was gratified today to receive an e-mail from a Swedish waste organisation ( det svenska avfallsbolaget ) which says that a pilot plant is now being constructed that can already handle 500 kg of waste and convert it to insoluble , solid form .
When we return to the matter in 2010 , I can guarantee that disposal in solid form will be a safe method which complies with the EU legislation .

- ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Schlyter has just said , 10 thousand tonnes is a very large amount .
Just to give you an idea of the scale , it is enough to poison approximately 4 million people a day .
About a year ago , we discussed the dossier at first reading .
Sufficient regulation of metallic mercury compounds and mercury has been arranged .
It has been ensured that this material does not return to the European Union .
Safe storage has also been sufficiently evaluated .
The actual restrictions make sense given mercury 's increasing toxicity , although I would have liked to see more far-reaching restrictions in many areas .
The compromise works very well , and at this point I would like to congratulate Mr Papadimoulis on his work .
It does not meet all expectations , but it does meet a great many of them .
As a former local and regional politician , I also have a great deal of sympathy for our Spanish Members , who have to find a solution to the Almadén problem that will be workable for everyone .
The compromise is so worthwhile , however , that we must not allow it to miscarry because of this issue .
There ought to be enough time before tomorrow 's vote for the Commission to make an appropriate statement of some kind .
It is important to accept the compromise now , because otherwise , there is a risk that we will not reach agreement in this parliamentary term .
I would like to mention one further matter : the mercury strategy is not yet complete .
The Commission 's two panels of experts continue to rate amalgam as safe .
I cannot agree with this opinion .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has brought back some amendments that refer to Almadén , the largest and oldest mine in the world , that were adopted by a large majority at first reading .
The Almadén mine has been closed since 2003 .
However , Almadén is the main exporter of mercury in the European Union and still continues to have considerable economic activity associated with mercury , because it sells it through the contracts signed by the company Mayasa with other companies in the chlor-alkali sector .
These contracts are valid until May 2011 .
Almadén should be expressly cited in the Regulation , because it is the only area in the European Union that is directly and negatively affected by the ban on exports , and because it has the best technicians and experts in handling mercury .
The mine also has the capacity to store all of the liquid mercury in the European Union , at a depth of 200 metres , in an enclave of quartzite rock and volcanic rock with a high degree of impermeability , as verified by the Director for Sustainable Development and Integration of the European Commission 's Environment DG , Mr Mäkelä , and the Slovenian Environment Minister , who visited the area in March 2007 .
( SK ) Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor .
The report by my fellow Member Mr Papadimoulis mentions dental amalgam as one of the sources of mercury supplies in Europe .
Allow me to quote some interesting figures .
Stomatologists in the European Union use 125 tonnes of mercury each year .
They carry out more than 200 million mercury fillings each year .
Our citizens walk around with more than 1 100 tonnes of mercury in their mouths .
Amalgam waste containing 50 % mercury is generated during the processing of dental amalgam and its application , in the process of removing original fillings , during cremation of the deceased .
Extracted teeth and the possible leakage into groundwater after ground burials are also sources of mercury .
Dental mercury also infiltrates the atmosphere during communal waste incineration .
Taking all the above into account , dental practices rank only second or third in the production of mercury waste in the European Union .
I am glad that the report reflects these facts as well .

( PL ) The position of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , and at the same time the Spanish viewpoint , was presented by my colleague Mr Martínez Martínez .
I would therefore like to speak not so much about mercury , as about the specific example of a region whose fundamental activity is undergoing massive change .
As a representative of a new country that went through a period of transformation in the early 1990s , I know this pain experienced by regions .
It is therefore with the greatest satisfaction that I wish to emphasise that the European Union , and Parliament too , do not wish to abandon Almadén to its fate .
Whether EUR 2 million will suffice is another story .
The most important thing , though , is that this is how we are approaching this matter , and that is very valuable .
Mr President , I should like to thank all concerned for their contribution .
I do not understand why the rapporteur has put at risk a second-reading agreement and the adoption of the regulation in advance of the UNEP discussions in October 2008 , where hopefully we will get a legally binding agreement on this most important area .
He has put it at risk because of his lack of collaboration during the trialogue and during discussions .
Maybe the Commissioner understands why the benefit of discussions at this stage was not extended to all the shadow rapporteurs or at least the key shadow rapporteurs who showed interest .
I have serious reservations procedurally on what has happened , which has polarised a very important debate and report which otherwise could have been easily concluded with the vote tomorrow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , according to the agreed text , mercury no longer used in the chlor-alkali industry or produced in other industrial enterprises will be regarded as waste and will be put into safe storage as soon as the ban on exports comes into effect on 15 March 2011 .
By 1 January 2010 at the latest , the Commission will organise an exchange of information between Member States and other interested parties with a view to considering the advisability of taking additional measures .
By 1 January 2010 at the latest , on the basis of the available scientific data and current research on safe options for mercury disposal , the Commission will recommend the appropriate requirements governing the facilities and conditions for accepting metallic mercury .
The Member States will monitor enforcement of the Regulation and its impact on the market , and will notify the Commission accordingly .
If it is considered advisable , the Commission may propose a review of the Regulation by 15 March 2013 at the latest .
Certain key provisions have been included in the proposed compromise package .
The most important of these is a ban on exports extended to cover not only metallic mercury , but also cinnabar ore and two common compounds of mercury , mercuric chloride and mercuric oxide .
As Mr Papadimoulis said earlier , mixtures with a mercury content of more than 95 % by weight have also been banned from export .
Mixing metallic mercury with other substances for the purpose of exporting metallic mercury has been expressly forbidden .
A revised schedule has been agreed , which is in fact more exacting than that envisaged in the original proposal , while at the same time ensuring sufficient time for taking suitable measures at each stage .
Provision has been made to exempt mercury compounds used in research and development and for medical or analytical purposes .
An obligation is imposed on companies in the chlor-alkali and gas cleaning industries to notify the Commission and publish information on the quantities of mercury in storage or being dispatched for disposal .
A review clause requires the Commission to re-examine the situation and submit a report on the matter to the European Parliament and the Council proposing additional measures , if considered advisable , no later than 15 March 2013 .
The Commission is in a position to assure Parliament that enforcement of the Regulation will be closely monitored and any necessary additional measures will be proposed in good time .
At the same time , the Commission is implementing the other procedures covered by the mercury strategy .
It is negotiating vigorously for the adoption of international measures under the UN Environment Programme .
Adopting of this Regulation ahead of the discussions scheduled for October 2008 on proposed international action , will demonstrate the EU 's commitment and determination .
This comes at an opportune time and enhances the EU 's credibility among its partners .
It is therefore essential that we agree on this compromise text .
To conclude , Mr President , the Commission is in a position to accept proposed compromise amendments 42-63 , as agreed in the tripartite talks .
As I have said , the Almadén district could obviously be considered for safe storage of mercury , provided it meets the conditions to be imposed , and provided it has the necessary permits .
However , the Commission cannot justify the priority given to only one area proposed in Amendments 37-41 and therefore cannot accept those amendments .
Mr President , once again I warmly thank the rapporteurs from all the political groups .
Without their effective cooperation at every step of this long-term endeavour and at each stage of the successful tripartite dialogue ( and how effective the discussion has been ) , we could not have achieved the satisfactory compromise that has emerged .
The Council 's initial position , ladies and gentlemen , contained only one of the European Parliament 's amendments .
The compromise before us shows that the important positions adopted by the European Parliament at first reading , together with the Commission 's constructive contribution , have been included in the agreement with the Council .
We must safeguard this achievement .
I can understand the concerns and requests of our Spanish colleagues concerning Almadén : let me remind you that we adopted this wording at first reading on my own recommendation .
However , we must be absolutely realistic .
Neither the Council nor the Commission is adopting this proposal and even the Spanish Government did not put forward such a request in the Council .
If the European Parliament is overzealous on the Almadén issue tomorrow , we risk setting at naught the significant progress made by Parliament and failing to take advantage of a satisfactory compromise .
We will also delay the adoption of measures to protect public health and the environment , as the current Parliamentary term ends in a year 's time .
There is a grave danger that the Council will return to square one , which is its initial position , and a very long way from the position we adopted at first reading .
I therefore call on you to vote in favour of this agreement tomorrow .
Once again , I thank the shadow rapporteurs , the representatives of the Council and the Commission for the joint effort we have made to achieve this agreement .
Mr President , I would have appreciated it if my question could have been addressed either by the Commission or by the rapporteur , but I see that it was not .
Maybe that constitutes a statement in itself .
Perhaps they will do so in writing .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
, in writing . - ( HU ) Mercury is one of the best known and most dangerous of the heavy metals .
It damages the nervous system and immune system and is especially harmful to babies and children .
I welcome the initiative to ban exports of mercury because , despite the restrictions imposed in recent years , its use has not declined significantly .
Instead , it has shifted from the developed world to developing countries .
The European Union is the world 's largest exporter and , therefore , if this regulation comes into effect , we can hope to see a reduction in mercury use world-wide .
When mercury is used it can also get into foods , which then appear on European Union markets .
For this reason , we not only have a global responsibility to reduce mercury pollution in the developing world ; it is also in our interest .
I regard it as a personal success and a success for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament that the export ban also covers mercury-calomel , given that mercury can easily be converted to calomel and the cost of converting it back to mercury is minimal .
If we did not include this provision , it would be easy for exporters of metallic mercury to evade compliance with the regulation .
Green Paper on better ship dismantling ( debate )
The next item is the report by Johannes Blokland , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Green Paper on better ship dismantling .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) On various shores in South Asia enormous seagoing ships for scrapping are dismantled under conditions that are environmentally damaging and humanly degrading .
Social standards do not apply here .
In Bangladesh alone , 200 lives have been lost over the past few years as a result of work on the dismantling of ships .
Many children are used to dismantle the ships because it is easy for them to get into small spaces .
They are expected to remove toxic substances without any protection for themselves .
The substances then end up in the environment , with disastrous consequences for the fishing and tourism industries .
Regrettably , many ships from Europe also end up on the shores of India , Pakistan and Bangladesh , for example , in this way .
The high prices of steel , low wages , poor safety regulations and absence of environmental measures are evidently financially attractive .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety clearly states that these practices are ethically unacceptable and that the humanly degrading and environmentally destructive conditions involved in the dismantling of ships must not be permitted to continue .
The efforts of an individual Member State or of the European Union alone will not be sufficient to tackle this .
Whatever we may do in the years ahead , a global solution to the problem of ship dismantling is still urgently needed .
Unfortunately , it has to be said that not much has so far been achieved at global level .
This , indeed , is precisely the reason why the European Commission has published a green paper .
The main objective that we wish to achieve is the protection of the environment and public health without simply displacing the problems to other countries .
In view of the fact that many seagoing ships currently sailing under the European flag will need to be dismantled in the coming years , we can no longer wait to take action .
The Committee on the Environment specifically proposes the following .
In order to prevent evasion of the provisions of the Waste Shipments Regulation , guidelines must be introduced that make it possible to distinguish between when a ship is truly a ship and when it is waste .
The implementation and enforcement of the Waste Shipments Regulation must be improved through tighter controls and monitoring by port authorities in the Member States , on the understanding that port states must have the power to declare a ship to be at the end of its life .
A list must be compiled of seagoing ships that are likely to be scrapped within a few years .
A competitive and clean ship dismantling industry must be developed within the European Union , for example at shipyards that are currently disused .
In the framework of development aid , know-how and technology must be transferred to dismantling sites in South Asia to help them comply with safety and environmental standards .
Incidentally , the dismantling of seagoing ships in Bangladesh is an extremely lucrative business , in which a sufficient amount of money can be earned in order to swiftly implement acceptable working conditions for dismantling work .
I should like to emphasise that it remains essential that we continue to work on two levels .
First of all , we must shoulder responsibility for our own European fleet and work towards establishing a global agreement .
At this moment in time , we cannot concentrate on one of these two issues alone .
The response I have often received from the shipping industry is that this Green Paper would prevent or delay the development of an IMO convention . I do not agree with this .
Rather , I believe that we , the European Union , are actually anticipating this IMO agreement and , in due course , will be better prepared to implement it .
Moreover , I am firmly of the opinion that the European Union would like to move away from the serious conditions that exist in South Asia as quickly as possible .
I am pleased that there is a high level of agreement on this issue in the Committee on the Environment and both of the committees who were asked for an opinion .
That is in any case a good start .
I assume that the plenary sitting can support this course of action .
It also appears that the Member States are now able to take action .
Last Thursday , the Otopan left the Netherlands for Turkey after the authorities had had the ship cleaned , as a result of which all of the hazardous waste was removed .
This is possible by virtue of the Waste Shipments Regulation .
Previously , an export licence was refused because these conditions were not fulfilled .
On that same Thursday , I received a visit from a delegation of the NGO that is committed to the responsible dismantling of ships is South-East Asia .
It must be made clear that these people have been battling for a responsible ship dismantling industry in their country for many years , and we must not leave these people out in the cold .
A lawyer from Bangladesh , people from India : they have been dedicating themselves to this cause for years , and I feel that we must support them in this and must adopt this resolution .
I hope to hear what Commissioner Dimas intends to do in the near future with regard to establishing a responsible ship dismantling industry in these countries and to making the resources available to achieve this .
Mr President , about a year ago the Commission adopted the Green Paper on better ship dismantling .
Since then , there have been various developments , particularly in the International Maritime Organisation ( IMO ) , where a draft convention on ship recycling is being prepared and is expected to be approved in May 2009 .
However , recent reports in the media have once again revealed the dismal reality of shipbreaking practices in some parts of South Asia .
I am therefore particularly satisfied with the support the European Parliament has given to the Commission 's initiative to improve shipbreaking practices .
About 90 % of all large ships decommissioned around the world in 2007 were dismantled on the coasts of South Asia , mainly in India and Bangladesh .
Many of these ships were from the EU .
We estimate that one quarter of the global fleet flies the flag of an EU Member State , and about 40 % of all vessels are owned by EU-based companies .
Shipbreaking on South Asian coasts is often carried out under appalling conditions : there is no protection against pollution whatsoever and workers ' lives are at risk .
Very few ships have their hazardous materials removed before they reach the breaking yards .
What Mr Blokland has just said about ship cleaning in Holland is very significant .
When the ships reach their destination , the waste materials in question are removed in a way that is dangerous and harmful to the environment .
To overcome this situation , international rules and Community legislation are already in place .
However , the Basel Convention and the Waste Shipments Regulation are very often contravened and are rarely observed by the countries of destination , on the pretext that the ship is making its last voyage .
According to the figures available to us , the number of ships reaching the end of their lives is steadily increasing , and the rules in question should therefore be adapted accordingly .
The IMO draft Convention on ship recycling signals some progress in this area .
It is likely to be approved in 2009 and we , for our part , shall do whatever we can to make that convention strong and effective .
However , it will not apply to warships , state-owned vessels or other vessels in the service of the state .
Furthermore , its implementation may take five or six years .
Apart from this , the convention will be effective only if accompanied by the adoption of measures at national and regional level .
Some Member States have already begun to take measures , as Mr Blokland has said , but a number of others have not yet begun to map out a strategy .
For these reasons , it is essential to take measures in good time and at Community level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank you once again for your report and for the support you are giving the Commission regarding the proposed measures .
The report contains interesting and useful ideas , which we shall study carefully when devising our strategy .


In particular , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Blokland , for his efforts , and Mr Hammerstein , Mr Evans and the other members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and the Committee on Transport and Tourism , for their contribution .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( ES ) Mr President , thank you , Commissioner Dimas , and thank you , Mr Blokland , for this very relevant and necessary report , because although for some time the International Maritime Organization has been preparing new legislation on ship dismantling , so that it is more ecological and causes less problems for the health of workers in the Third World , in the South , this legislation could take years to be ratified and complied with globally .
In the meantime , ship dismantling could reach maximum levels in the next ten years , precisely because of the new rules banning single-hull vessels .
There are going to be an increasing number of ships to be dismantled .
The European Union cannot wait for there to be a change in the international rules ; it needs to act now , to lead the change , to promote green audits of ship dismantling and create a fund with the industry to internalise the environmental costs and also to help the communities in the South , that have already suffered a great deal from the environmental and health costs of this problem .
We also need to implement a precautionary policy through the principle of compulsory substitution of hazardous materials in ships , because ships that leave to be dismantled in Asia are not a means of transport .
No .
They are hazardous waste , and we are exporting this hazardous waste , which is prohibited by European legislation .
It is time to take responsibility and to act ethically and morally .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - Mr President , I may perhaps be the only person here tonight who has actually witnessed first-hand the process to which we are referring .
As Chairman of the Delegation for relations with the countries of South Asia , I have been to Bangladesh and seen the shipyards .
In amongst the ships that were being repaired and dismantled - and the noise , I have to tell you , was intolerable - there were whole families living , sleeping , cooking meals in shanty towns .
Children were playing around the boats , retrieving cricket balls from under the vessels whilst above them oxyacetylene torches were being used .
It is not acceptable for European ships - and none of them were flying European flags ; by this stage they had already been passed off as local ships or from somewhere else in the world - to be broken in these circumstances .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism believes that the EU should lead the way and encourage global action with the clear aim of putting an end to the current practices and ways in which ships are dismantled , particularly in parts of South Asia .
But dismantling should not be stopped altogether , nor indeed immediately , as Mr Blokland stated , in view of its economic importance to the countries concerned .
I agree with the rapporteur when he says that we must work towards a global strategy which ensures that all those who are involved in the process of ship recycling assume their due share of responsibility for the way it is carried out - for safety , workers ' rights and the protection of the environment .
Finally , I think we should also support the development of a competitive and clean European ship-recycling industry .
But , in the meantime , Member States must commit themselves to a policy that state-owned vessels and old warships will be dismantled in a safe and environmentally sound way .
Mr President , Commissioner , can we accept that our vessels that are to be broken up go and pollute the beaches of South Asia because we refuse to accept our responsibilities for dismantling them ?
South Asia , which receives most of our vessels , unfortunately receives polluting substances such as asbestos , pyralenes , oils and hydrocarbon sludge , which end up in the soil , the sand and the sea , and that is not the only thing !
Children work on dismantling these vessels , because they can enter small spaces easily , and unfortunately , they remove toxic materials without any protection at all .
They are cheap labour , and suffer from chronic incurable diseases .
From an ethical point of view this is unacceptable , especially as the vessels come from Europe and thus end up on the beaches of India , Pakistan and Bangladesh .
The European Union , which is partly responsible for these social and environmental problems , must take the right measures , in cooperation with the IMO , to put an end to social and environmental dumping due to economic incentives .
There are measures to be taken urgently , to establish constraints on the recycling of vessels , and that should include requirements for certification and notification .
When vessels are designed and built , the perspective of future recycling should be incorporated , and facilities for recycling boats should be provided .
We urgently need to establish facilities that will be deemed the best of their kind in terms of human rights , health and safety .
Then , without wishing to deprive South Asia of this large market , we also need to provide facilities in European naval yards so that we can recover this waste for ourselves , and then develop what we could call ecologically rational dismantling , all of which could serve as a basis for an international agreement .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I am glad that the Commission is bringing forward proposals and I am pleased the EU is finally dealing with this issue , because we have known about it for a long time .
The conditions that Robert Evans has just described are nothing new to this Parliament and nothing new to the Commission .
Yet it is now the end of May 2008 .
We have a Green Paper and we hear that we are going to have a proposal from the Commission to be adopted in May 2009 , which means it will be at the end of this Commission and in the middle of the European election campaign .
I wonder how we will ever have anything in place to deal with the hundreds of ships which the Commission has identified .
It knows that 800 single-hull tankers will have to be dismantled from 2010 onwards .
I wonder if you can comment , Commissioner , on that very short timetable which we are leaving ourselves to introduce legislation .
It would also have been better if the EU could have completed the legislation in this Parliament before the end of your mandate .
The Socialist Group will support Mr Blokland .
We have supported everything he has done throughout this procedure and we thank him very much for his hard work .
We will also support amendments which strengthen the proposal , but we will not support amendments which are protectionist .
We are not seeking to stop ships being dismantled in Asian countries because , as Robert Evans has just pointed out , there are jobs at stake and the metals are a major source of raw materials for these countries .
But we want the pre-cleaning , which , as Mr Blokland pointed out , is quite possible .
We need to invest in specialised cleaning operations in Europe so that we can have a much safer environment for people to dismantle ships in the developing countries .

We also support the creation of a ship-dismantling fund .
I have seen that the PPE-DE Group have asked for separate votes .
I hope they are not going to vote against that fund tomorrow in plenary .
Commissioner , I hope we can act speedily and that we can get something on the statute books to deal with the huge increase in ships for dismantling in 2010 .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , congratulations to Mr Blokland for his - as expected - excellent report and for the very good cooperation offered to all shadow rapporteurs .
The subject matter of this Green Paper is very important , as well as being deeply worrisome .
Much of the dismantling of ships as presently done can rightly be characterised by many as criminal , both with reference to human health and also with reference to the environment .
Most such dismantling , as we all know , takes place on beaches and river banks on the Indian subcontinent with no or minimal concern for the most basic rules of protection of humans and of the environment from contamination by a variety of toxic substances , including numerous carcinogenic agents .
Additionally , workers in such dismantling places are treated with the utmost disrespect for their human and labour rights and for their dignity , not to mention the use of child labour in truly atrocious conditions which , in some cases , differ little from child slavery in its most despicably shameful glory .
A small number of amendments have been submitted , most with the support of the rapporteur .
We shall follow his position , with the exception of Amendment 1 , for which we can find no reasonable explanation why it does not meet with Mr Blokland 's approval and for which we shall vote positively , and we trust that others will do the same .
In giving our full support to this Green Paper let us hope that ship dismantling , regrettably a most necessary eventuality for the shipping industry , is done in the future in an environmentally , socially and hygienically safe manner and that it will provide a much needed but properly and safely earned income for the population of developing countries .
Let us also hope that the ideas in this report are put into legislative form as soon as possible and that its scope is extended to include military as well as commercial vessels .
Finally , let me say that I agree with previous speakers that our eventual aim should be a globally accepted strategy for ship dismantling .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Firstly , I should like to thank my colleague Mr Blokland most warmly for his excellent report .
I feel that he has outlined very well the enormous problems that are created in poor countries as a result of the dismantling of European ships .
The consequences for both working conditions and the environment are often serious , and the EU must not run away from its responsibility for these .
Amongst other things , Mr Blokland opts to follow the route of more stringent international legislation .
I am most certainly an advocate of such legislation , but I fear it will take much too long before tangible results can be achieved in this way .
Europe must take action now and cannot wait for the rest of the world .
Effective scrapping regulations must be established for ships .
These regulations should include a provision to the effect that , in principle , European ships may only be dismantled outside the EU if the owners can demonstrate that it is impossible for this to be carried out within Europe .
Furthermore , ships for scrapping that contain asbestos or other hazardous substances should in any case be dismantled in European territory .
We cannot allow our rubbish to cause great problems elsewhere in the world .
Once a ship ceases to be suitable for use , we must stop thinking of it as a ship .
It then becomes waste and must be treated as such .
We do not simply allow other hazardous waste to leave the EU without guarantees with regard to the way in which it is going to be processed , and so there is no reason why we should do so with ships for scrapping .
In addition , emphasis should be placed upon processing within the Union itself , as is the case in the entire European waste policy .
Finally , a policy of naming and shaming shipowners and Member States who have their ships dismantled according to methods that are unfriendly to the environment and people would be an effective initial step that we could in fact commence tomorrow .
The responsibility for dismantling a ship responsibly must always remain with the owner and , subsequently , it is up to Member States to verify that this takes place in the correct manner .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your excellent work , and the same goes for Mr Blokland .

The Green Paper before us on better ship dismantling is , in all seriousness , a classic example of the global imbalance that has resulted from industrial development and of the efforts of many different agencies at long last to do something about its negative impact .
The responsibility of the industrialised countries rightly comes to the fore in situations where developing countries suffer intolerable social and environmental harm because others have gone in pursuit of economic benefits .
The negative impact of ship dismantling is particularly glaring .
With the greater environmental , health and safety requirements of which industrialised countries have had to take account , most of the world 's seagoing vessels are dismantled in Bangladesh , Pakistan and India , often in very primitive conditions .
Dismantling yards barely comply with health and environmental standards , and toxic substances such as asbestos are handled by people wearing shorts and sandals .
The use of child labour is also common .
The equation is a difficult one .
Ship dismantling is a profitable business for these countries , not only in terms of its effect on employment and the financial benefits but also for the recovery of raw materials .
For example , Bangladesh gets 80-90 % of its steel from dismantled ships .
At the same time , low labour costs and the lack of basic standards make it an economically attractive business , which in practice results in environmental dumping and a human tragedy on an enormous scale .
An increase in unprofitable dismantling in the EU with the help of aid is not , however , a sustainable option .
There should instead be direct aid measures for the developing countries engaged in dismantling , greatly multiplying the environmental and social benefits .
After vessels have been partially dismantled or cleaned they are in practice unfit to sail , and after asbestos has been removed , for example , most ships can no longer be moved .
For that reason aid measures should focus on the establishment of certified dismantling yards , where the dismantling techniques used comply with Western notions of safety and environmental acceptability .
Globally there should be a list for shipping companies of approved dismantling yards , and the International Maritime Organization should have a key part to play in their certification , to make the system truly international .
This would solve the equation .
The developing countries need the economic and material benefits derived from dismantling , and the shipping firms in the industrialised countries which are under growing pressure need the situation to change .
( PL ) Mr President , some words of acknowledgement for the rapporteur , Mr Blokland ; as always , once again he has done some excellent work .
Mr Evans said that he had seen ships being dismantled in Bangladesh .
Beyond the Polish eastern border , which is also a European boarder , I have seen instances of ' non-dismantling ' of ships ; in other words , somewhere on the seashore , fishing vessels , passenger ships and freighters , and even military ships , have been dumped and the water has flushed them out .
We are talking about the first step , then , which is dismantling .
The second step would seem to be some kind of duty to dismantle .
Then , finally , there is the third step - recycling , or establishing the kind of material used to build ships , how this material is embodied in the vessel and how such materials may be recovered .
This is the process we are commencing .
As an economist rather than an idealist , I believe we have quite a long road ahead of us , but it is a very good thing that we are starting our journey along it , and let us hope that we will find followers out there in the world .
( RO ) I would also like to congratulate Mr. Blokland for his report .
In response to the accidents in which oil tankers such as Erika and Prestige were involved , the Union adopted the international legislation and rules for the gradual phasing-out of single hull oil tankers .
It is estimated that approximately 1,300 single hull oil tankers will be phased out and sent for dismantling by 2015 .
The costs entailed by the ship dismantling are very high and make the recycling of ships unfeasible from the economic point of view .
In many Member States , there are still ships that are very old , in poor condition , anchored at the shore or even stranded on the shores of internal waters .
Thus , I believe special attention should be given to delta and estuary areas , where stranded ships could have a negative impact on the environment .
Stranded ships often block navigable waterways periodically and cause substantial economic damage .
Since 2005 , the International Maritime Organization has worked on implementing a mandatory international system for ecological ship dismantling , a process to which the European Union has also contributed .
The future international convention and the responsible involvement of Member States will be essential for solving the problems related to ship dismantling .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for the high level of discussion this evening .
Your report is extremely encouraging as regards the Commission 's proposals .
Let me mention three issues you have touched on .
Firstly , you call on the Member States and the Commission to enforce the Waste Shipments Regulation more effectively .
You also call on the Commission to draw up a list of ships likely to be taken to breaking yards in the next few years .
We shall examine the possibility of drawing up such a list .
As Mrs Grossetête has proposed , we must also list the facilities that meet higher standards .
Furthermore , with regard to ships reaching the end of their lives , we agree that stricter regulation on the shipment of waste must be enforced .
The Commission intends to provide the necessary guidelines .
I expect the authorities of the Member States to ensure that there are no cases of ships being allowed to leave EU ports if they are clearly being sent for breaking in developing countries .
In addition , in view of the fact that most ships of European origin will be broken and turned into waste outside Community waters , a binding international regime really must be enacted .
Secondly , we shall examine the question of developing a competitive shipbreaking and pre-cleaning industry in the EU , without endangering the viability of South Asian breaking yards .
The European shipyards are not in a position to compete with the breaking yards of South Asia .
There is no question , then , of retaining or artificially bringing back the bulk of the shipbreaking market to Europe .
What we can ensure , however , is the requirement that warships , other state-owned ships and those receiving state aid should be broken up exclusively in facilities that are environmentally well run , in Europe or in OECD countries .
We could perhaps require ships flying the flags of Member States to be broken exclusively in fully authorised and certified facilities .
Pre-cleaning should be made common practice so that it becomes practicable .
Lastly , I see that you are supporting the proposal to set up a shipbreaking fund .
You are asking the Commission to examine the possibility of imposing compulsory insurance as a guarantee of environmentally friendly recycling .
The Commission is to examine the existing options .
Those responsible in the shipping sector inform us that the new international Convention on ship recycling will combine with market forces to solve the shipbreaking problem .
We certainly do not want to create unnecessary administrative or financial burdens .
We shall , at any rate , keep a close watch on developments ; we shall not hesitate to take regulatory measures if the market remains unable to provide a solution to this problem .
Your continuing support will be of crucial importance in ensuring a change for the better in shipbreaking conditions .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) I should like first of all to thank all the speakers for their appreciative words , especially Commissioner Dimas .
I should like to make a couple more observations .
I believe that it is of exceptional importance that this dismantling fund be established .
This fund should be filled with contributions from shipowners and not , of course , with government subsidies .
I believe that that is not at all necessary .
In the same way as a scrapping fund for old cars , this will begin to support itself as time goes by .
I am happy that the Commissioner is also thinking along these lines .
We must be very quick and , therefore , it may perhaps be a good idea to enter into an agreement with the European shipowners as soon as possible , so that they will have their ships dismantled responsibly in any case .
I know that shipping company P & O Nedlloyd Maersk has had around 20 ships dismantled responsibly in China , particularly also by ensuring that facilities were provided there where possible .
I believe that we must make the shipowners , in particular , aware of their social responsibility and let them know that they really cannot do this any more ; that is , to sell a ship for large sums of money .
It is then sold 10 more times before it is finally dismantled .
We need to adopt a completely different approach to dismantling and , in my opinion , it may well be possible to induce the shipowners to do so , especially given all the negative publicity on this issue in recent years .
Dismantling work is also often carried out in contravention of local legislation and against the wishes of the Ministries of Social Affairs and the Environment .
I have also been told that , in Bangladesh , it is not the national legislation that is the problem but the enforcement of such legislation .
I think , therefore , that there may well be sufficient facilities in place , but they are not being used .
Mr Matsakis also asked what my objection is to his amendment .
The issue is that this amendment implies that environmentally destructive conditions involved in the dismantling of ships cannot be permitted to continue in developing countries .
However , they cannot be permitted to continue anywhere , including in Eastern Europe , for example , where ships are indeed still occasionally dismantled according to irresponsible methods .
It is therefore excessive to focus this exclusively on developing countries , particularly if it is later specified that it is not allowed to be carried out in places such as the Far East .
I feel that this addition is unnecessary , therefore .
Unfortunately , I cannot support the amendments by Mrs Liotard , as they are too protectionist .
Mr Liberadzki has raised an important issue , specifically that there are also ships stored elsewhere , left to rust , with nothing being done about them .
We must also tackle that issue .
I should like to say a big thank you to everyone once again , and I shall leave it at that .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting closed at 23.40 . )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , it gives me great pleasure to welcome a delegation from the Mexican Congress , led by Senator Guadarrama , who have taken their seats in the official gallery .
A very warm welcome to you .
( Applause )
The delegation is taking part in the sixth meeting of the EU-Mexico Joint Parliamentary Committee today .
Mexico is a close partner of the European Union and this meeting is taking place at an important time in relations between Mexico and the European Union .
The Lima Summit last weekend showed that we have many common interests .
I also had the opportunity to speak with your President , Felipe Calderón .
The Joint Parliamentary Committee will also be discussing climate change this afternoon , so I am sure that this plenary debate will be followed by you with interest .
I wish our Mexican colleagues and friends a successful stay in Strasbourg .
Scientific facts of climate change : findings and recommendations for decision-making ( debate )
The next item is the interim report by Mr Florenz on the scientific facts of climate change : findings and recommendations for decision-making .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , welcome to the European Parliament .
What prompted the European Union to set up a Temporary Committee on Climate Change ?
It was the right approach , to present an overall view of how we , the European Union , intend to deal with this issue .
If we want to help at international level to ensure that this issue is kept on the agenda - as Stavros Dimas is successfully doing for the Commission - as the European Union , as the Parliament , we must state what our concept is ; in other words , we need to state what our visiting card is on this issue .
Ultimately , Europe must show how we are dealing with this issue , and what approach we are adopting in order to encourage other countries and continents to move with us in the same direction .
That is why it is important to begin with the scientific aspect of this debate , and that is what we are talking about today .
Focusing on this aspect will never produce an attractive report because it simply deals with the status quo .
It is not a matter of horse-trading : giving a bit here , taking a bit there . It is about focusing on the facts .
We have brought together these facts in numerous thematic strategies , during which we invited two Nobel Prize laureates to Brussels and Strasbourg .
Mr President , you organised an excellent event and delivered a very significant speech on climate change , which was extremely gratifying from my perspective and which encouraged me to redouble my efforts .
We have heard the views of numerous experts from international bodies all over the world , under the excellent chairmanship of my good friend Guido Sacconi who managed matters very well .
We were also able to invite some critics , although unfortunately they did not all come , because they do not want to subject their criticism to international scrutiny .
Producing criticism in print without being willing to subject it to formal scrutiny is hardly heroic conduct .
I would have welcomed the presence of at least one or two critics willing to face up to international debate .
We have read many excellent documents .
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) was involved , and we also consulted the Food and Agriculture Organization , the United Nations Environment Programme , the climate conference of the Federal Republic of Germany , and many others , with the result that we now have the facts before us .
This is not a combative sort of paper , as some of my friends have occasionally claimed ; it is a status report as a basis on which to determine how we should proceed in future .
The arguments clearly show that there is a scientific consensus with which we can now progress with our work .
There is a consensus on how to assess the anthropogenic influence ; that is covered in Article 3 .
We have sufficient information to state that the target of limiting the global average temperature increase to not more than 2 ° C above pre-industrial levels in future is important .
What , then , do we need to do in future ?
In Europe , we need to muster our energy for a new third industrial revolution based on the three pillars of sustainability , namely product sustainability , the social dimension and of course the economic dimension .
This is not a burden ; it is a massive opportunity which we must develop further as our vision .
One thing is certain : the climate debate is just a minor part of our problem . We must engage in a debate about sustainability .
The fact is that in just 500 years , we are squandering energy which took millions of years to create , and we have absolutely no answer to the question of how our children , and our children 's children , will be able to develop their energy sources in future .
That is the great opportunity .
We need the courage to be creative .
The Stone Age did not end because we no longer had any stones available .
Let me tell you , the Stone Age ended , fortunately , because we politicians had courage : courage to seize the future , courage for our children , and courage for this planet of ours .
( Applause )
Many thanks , Mr Florenz , also for your kind words to the President .
It is the exception rather than the rule for such kind sentiments to be expressed .
As my role here is to be objective and neutral , I will refrain from making the point that very little praise tends to be forthcoming , especially from one 's own political family .
What has happened this morning was therefore quite an event !

President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Mr President , Mr Florenz , ladies and gentlemen , proof is now available that man shares the responsibility for the great changes to the climate system , and that these changes have already had a negative impact on nature and human society .
It is also certain that if we do not act promptly and considerably reduce the emissions of greenhouse gases during this century the global temperature will continue to rise , which will lead to general damage and disruption .
The Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , released in Spain in November 2007 , represents the most complete and the most credible scientific assessment of climate change so far .
The report states that there is no doubt that the climate system is warming up , and that the increase in the average global temperature over the last fifty years has most probably been caused by the anthropogenic concentration of greenhouse gases .
The assessment reports on the situation which have been published by IPCC since 1990 show that the science on climate change and the consequences thereof has made considerable advances over the last few years .
This can be ascribed to a number of factors : the ever-increasing evidence of the known change to the climate , the scientists ' hard work , and an improved dissemination of scientific discoveries .
As has been stated in Mr Florenz 's interim report , which in our opinion brings out some very important fresh formulations concerning the problems described that we know of today , the situation is enough to warrant the immediate creation and implementation of policies which will contribute to a reduction in greenhouse emissions .
As we all know , this is why the European heads of state and government decided in March last year to send out a resolute message to the international community , with commitments concerning the reduction of greenhouse emissions .
The European Union is determined to meet these commitments with an integrated approach to climate and energy policy .
Secondly , it will dedicate special attention to energy efficiency , renewable sources of energy , biofuels , to carbon dioxide capture and storage and generally a transition to a low carbon economy .
I should also like to remind you , ladies and gentlemen , of the latest decisions of the European Council .
As I already mentioned , last year the European Union adopted resolute and large-scale commitments concerning climate and energy policy .
Now , in 2008 , it is time for action .
At the Climate Change Conference held in December last year in Bali , an important breakthrough was made with the beginning of the international negotiations process , which includes everyone , the developed and the developing countries .
This process has been outlined in the Action Plan from Bali .
The European Union is determined to further maintain its leading international role in the area of climate change and energy , and to preserve the necessary impetus in negotiations within the framework of the United Nations Convention , in particular at one of its next sessions this year in Poznan .
The objective is to ensure that in Copenhagen in 2009 , an ambitious , global and integrated climate change agreement is reached for the period following the year 2012 , which will be in line with the European Union 's objectives , that the global temperature should not increase by more than two degrees . The European Union will also contribute to this considerably by meeting the targets set out at the European Council 's spring meeting in 2007 .
The key challenge is that the transition to a safe and sustainable low carbon economy is carried out in a manner that will be in line with the sustainable development of the European Union , its competitiveness , a reliable energy supply , food security , and healthy and sustainable public finances .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for the opportunity you have given us today to discuss the interim report by the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , presented by Mr Florenz .
I congratulate him on his excellent work .
The report confirms the European Parliament 's support for an ambitious Community policy on combating climate change . Let me take this opportunity , Mr President , to thank all the Members of the European Parliament for their continuing support and vital contribution towards promoting our climate policy , raising public awareness and informing MPs from other countries .
Mr President , I should also like to point out the important part you have played in promoting the EU 's policy on climate change . I am sure that you and Members of the European Parliament will continue with the same commitment , so that in the two brief years we have ahead of us we can achieve an agreement by the end of 2009 in Copenhagen .
We shall thus be able to deal effectively with this great threat to the planet .
Both in the EU , where discussions on the climate and energy package of measures are intensifying , and in international negotiations , we must muster all our resources and cooperate as best we can . We must make use of the EU 's head start , bearing in mind the Copenhagen Conference in December 2009 .
Two factors have helped us reach the important decisions taken in Bali : Europe 's position as world leader in combating climate change , and the scientific findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) .
Thanks to these findings , many world leaders have accepted that there is indeed an urgent need to take measures . This series of scientific reports has now allowed citizens and political leaders , including Members in various countries , to better understand the scale of the challenge and the serious dangers we face if we do not intervene to stop climate change .
I think we nearly all agree that it has indeed been scientifically proven that urgent , bold measures to combat climate change are needed .
These measures are summarised in the interim report we have before us .
This report puts across more clearly than ever before the scientific message given by the IPCC and other sources in 2007 .
The scientific debate on whether climate change is caused by human activity has lasted for decades because of scepticism , which has prevented decisive measures from being taken .
Now the debate is over .
This does not mean that all the questions have been answered or that we have understood every detail ; but we now know enough to conclude that the rapid adoption of ambitious measures is in our interests , in terms of energy security and in economic , environmental and social terms .
Not only do we not have the luxury of waiting but , worse still , the time we have is very limited .
If we are to restrict global warming to 2 ° C , the threshold above which we lose the ability to limit or reverse its environmental impact , greenhouse gas emissions should peak within the next 10 to 15 years at the most .
In the long term , to give us a good chance of not exceeding 2 ° C , global emissions in 2050 must be reduced to 50 % of their 1990 levels .
To achieve this , a radical change is needed in the way we produce and use energy .
There must be a worldwide transition to a low-CO2 economy , and small but important changes are needed in many aspects of our everyday lives .
What we need is nothing short of a green revolution .
The IPCC reports have made it clear that even with ambitious measures to reduce emissions some serious effects of climate change are probably inevitable . The international community must therefore be ready to deal with them .
For this reason , support will be necessary , especially to the most vulnerable among the developing countries , which will face the gravest problems .
I now turn to the UN negotiations . We know we have little time at our disposal , since our overriding priority is to achieve an agreement in Copenhagen in 2009 .
Signing a substantial , comprehensive agreement that meets the ambitious targets set by scientific findings is a considerable challenge .
Persuading our international partners to sign the ambitious agreement is our objective and will require a titanic effort .
The EU must therefore remain faithful to its hitherto successful strategy . This means that we must achieve positive results at home and show our international partners abroad that adopting ambitious measures is neither contrary to their interests , nor does it hinder their economic development .
One of our challenges here will be to secure the participation of developed countries in an effort to reduce emissions to levels corresponding to the 2 ° C target . This means a 25-40 % reduction in their emissions by 2020 from the 1990 level .
Let me not beat about the bush .
We call on the United States to rise to the challenge ; instead of hindering progress , it must encourage it .
As you will have realised during your recent visit to the United States , discussions in progress there have begun to move in the right direction , but obviously we still expect much more from them .
As well as working with developed countries , we must also work to achieve ambitious commitments on emission reduction from developing countries , especially the more advanced ones .
There are many possibilities for reducing emissions ; they entail significant additional benefits for energy security , human health , and development in general .
Measures in this direction must be provided for and supported in the forthcoming 2009 agreement .
Here , too , I believe , things are moving in the right direction .
There is increased awareness of the need to take steps to combat climate change .
At the same time , additional benefits are also becoming apparent , whether in relation to safeguarding energy , or human health , or economic development , which will not only be safeguarded , but will probably benefit .
The recent visit by Commission representatives to China confirmed that our Chinese counterparts are fully aware of their pressing obligation to take internal measures .
They have already begun to take them and intend to continue their efforts .
We must support them bilaterally and multilaterally .
We shall have many opportunities during the coming months and next year to put across our message .
For instance , there will be the G8 Conference and G8 + 5 , for which the Japanese presidency is concentrating on climate change .
Further opportunities will come with the initiative under the auspices of the UN for the world 's leading economies and the EU 's various bilateral cooperation programmes on climate change .
We shall make use of all these opportunities . We shall persuade our partners that urgent measures must be taken and that sound , viable policies must be mapped out on energy and climate change .
In our endeavour we must systematically highlight the scientific findings underpinning our actions ; we must keep referring back to the consequences of inaction or inadequate measures .
As we know , the shared vision is to be the subject of negotiations in the context of the Bali roadmap .
It is very important that the vision should be negotiated on the basis of the authoritative scientific opinions that we have at our disposal .
We must insist that the negotiations should be conducted in the light of scientific findings .
I am confident that together you have just as important a role to play as the Commission in putting this crucial message across to our partners , to our citizens and to their parliamentary representatives .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am sorry I am late , but I was trying to keep my speed down in order to protect our climate .
Our main debate today concerns scientific data on climate change .
First of all I wish to thank my colleague Karl-Heinz Florenz for his outstanding work and his constant devotion to this issue .
Ladies and gentlemen , scientific knowledge on climate change has now been established .
In the opinion of a majority of experts on the subject , we can no longer entertain any doubts as to the fact that global warming is now a reality , and that it is largely due to human activities .
A few dissidents question the reality of this phenomenon , without offering any genuine proof .
The interim report by our Temporary Committee on Climate Change is the first phase in a process that will lead to a search for solutions .
Almost all of us agree that the increase in world temperature ought to be restricted to two degrees above pre-industrial levels , while bearing in mind that we actually ought to be aiming for an increase of less than two degrees . The debate on climate change cannot , however , be boiled down to a battle of statistics .
When we talk about the climate , we mention the melting of the Arctic ice cap , desertification , global warming , displacement of animal species , and especially phenomena that could have catastrophic consequences in terms of human displacement .
This is a major challenge for mankind as a whole .
The regions hardest hit will be the poorest countries in Africa , Asia and Central and Latin America , where environmental migration is envisaged .
A new kind of refugee is set to emerge with the onset of extreme climate conditions .
They will no longer be political refugees or economic migrants ; they will be climate refugees .
There is also a risk of a food crisis since there will be less cultivatable land .
When supplies of drinking water become more scarce , tensions will rise , and wars could break out in a struggle for control of resources .
We have an immense responsibility here .
It is no longer a matter of questioning the phenomenon of climate change , but for all of us to work together to find solutions and implement them .
The Climate Action and Renewable Energy package presented by the Commission in January is also now being discussed by Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy : emission quota trading system , sharing of the climate burden , capture and storage of carbon and renewable energies .
Members of our PPE-DE Group on these committees and the PPE Group as a whole are heavily involved .
We are expecting many such debates , and are determined to work together to find a compromise at first reading .
It is essential that Parliament and the Council reach an agreement before the European elections .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has taken on the role of world leader in the fight against climate change vis-à-vis its international partners , and it must retain this role .
If we do not take our role seriously to encourage the US and other countries , as you said , Commissioner , such as China and India , to join us in the fight against climate change , then who will ?
Europe must be united and fully operational at the Poznań World Conference in December 2008 , which will shape the agreement we hope to sign in Copenhagen in December 2009 .
This is a world challenge , but Europe is the power that can persuade its partners to join its fight , and we must make preparations for the future of our children and our grandchildren .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the Socialist Group moved that the Temporary Committee on Climate Change be established and when we tabled that motion we were more convinced than ever that we are at a decisive phase in terms of European and indeed international policy , for what we are expecting of this Committee is a Herculean task , not only here in the House .
The issues it is dealing with are - it must be said - a monumental task : a task , as we say in German , for an entire century . Indeed , they are issues which must be resolved this century , for if we do not do so , much will be irrevocably lost for future generations .
I therefore welcome the fact that this debate has revealed an overwhelming consensus among Members of this House that we must make massive efforts to master the challenges facing us .
I would therefore like to join in the thanks expressed to Karl-Heinz Florenz who , as a member of a different parliamentary group but in his capacity as rapporteur , has presented a report whose contents we , as the Socialist Group , can certainly endorse .
I am grateful too that , with Karl-Heinz Florenz and my colleague Guido Sacconi , we have two people from this House jointly steering the Committee , which in my view is a good sign that we can achieve a result based on a consensus .
So much for the consensual issues : the question which in my view will undoubtedly arise is whether we will still be able to work together when it comes to substantive issues concerning the policy course that we should take , and when we start addressing points of detail .
I would therefore like to highlight two or three fracture lines which we will have to deal with .
I do not want to go into the detail of the interim report , which I think is excellent ; I would simply draw your attention to one example .
A few years ago , we were all very enthusiastic when we said that , in reducing CO2 emissions , we wanted to move away from oil and towards renewable resources .
We said that biofuels were the answer but no one realised at the time that the massive use of arable land for the cultivation of energy crops could lead to a shortage of farmland for the cultivation of foods .
When riots occurred some years ago in Mexico , when maize flour was suddenly no longer available or prices had risen dramatically , we - or at least I - did not immediately make the connection .
Today , we know that we have to solve energy and climate problems but also combat hunger in the world .
We need to reconcile these two aspects , and this is just one small indication that we are tackling an interdisciplinary task which will require us to demonstrate considerable resolve , and that includes the resolve to make compromises , including compromises elsewhere as well .
Europe is an industrial continent .
The industrial structures which were established over the course of 50 or 60 years have been responsible for the damage to our climate .
We need a change of course , but we all need to recognise that industrial structures which have been established over 50 or 60 years cannot be changed within two weeks by a parliamentary resolution .
That takes time as well , so we will have to strike a balance between the very ambitious goals we are setting ourselves here .
Commissioner Dimas is right ; we have no time to lose . We have to strike a balance between these ambitious goals , on the one hand , and what is feasible , in terms of a change of course , on the other .
Both these aspects are crucially important , and both need a rational approach that is geared towards compromise .
I therefore welcome the fact that the French Presidency has said that it is willing to try and produce a result by the end of the year .
If we have the same willingness to compromise and the degree of commitment in the Council that is apparent here in Parliament , that gives me cause for optimism .
However , if we see the same tactical positioning within the Council that we always see in this particular institution , we will lose time .
I have the impression that there is great readiness on the part of Parliament and in the Commission as well .
If we have the same readiness in the Council too , and if all three European institutions work together , then before the European elections , we can achieve what Mr Daul has said : namely to signal to the public that the heads of state and government agree the broad policy outlines while the European Parliament does the detailed work .
This division of labour is what is customary , and then it would actually be visible at last .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , if the interim report from our Committee on Climate Change does no more than state the obvious , that is no bad thing .
For it confirms , in black and white , what most of us have acknowledged for some time .
The science of climate change is incontrovertible .
Permafrost and ice caps are melting , sea-levels and temperatures rising , largely due to human activity .
Failure to act now means humankind will hurtle towards a tipping point from which there is no return .
The deadlines for climate policy are set not by the European Union , nor by the world community : they are set by nature .
And the bottom line is that - despite commitments in Kyoto - global greenhouse gas emissions are growing faster than ever before , up by a quarter since 1990 .
Some scientists say CO2 concentrations have already gone too far .
All agree the window of opportunity open to us to stabilise emissions and limit the rise in temperature to two degrees above pre-industrial levels will close within seven years .
Democracies are run by crisis management .
Serious problems are often not tackled until they have to be tackled , and as Karl-Heinz Florenz points out in this excellent report we need to cut greenhouse gas emissions not by 20 % , but possibly by up to 40 % , depending on what deal can be made with third countries at the Copenhagen talks next year .
There are positive signs from the other big polluters , China and the USA .
Beijing showed a new-found willingness to negotiate at the UN summit in Bali and all three US presidential candidates are committed to tackling climate change .
What we must do - in the absence of further evidence , and with the resources at hand - is to approve the Commission 's climate change package , and I salute the work that my colleagues Lena Ek , Chris Davis and Vittorio Prodi have done in this area .
We must also redouble our efforts to promote clean energy - and the amazing thing is this : we know how .
Generating power from the desert sun , as a supplement to sources of renewable energy here in Europe , could speed up the process of cutting CO2 emissions at a stroke .
Indeed , satellite-based studies by the German Aerospace Centre have shown us that , using less than 0.3 % of the desert area of the Middle East and North Africa , enough high-voltage electricity can be generated to supply current and future demand in Europe , the Middle East and North Africa .
It is not rocket science .
It has been done for 20 years in California .
Plants are now being built in Spain and Morocco to do the same .
If we could summon the drive and the determination , the guts and the grit , we could make the shift from oil while providing jobs , drinking water and better infrastructure for those bearing the brunt of climate change .
We could combat climate change without having to turn off the lights .
Our aim should be to put Europe 's money where its mouth is , to invest money in high-voltage solar thermal power generation and political capital in the human relations across the Mediterranean Sea to make it possible .
We could find no better ammunition for use in negotiations with the UN to get a progressive international agreement in Copenhagen .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to express my thanks to Karl-Heinz Florenz for the very good cooperation in the Temporary Committee on Climate Change .
If we take the Florenz report and say , ' this is the state of play in the climate policy debate in the European Parliament ' , we might conclude that there is a wonderful ' climate ' among Members here in the European Parliament , were it not for the fact that - like the Beagle Boys in the famous cartoons , whom we call the ' Tank-busters ' in German - a very different agenda is being pursued in the same place at the same time !
Unfortunately , in parallel to the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , climate policy is being pursued in the European Parliament 's other committees as well : in the Committee on Industry , in the Committee on Environment and in the Committee on Development .
In these committees , our colleagues often arrive at very different outcomes ; they do not conclude that we are at the dawn of a ' green ' revolution , a second or third industrial revolution .
Let us take the controversy over the regulation of CO2 emissions from cars as just one example .
What is being put forward at present in this context by Mr Langen , the rapporteur for the Committee on Industry , has nothing to do with ambitious climate policy or the effort to guarantee energy security through efficiency technologies , which is what we are prescribing for the car industry in Europe .
The ambitious new dawn which is championed by Mr Dimas has been consistently blocked by various majorities in the European Parliament for the last one and a half years .
I would like to know what has happened to the spirit of the broader climate debate in this controversy over cars .
Here , it is not my Group that should put its hand on its heart ; those who are applying the brakes here are distributed among all the other groups in this House .
Let me make one further point : emissions trading will be an important issue in Poznań and Copenhagen .
The Commission should ensure that we achieve a 20 % reduction in Europe .
That was the proposal made by Angela Merkel when Germany held the Council Presidency , and yet as soon as the Commission tables its proposal for emissions trading , Members spring into action yet again as the parliamentary arm of the industry lobby in Europe , with the result that the negotiations focus not on achieving ambitious reduction targets but on achieving exemptions even before the rules have been established .
Mr Florenz 's report is a good report .
The fact remains , however , that what we are voting on today has nothing to do with the reality of climate policy in the European Parliament .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I too should like to add my voice of congratulations to Mr Florenz and say how fortunate we are that we have a man of his ability leading this debate and to compliment him on what he has produced so far .
We are often accused of being remote in this institution , of not being in touch with our people , but on this occasion the EU is working for its citizens .
It is no coincidence that 95 % of European citizens believe in the importance of protecting our environment .
Over two thirds believe that policies tackling climate change should be initiated at European level .
My country , which is a small island , cannot solve or undertake to tackle climate change alone , just like any other country .
In the Reform Treaty , which is a very prominent subject of debate in my country at the present time , the European Union has outlined measures which will see the 27 Member States combating climate change , united together .
The European Union constructively facilitated the UN agreement breakthrough in Bali last December , with all parties now recognising the urgency of action .
We must accept the difficulties that we are facing ; the scientific evidence is now overwhelming .
Climate change is a serious global threat .
It is going to cost us .
Are we seriously willing to sacrifice not only our climate and planet , but also our economies ?
Continued inaction will eventually cost us up to one fifth of our annual gross domestic product , but real action will mean a 1 % spend .
Are we also willing to subject our climate to the point of no return ?
Already scientists inform us that the last decade was the warmest on record and that 2007 was one of the top 10 warmest years .
Let us not forget our achievements and goals in Bali .
We need to continue to deliver a road map of cohesive solutions to the threat of climate change , ensuring that Member State flexibility is at its heart .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) The content of this report is correct , but I would have liked to see more in the way of concrete measures to counter climate change .
Despite this , of course , the report has the support of the GUE / NGL Group .
We note from the report that global emissions increased by 70 % between 1970 and 2004 , that the last decade was the warmest ever and that we face several tipping-points , for example the melting of the Greenland ice sheet .
We therefore call for a 60-80 % reduction in the EU 's emissions by 2050 .
We call for climate-labelling of consumer products and measures to counteract the considerable emissions generated by the EU through imports from other countries .
We also appeal for a change in lifestyle patterns .
This is perfectly correct , but we must also make it easier for people to live in climate-friendly ways .
For example , we must eat less meat and we must travel less by car and aeroplane .
Unfortunately the EU subsidises the meat industry by huge amounts .
Just as unfortunately the EU subsidises the construction of motorways , which only leads to increased motoring .
Our measures to counter flying are also far from adequate .
If we politicians do not create sustainable systems , we are not credible when we urge people to change their lifestyles .
As I have said , we should go further .
We must have more concrete measures to bring about changes , and we must have higher reduction targets .
We must also be self-critical and question the economic order which prevails in the EU .
The EU is after all committed to the completion of the internal market and permanent growth .
This only leads to more transport , and that is unsustainable .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) First I thank the rapporteur , Mr Florenz , for the thorough interim report we have in front of us today .
It is good to have all the relevant scientific information on climate change collected in this report .
It can then serve as a useful step towards the final report by the Temporary Committee on Climate Change .
I have nothing to add to the content and I have therefore not tabled any amendments .
A great deal is already known about climate change , but a lot of further study is needed , because many of the parameters are still not known .
This report makes an active start with that additional study .
I cannot support the amendments by Mr Březina amongst others , insofar as they are admissible at all .
As regards the amendments by Mrs Doyle and others , I shall follow the opinion of the rapporteur .
Finally , I should like to wish Mr Florenz luck in drawing up the final report .
( CS ) Mr President , the report we are debating today is a symbol of the arrogance and mainstream blindness of Parliament .
It is dangerously close to suppressing freedom , democracy and solidarity with the weakest in society .
In regard to freedom of thought , there is nothing worse than insisting that only one scientific opinion is correct and denouncing other ideas .
In regard to democracy , there is nothing worse than giving political blessing to such an opinion and trying to control people 's lives accordingly .
In regard to solidarity with the weakest , there is nothing worse than pouring foodstuffs into car petrol tanks and watching people die from hunger .
Such policies will not save the planet .
The only winners will be the producers of subsidised rapeseed and manufacturers of windmill components .
Taking into account that the report attempts to suppress the exchange of opinions , dictates what the scientific results should be and overlooks the needs of the poorest in society , in no way can I give it my support .
I think that the Temporary Committee on Climate Change should be immediately dissolved .
In conclusion I just want to say that I come from the Czech Republic and I can proudly say that , unlike other politicians , President Václav Klaus 's thinking has not become warmer and his brain has not become green .
Thank you , Mrs Bobošíková .
I will try harder to pronounce your name correctly in future .
I think we are all on a learning curve , not only the President but undoubtedly the speaker as well .
Thank you , Madam .

( ES ) Mr President , I wish to thank Karl-Heinz Florenz and the entire working group for having brought in such high-level scientists to work on this issue .
I think it is the first time that scientists have worked alongside Members of this House .
This is an asset that must not be discarded since it is clear , as the scientists have stated , that we face enormous uncertainty in the shape of climate change . In other words , science is progressing and is changing its opinions as it goes , and thus we cannot turn science into absolute truths .
What does this mean ?
It means that if scientists , in their work , are constantly reviewing their findings and we are following along behind , then we must also be flexible and adapt our solutions to the changes in knowledge .
This symmetry between ever-increasing knowledge and our own flexibility is very important .
Thus one of my concerns is the enormous confidence we have in ourselves in Europe .
Doubt and uncertainty form the basis of scientific work , and of getting it right in this case .
I think we have to be aware of the fact that there may be other countries , those we are criticising , that are doing the right thing in certain areas .
I say this , and I must reiterate that I support the project , for I believe that the concepts of complexity and impact must be taken into consideration , and this is borne out by what has happened to us with biofuels .
We must also be ruled by absolute discipline in relation to environmental impact , economic impact and feasibility of the solutions .
Since the aim of this document is not to provide solutions , however , I continue to support it .
Nevertheless I would also say that we must apply a combined policy , and here the document must move one step forward in the second part , with decisions taken from above at state level , without neglecting the fact that climate change is an issue which must be solved by adaptation at local level .
We must therefore start contemplating a policy of broad climate change knowledge from above , in combination with a policy operated from below , in industry , in economic sectors , in agriculture , in our various territories , to allow each country to draw up its own project in line with the general project .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too of course add my voice to those of my fellow Members who have expressed thanks and appreciation for the work done by our rapporteur , Karl-Heinz Florenz .
I would also like to thank , informally , all Members and political groups who are working and have worked very intensively this year for the Temporary Committee on Climate Change which has genuinely forged a very strong , staunch climate of unity beyond the fringe areas of discord which do nevertheless exist .
This gives me reason for hope because a summary of all the material we have gathered already and the material we are gathering for the final report will be forthcoming , and this will , in short , allow us to pass on a healthy legacy to the future Parliament which it can use to carry out the work it must do in line with the truly overarching vision which is so necessary on this matter .
What we have today is the first chapter , the placing on record of the state of scientific knowledge on this issue .
We should be clear that this does not mean that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) is a scientific movement , but a forum where , following years of work , all scientific literature on the subject has been considered and a summary , an audit , has been made , reaching levels of probability in various areas , various assessments , which have very rapidly attained almost 100 % , an unprecedented state of affairs , I believe , in the history of science .
I believe that this is also of concern from a wider point of view ; it could be regarded to some degree as a model for establishing an intelligent relationship , if I may be so bold , between scientific knowledge and political decision-making in respect of the extraordinary complexity of the issues facing the world today .
Climate change is happening , it is happening fast , and therefore we must act promptly and , as Karl-Heinz rightly said , it is not only a problem but an opportunity .
This knowledge is precisely the basis upon which , in the space of one year , Commissioner Dimas , the world political climate has also changed , and global warming is not the only thing to have happened .
The world political climate has changed , culminating in Bali with an acknowledgement by everyone of the validity of the IPCC research and , in recent months , of truly important changes in the positions taken by leaders .
Some of our work also involved carrying out several visits to China , India and recently to Washington in the United States , and we were able to seize upon what , as you noted , the Presidential candidates have stated very clearly , namely that there will be a very different commitment even in the United States over the coming months which really gives rise to hope for the international negotiations which are due to conclude in Copenhagen in 2009 .
I agree with you on that point and we are producing results which were unimaginable only one year ago .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you Commissioner for your continued attendance .
As a scientist I can only welcome the fact that the picture in terms of science has finally been accepted and acknowledged , even in high-ranking political bodies such as this .
As Vice-Chairman of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , I am satisfied with the initial results of the joint work and I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Florenz , my colleagues and the Chairman , Mr Sacconi .

Personally , however , I fear that all our goodwill will not be enough to resolve the serious problems which we face .
I am thinking especially of the catastrophic outlook predicted by climate change for problems which are already very difficult , such as poverty , public health and access to natural resources , chief among which is water , and I believe that , once the first step on this journey of discovery into this phenomenon has been taken , namely the drafting of this initial report on scientific evidence , we will in all likelihood be choosing to accept a mission impossible .
This mission will be to give grounds for hope , to come up with achievable plans for a future which is not built solely on conflict and inequalities and to offer a vision where science helps us to even out the imbalances which mankind has created or helped to exacerbate .
What we should tell our fellow citizens is this : we will accept this mission and in doing so we will make a leap forward for civilisation .
Mr President , at first sight this report may seem like a technical one , simply summarising the science as we know it .
But make no mistake , this report is also a deeply political one and it is a call to arms , because the fact is that this report demonstrates the urgent need for a complete revolution in the way we run our economies .
Knowledge brings with it responsibility and to know what we know about the realities of climate change and yet to fail to act in a commensurate way would amount to nothing less than a crime against future generations .
So the logic of the report is this : that the EU 's 20 % emission reduction target is quite simply incompatible with the science on two degrees ; that we must therefore move unilaterally to make at least 30 % domestic reductions now ; that we must respond to new facts - just last month a leading climate scientist , James Hansen , warned that current targets are far too weak and that we must commit far more resources to helping developing countries adapt , with all the revenue from the ETS auctioning being ring-fenced for climate action .
The good news is that the EU is uniquely well placed to take the lead on climate change and that , if we were to take up that challenge , we might also find that our own institutions are revitalised and that the EU is reconnected with the citizens it is supposed to represent .
( PL ) Mr President , for some time now I have listened with alarm to pseudo-scientific arguments put forward in the very heart of Europe .
I refer to presentations made in this House , from which wisdom based on sound scientific evidence is supposed be disseminated to the entire world .
In fact , however , there are just as many scientists who maintain that we are not in a position to influence climate change with the means currently available as there are scientists who maintain that we can do so .
Imagine for a minute that the first group is right , ladies and gentlemen .
If that is the case and we devote enormous resources to alleged climate change , thus affecting humankind 's well-being , notably in Europe , we shall be condemning the nations of Europe to a steep decline in relation to other nations that will develop faster in the meantime .
I can assure the House that the Chairman of a parliamentary committee only takes account of the opinions of one set of scientists , and if Commissioner Dimas does not refer to all known scientific work on this subject , thus allowing a myth to arise , I shall protest in the strongest terms . I shall do so because action of this sort must be taken only and exclusively on the basis of conclusive scientific evidence .

( IT ) Mr President , colleagues , my great thanks go to the rapporteur , Mr Florenz , because he has worked hard and has assessed several months ' work by the Temporary Committee on Climate Change under the expert chairmanship of Guido Sacconi .
The key political point which leads me to agree with the Florenz report is the acceptance of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) as a body and therefore of the UN and the Bali Conference guidelines .
Note that this is not just a scientific point , but a point of democracy ; it is a forum for world democracy .
Now the issue before us is that if Europe seeks to be a credible , driving force in the post-Kyoto agreement we must have our house in order .
The package of measures set out must be approved within a specific period , and in line with the Bali undertakings , in other words the package must be one which abides by the commitments , as well as being transparent , in place and verified .
It is essential that we prevent exceptions and derogations which give rise to non-credibility within Europe and in relations with others .
We must prevent any jiggery-pokery by Member States and the business world , in other words we must be serious !
Mr President , I agree with Mr Pęk .
Many eminent scientists from around the world signed the Manhattan Declaration on 4 March this year .
Amongst other things , it states that ' there is no convincing evidence that CO2 emissions from modern industrial activity has in the past , is now , or will in the future , cause catastrophic climate change ' .
Last week , another 31 000 scientists endorsed that view in the Oregon Petition .
This is no longer the odd dissenting voice , and Nigel Lawson , a member of the House of Lords Committee on Climate Change , also agrees that the debate is not over .
Before we commit ourselves to enormous costs by way of climate taxes , carbon trading etc. at the very time when we are being warned of a likely global economic recession , we must listen to both sides of the debate and make absolutely sure who is right .
Mr President , for once I come to the House with good news : global warning has stopped .
1998 was the warmest year in living memory .
For the last 10 years global temperatures have been static or falling .
The recent modest warming is comparable to what occurred in the medieval warm period ; before that , in the Roman Optimum ; and , before that , in the Holocene Optimum .
Temperatures today are below the maxima of the last 2 000 years .
Increasing doubts are being cast on the role of CO2 .
Since 1850 , average temperatures correlate well with solar cycles but very poorly with atmospheric CO2 .
The pattern of warming , both geographically and over time , is wholly different from that predicted by computer models .
The greenhouse models predict maximum warming in the high atmosphere , but observations show that what little warming there is is at the surface and largely a result of the urban heat-island effect .
The greenhouse effect of CO2 is logarithmic ; that is , it is a law of diminishing returns .
In greenhouse terms , the atmosphere is already saturated with CO2 and further emissions will have little effect .
The sea-level is rising no faster than it always has , about six to eight inches a century ; the global ice mass is broadly constant ; severe weather events are no more frequent than they ever were ; species extinction is driven not by global warming but by loss of habitat , and especially by the drive for biofuels .
Recent studies show that polar bears are doing very well .

Climate hysteria is increasingly remote from reality .
We need to rethink our policies before they do any more damage .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Harms , tank-busting is actually a positive thing in a pacifistic sense !
The scientific facts are well-known : the climate change that we are witnessing today has much to do with human activity .
In that respect , the achievements of the Temporary Committee are therefore exemplary .
What perturbs me about this report , however , is its threatening undertone .
I am perturbed that absolutely no space is given to divergent scientific opinions .
The fact is that whenever politics claims to be infallible , it gets something wrong .
The report talks about heat waves of unprecedented magnitude and about species extinction of up to 70 % being caused by climate change .
It says that almost every region of the world will be adversely affected .
These assertions are based on projections from long-term modelling , but they cannot be ascribed so simplistically to human-induced climate change alone .
Against this background , I think it is scandalous for our Parliament that amendments tabled by Mr Březina which draw attention to precisely this situation are to be declared inadmissible .
Mr President , I would ask you specifically to declare Amendment 15 admissible .
Environmental protection is not well-served if certain opinions are suppressed simply by means of administrative procedures .
An exaggerated threat will trigger policy measures which lead to a skewed view of political priorities .
One example is the assertion that climate change should become a priority in development assistance .
However , AIDS , malnutrition , malaria and earthquakes are more pressing problems today , and this is where we should be deploying our political resources .
In Europe , too , the debate about climate change has reached a dimension which is putting social achievements at risk .
Already , a family in Germany is paying more than 40 % of the electricity price to the state , and at the petrol pumps the figure is now between 55 % and 78 % . The new emissions trading scheme will drive up electricity prices again by at least 30 % .
I advocate a rational approach to the issue of climate change , so that we can then identify solutions which are socially and economically compatible .
The amendments tabled by Mr Březina would offer a number of starting points , and I would ask you for your support .
( Applause )
( NL ) I would like to thank Mr Florenz .
He has produced an excellent report .
The climate change debate is very emotional , rightly so of course .
However , today we have to opt for a sensible approach .
In the next few months we shall be working intensively on climate change and many ambitious measures are on the agenda .
It is very important for Europe to demonstrate its credibility before Copenhagen and to reach agreement on the climate package .
That can only happen if we have a common basis and that basis is knowledge .
Mr Florenz can take credit for having set out the scientific consensus .
The starting point for our policy is the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) findings .
Thousands of scientists work together in the IPCC .
It is a fact that the earth is warming up and it is also a fact that the warming is to some extent caused by human actions .
In order to keep climate change within the limits , we have to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 60 to 80 % before 2050 .
That is no easy task .
There are important interests involved .
Of course clean production can bring in a lot of profit and employment and it is also good that this way we shall end our reliance on oil and enter the world of sustainable energy .
However , the transition to a low-CO2 economy is not easy .
Two things are therefore important .
Firstly , the policy must be knowledge-based and that does not mean , Mr Pieper , that the consensus in the IPCC is set in stone .
We can expect the IPCC to be open to criticism and well-founded arguments from the sceptics , because that helps knowledge , and so our Group fully supports paragraph 10 .
The second point is that long-term public support is needed .
To make it possible for the public to support firm measures , we are asking for the basic scientific points to be set out in a brochure available to the public , so that everyone can be aware of the challenges we face .
That way we can deal with the challenges together .
I expect this report by Mr Florenz to be the basis for us to take more joint action and to establish a good policy by 2009 .
( SV ) Mr President , let me also congratulate Karl-Heinz Florenz on an excellent report .
I would point out that it has very strong political and symbolic significance , which is manifested not least in the fact that the leaders of the three big political groups introduced the debate .
We all agree with the content of the Florenz report .
It is also written in such a way that ordinary Europeans can actually read the text and understand what we mean .
Its clear and instructive presentation is a further positive aspect which I am keen to highlight .
However , problems still remain which we need to discuss .
I urge you to support the amendments relating to the sea and the 1.5 ° rise in sea surface temperature .
We also need to look at questions of public health .
We shall be addressing that in the next report .
I expect some sound ideas to be presented in that area .
We MEPs now have a chance to show that we are determined and serious in our commitment on these issues .
Avril Doyle and I are both rapporteurs on emission rights trading .
If we are all serious on the things said today ahead of the vote , then we expect strong support for the proposals we shall be putting forward in our various committees .
Finally , I would point out that we are in the middle of preparations for the Copenhagen Conference .
These preparations must proceed in an entirely different way , in cooperation between Parliament , the Council and the Commission and together with the developing countries .
There are only 18 months to go .
( EL ) Mr President , I , too , congratulate Mr Florenz on his report .
How excellent that it should be based on the scientific findings of the competent UN committee and that it should highlight the need for more and better information for citizens .
However , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , let us move from findings to action .
We must adapt our policies to the measures proposed by science .
We need cleaner fuels and cleaner cars .
We know of your struggle , Commissioner , even within the Commission , against lobbies and interests that undermine the EU 's efforts to be a world leader in the fight against climate change .
The vast majority of the European Parliament is an ally . It will support a more ambitious effort on the part of the Commission and governments because human life and the protection of the environment are of considerably greater importance than the interests of certain business circles .
( PL ) Mr President , I am not the first to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report , and I am sure I will not be the last .
The international community recently received the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) document containing an extensive scientific study of global warming .
We refer to it in our report and in our resolution .
Most researchers accepted this document , namely the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report . So too did the majority of the governments of the 110 countries represented on the Panel .
Nonetheless , voices are being raised questioning the validity of the document .
They have been heard in this House too .
It is therefore appropriate to begin by assessing the controversy .
Firstly , almost everyone now at least agrees that global warming is a fact , even if some corner of our planet happens to be temporarily colder than in the past .
Due amongst other reasons to the IPCC report , it now seems to be accepted that global warming exists .
Consequently , it is no longer so important to refer to further indications of the approaching Apocalypse linked to rising temperatures .
On the other hand , explaining and proving the reason for the rise in temperatures is certainly necessary .
I would ask the House to remember that the majority of scientists who have researched this problem seriously believe that responsibility for global warming rests mainly , though not exclusively , with human beings .
This is particularly true in relation to greenhouse gas emissions .
It would be worth devoting further effort to documenting and proving this theory .
Research into the causes of warming should certainly continue , and this should be the main conclusion of our deliberations .
Nonetheless , it is most important for us to bear in mind that it already seems very probable that greenhouse gases produced by human beings are the main cause of global warming , so action is therefore called for .
That is why the European Union assumed the role of world leader in limiting emissions .
Consequently , it is particularly important for us Europeans to achieve a global agreement on this issue in Poznań and Copenhagen .
We must remember that we cannot save the planet on our own .
To abandon our own actions now , however , would be unforgivable .
We cannot abrogate our responsibility to civilisation .
( FI ) Mr President , there is well established and recognised data on climate change worldwide , and the human origins of the current global warming trend are beyond any serious scientific doubt .
This is what Mr Florenz states in his report at the beginning of his conclusions .
The purpose after all of drafting this interim report was specifically to establish a common basis for the final version .
The work of the Committee and Parliament needs to be firmly anchored to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change .
There is very clear consensus in this report that the global average temperature must be stabilised so that it does not increase by more than 2 ° C. This is also a way to take account of the economic , ecological and social impact of climate change .
The facts are on the table , as Mr Florenz said .
Now it is a matter of how we understand what we read - what our reading skills are like .
That will be evident this year when we discuss the package of laws the Commission presented to us .
I would like particularly to stress that , as this is a matter of the ecological , economic and social impact on climate change , we should focus more on the issue of energy efficiency .
I hope the Commission will in its future activities make a special issue of the potential for increasing energy efficiency .
As saved energy is the cheapest energy it is also ecologically the best way of combating climate change , and so on this point I hope that there will be new proposals and stimuli from the Commission .
Mr President , we are discussing here an excellent interim report on the scientific facts of climate change by the rapporteur of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , Karl-Heinz Florenz .
I would like to thank him for the huge amount of work he has put into this , and all colleagues on the Temporary Committee across the House .
For legislators to ignore the peer-reviewed opinion of the overwhelming majority of scientists in the field of climate change throughout the world would be a combustible mixture of arrogance , irresponsibility and complete dereliction of duty .
We are the decision-makers .
We have a democratic mandate from our citizens and on this , the most pressing issue facing the world community today , we cannot be found wanting even when , or especially when , the decisions before us are extremely challenging .
I would urge our dear colleagues who could loosely be termed ' climate sceptics ' to travel this road with us , if only on the basis of the much abused but very important concept of the precautionary principle .
Yes , the science is complex and dynamic , but with a ratio of five to one of the scientific community supporting the case we make , we must challenge , we must question and above all we must respond - and respond adequately - to the peer-reviewed work of some of our best and brightest in the fields of climatology and meteorology .
More than two thirds of the world 's surface is covered by oceans and three quarters of the world 's mega-cities are by the sea .
More than 97 % of the planet 's water is contained in the oceans and fish supply the highest percentage of the world 's protein consumed by humans , on which 3.5 billion people depend for their primary source of food .
As man-made greenhouse gas emissions rise , the scientific prediction is that dramatic changes such as warmer oceans , melting of the poles , rising sea levels and ocean acidification will pose severe threats to marine ecosystems and the fishing community .
As I put on my hat as Vice-Chairwoman of the Committee on Fisheries , I would urge that its considered views be taken on board in this interim report today .
Two quick points : it was a serious omission not to have included members of the Committee on Fisheries on the Temporary Committee on Climate Change and , secondly , I regret that the Temporary Committee felt unable to accept the opinion of the Fisheries Committee .
In conclusion , there is a series of amendments emphasising the scientific impact of the consequences of climate change on the world 's oceans .
I would urge colleagues to support these amendments , as Parliament 's decision-making report should be as comprehensive and as integrated as possible .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to start by expressing my warm thanks to our rapporteur for his work .
The report - as the previous speakers have said - relates entirely to the scientific facts concerning climate change , which were discussed in detail with world-renowned experts during the thematic meetings .
The agriculture and forestry sector is one of the industries hardest hit by climate change and therefore has a strong interest in effective climate protection measures being adopted at global level .
The involvement of all countries , especially the developing countries , in the post-Kyoto process is essential .
It is also important to underline that agriculture is by no means a driver of food prices : in the price of a bread roll , for example , the wheat used to make it accounts for less than 2 % of the costs .
It is also well-known that renewable resources for crop-based fuels do not release any more CO2 than was stored during their growth , which means that they are indeed CO2-neutral .
It has also been recognised , on the basis of sound research findings , that humans are partly responsible for climate change .
For that reason , it is important to conduct more intensive research as well as to save energy through more efficient use .
Let us take heart from the fact that it took 3 000 years for it to be accepted that the Earth is a globe and not flat .
May I appeal to this Parliament to engage in serious debate which recognises that climate change is a global problem ; it is a macrosocial problem which cannot be resolved by means of sectoral policies in individual EU Member States .
A solution can only be achieved worldwide , and the European Union should certainly take a leading and mediating role in combating climate change .
( LV ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his clear and unambiguous position , which , on the basis of the results of scientific studies , acknowledges that global warming is really happening and that it is caused by humans .
We ought to remember that a few years ago many influential politicians , including leaders of certain major powers , were still trying to deny this .
The report goes a step further and rejects , as scientifically unfounded , statements to the effect that global warming is not occurring and that these are only natural variations in temperature .
This report once again demonstrates that the EU is a world leader with respect to global warming .
This is no cause for elation , however .
In order to keep global warming within the bounds of 2 % , according to current estimates the volume of CO2 emissions will need to be reduced by at least half by 2050 .
In this context , the statement in the report to the effect that nearly all the EU Member States have made good progress in meeting the Kyoto targets is over-optimistic .
In the period from 1990 to 2005 the 15 older EU Member States reduced their emissions by only 2 % , and it is very unlikely that in the remaining five years they will reduce their emissions by a further 6 % , in order to achieve their collective Kyoto target .
It is only thanks to the fact that the newer EU Member States have reduced their emissions considerably more quickly that the EU as a whole can claim world leader status in this sphere .
It is expected that the newer EU Member States will reduce their CO2 emissions by 21 % by 2010 .
It is only this fact that enables the EU leaders to talk about the apparently ambitious target of reducing emissions by 20 % by 2020 .
Of course , this target is to be welcomed , but it is important that the largest polluters should achieve the greater part of this reduction .
It is not acceptable to allow the efforts of EU climate change policies to be based only on the existing achievements of the newer Member States and isolated older ones , and to place an additional burden on them , while at the same time making allowances for the largest polluters .
Regardless of the allocation of emissions reductions among the EU Member States , however , we will not achieve anything unless worldwide agreement is reached and countries such as the United States , China , India , Russia and others are involved in solving the problem .
This issue must be a priority in EU foreign policy and climate change policy . Thank you for your attention .
( SL ) We usually opt for changes and measures only if they are based on solid facts .
In the Committee on Climate Change we have accumulated numerous data from many scientists .
Most of the data indicate that the changes in eco-systems are the consequence of anthropogenic emissions and indicate possible trends for the future .
Whilst some are concerned and use the data as a threat , we must also see the good side of it , which is that we can still act .
However , we must act quickly , responsibly , seriously , and in a coordinated manner : inside the Union first , and then also globally .
We can succeed with international agreements only if we are sufficiently sensitive also in relation to the problems of third countries who are preoccupied with sustainable development issues , and many even with elimination of poverty .
An integral approach requires a change in our European heads , because until now , we have only been preoccupied with development , or primarily with the development of a low carbon society .
However , we can reach international agreement only if we give equal consideration to both the measures to reduce emissions and the measures for modifying emissions , in order to bring them in line with the climate changes .
My thanks to the rapporteur for an excellent report , and I expect that , in this sense , our work will continue into the next year .
( HU ) Mr President , I congratulate Mr Florenz on his outstanding report .
The debate on the scientific basis of climate change is exceptionally important , because sadly we politicians often fail to take the facts into account , although facts are very persistent things .
I agree with Martin Schulz that we should call a halt to the debate based on beliefs and consider the facts .
In Hungary , for example , the groundwater level on the Hungarian Plain between the rivers Danube and Tisza has fallen by 3-4 metres over the past 30-40 years ; serious desertification has occurred , meaning that scientists have taken measurements and found that desertification is 50 % due to climate change and 50 % due to harmful human activity .
In short , let us give due consideration to what the scientists are saying .
I also agree that the European Union cannot resolve this problem by itself ; the USA , Japan , China , Brazil and the developing world must be partners in this undertaking .
Thank you for your attention .
( FI ) Mr President , mankind is to blame for climate change and man can also therefore help change its direction .
The EU 's goal is to raise the amount that biofuels account for fuel for transport to 10 % .
That is a goal that must be achieved , furthermore .
We need to do all we can to achieve it , including incorporating the use of peat as the raw material in biodiesel .
More money is needed for research so that the most efficient methods can be employed .
For example , some studies show that energy production from algae is up to 15 times greater per hectare than production from grapes , palm oil and soya , so more research into this is needed .
This is therefore one way we can reduce the use of palm oil and hopefully also stop it completely as it is by no means an environmentally friendly activity .
We therefore need to take action in collaboration with the United States of America , China , India , and Russia .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
If we want to achieve success in Copenhagen at the end of 2009 , I believe there are two things we absolutely have to take into consideration , things that I myself have experienced in the course of visits to India , Bangladesh , China and California over the past few months .
First of all , we must make a genuine effort .
In other words , it is not enough to pat ourselves on the back ; it is not enough to talk of 10 or 20 or 30 or 40 % .
According to European Environment Agency figures , not only have carbon dioxide emissions not fallen since 2000 , they have in fact risen somewhat , by 1 % .
The emissions trading system ( ETS ) is a great success and it is currently in the process of being reformed , but I believe that it would be worthwhile initiating similar reforms in the non-ETS system ; perhaps the two systems should even be consolidated .
I vigorously support the Council proposal to set 1990 as the base year rather than 2005 .
The other very important thing is the Adaptation Fund .
If we want to achieve success in Copenhagen , we must create the Adaptation Fund .
The Stern report showed that unless there is an Adaptation Fund the other regions of the world have very little chance of avoiding the unpleasant consequences of climate change . Thank you .
( RO ) Climate change already affects the European Union .
In recent years , Romania , for instance , has been affected by drought , floods and hot weather .
Some areas in Romania 's South and Southeast region have started to turn into desert .
The Union has undertaken an important role in the fight against climate change both as regards the reduction of causes and the adjustment to climate change .
The Lisbon Treaty includes provisions on climate change and I also appreciate here the clause of solidarity in case of natural disasters .
Unfortunately , global governance in the field of environmental protection is decentralized and sometimes the coherence of overall decisions is lacking ; 18 multilateral institutions are responsible with monitoring approximately 500 international agreements , of which 300 at regional level .
The European Union has to have the role of leader in this field .
There are solutions .
We need coherent actions on climate change , more ecological transport , research and development programmes , to adapt agriculture to adequate water consumption , reforestation and , especially , better waste management .
I congratulate the Rapporteur .
( SK ) Climate change has serious implications , not only for ecosystems , but also for the economy , public health , water and food security , as well as migration .
The latest scientific studies lead to the conviction that human activity too has contributed to the global warming trend and therefore the onus is on our society to implement effective political measures .
I welcome the interim report by the Temporary Committee on Climate Change and its recommendations on the EU 's future integrated policy on climate change , and I strongly support the notion that the global average temperature increase should be limited to not more than 2 ° C. In addition to that , the European Union should make the effort to reduce emissions in a way that would keep the temperatures well below this two-degree cut-off point . Making scientifically proven information available to the public and so contributing to increased public awareness on this issue should be an important instrument in climate change mitigation policies .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , let me first welcome the interim report on the scientific facts of climate change .
I am particularly glad because it emphasises the fact that scientists agree on the seriousness of this problem . The report also brings out the major impact of the human factor , especially energy , on climate change .
The Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC states that world CO2 emissions increased by about 80 % between 1970 and 2004 , and that these increases were due mainly to the use of fossil fuels .
Given that there is an undeniably close link between the climate and energy planning , I should like to point out how necessary it is to create an integrated plan at European level so that we know what the most advisable and effective energy choices might be .
Mr President , listening to the debate this morning I feel the need to make a couple of comments .
First of all , the scientific evidence .
There is no doubt that establishing the presence of global warming and its causation is a very complicated business .
This is not a test-tube situation where an experiment can be done in a laboratory to prove something one way or the other .
The evidence is based on long-term observations and very complicated procedures and of course there are some doubters , some scientists who have a different opinion .
This is not new .
Scientists are well known for differing in their opinions : let us not forget that even the causation of cancer by smoking has been doubted extensively by many scientists and they are still doubting it today .
We all know of course what the truth is .
The same of course has happened with thalidomide and the causation of phocomelia in human embryos .
The second point is that emphasis should be placed on a global approach because we all know that the countries which pollute the most , i.e. the USA , China and India , are doing the least about combating global warming .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I have followed with great interest your very lively discussion , which was a very good basis for the interim report provided by the rapporteur , Mr Karl-Heinz Florenz , for which I thank him , and congratulate him on it .
Your discussion was such that it would benefit any parliament .
It was very involved ; I understood it as a positive criticism , since every opinion is precious , including a critical one .
From your discussion I can summarise two basic conclusions .
The European Union is and will remain a force capable of facing up to ... of course , in cooperation with all its global partners , to continue pushing for a serious confrontation on climate changes .
And another conclusion , that the climate change is not just a problem , but it can also be an opportunity .
However , we can deal with it effectively primarily by acting at a global level .
I should also like to say that , within the climate and energy bundle , the European Union is successfully and thoroughly preparing all those measures with which we can effectively counter the consequences of the climate change .
The transition to a safe and sustainable low carbon economy will influence numerous policies including the economy and people 's everyday lives .
Coordinated political measures are required in numerous areas of the European Union .
This is where I would support your thoughts , that we have to stick together , not just concerning global decisions , but also to be unanimous regarding the details connected with these political measures .
I should particularly like to mention the synergies between climate change and energy .
In this respect , harmonious European and national policies must be created in the area of research , development and innovations ; we must encourage a sustainable transport system , enabling the member States to adopt the necessary measures in fighting climate change ; we must improve energy efficiency , particularly that in buildings , as well as other sources of energy in all sectors , and keep informing consumers about the efficient use of energy , in order to reduce the social implications and also to make the most of new opportunities .
As has already been mentioned in Mr Florenz 's report , the science on climate change is well established and recognised , and the fact that the current global warming is a consequence of human activity is scientifically irrefutable .
Allow me to briefly comment on your differing views on the scientific framework of the IPCC .
On this matter I am in favour of respecting the field of politics .
The European Parliament is an eminent political arena .
Of course we should also respect the field of science , which is , however , committed to the ethical principles of research and scientific accuracy .
At the same time we should not forget the space of the citizen , the ordinary man , who will be affected by individual measures in terms of quality of his life , including when he is working out his family budget and planning his future .
I would particularly like to say that it seems important that the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , has , according to Mr Sacconi , been doing well and discussed climate change issues in a positive atmosphere during their sessions , and also that it has , by a large majority , adopted an interim report on scientific facts concerning climate change .
We particularly welcome the European Parliament 's decision to extend the mandate to the Temporary Committee on Climate Change to February 2009 .
Mr President , we see this as a particular additional proof that in the sphere of climate change the European Parliament supports the ambitious policy of the European Union at an international level with its actions , taking care that its political decisions are backed with the latest scientific results .
We are also pleased with the announcement in today 's debate that the debate on the climate change bundle will follow , which should mean a serious fulfilment of the commitments made by the European Council in March 2008 .
Mr President , I thank all the speakers in today 's debate for their very interesting interventions .
In particular , let me point out that the EU , either as the EU-15 or the EU-27 , will meet the Kyoto target , and there is no doubt about that .
Since I will be or hope to be a commissioner for another 18 months , I assure you that there is no way we can fail to achieve the Kyoto target .
I say this because the measures we have already taken , and are taking now , ensure that the Kyoto target will be met .
Now this is the least we should do in the coming years . For the record , the figures you supplied earlier are correct .
It has to be said that the EU is reducing its greenhouse gas emissions , while other countries such as the United States are increasing them , and at a significantly faster rate than in 1990 .
In 2005 , as you said , we were 2 % below the 1990 level , and in 2006 a little short of 3 % for the 15 EU countries , which have a collective target . However , as the EU-27 , our success is ever greater , as we are roughly 8 % below the 1990 level .
At the end of the period the Kyoto Protocol has given us to fulfil our obligations , the EU-15 will be at least 8 % below , and the EU-27 at least 11 % below the 1990 level .
Let us note that our decrease of just over 8 % is very positive because it will help us to achieve the target for 2020 and beyond .
According to the interim report , scientific findings will play an important role in international negotiations because they will allow us to take bold measures .
They will serve as a basis for assessing the suitability of the proposals to be tabled for negotiation during the run-up to the Copenhagen Conference .
The resolution reminds us of the dangers involved in uncontrolled climate change , which will affect human society in a variety of ways and will seriously impact our economies and cultural traditions .
The resolution quite rightly emphasises how important it is to avoid major disruptions to the climate , such as the drying-up of the Amazon tributaries and the collapse of large volumes of ice at both Poles .
I think it is equally important to highlight the likely consequences of climate change in terms of international security , food and water shortages , and disputes over control of resources and over movements of migrants .
Pressure is steadily increasing on the international community because of environmental emergencies resulting from extreme weather conditions and violent conflicts caused by climate change .
The recent food price crisis is the most palpable example to date of what may happen : reduced harvests in many parts of the world are caused by extreme weather conditions .
Unfortunately , this situation does not appear to be temporary or exceptional ; it is set to become integral and recurrent and cannot be controlled without drastic changes to agricultural policy and farming practice .
Allow me here to mention some other topics raised in the report .
I will start with the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions through suitable action at national level in developing countries .
There is a need for the support and prospects offered by technology .
There must be funding to transfer technology and enhance the administrative capacities of these countries so that the reductions in question can be measured , recorded and verified .
This idea is at the core of the Bali Action Plan negotiations .
As was noted in Bali , any move on the part of the developing countries will depend not only on serious commitments by the developed countries to reduce emissions , but also on substantial efforts on the part of those countries to provide funding , especially for the transfer of technology and creation of the necessary administrative capacity .
It is important for the EU to take advantage of every opportunity for dialogue with the main developing countries , so that there is agreement on what exactly this means and how the EU can support such actions , either through cooperation in formulating policy , technical assistance , the transfer of know-how and the provision of incentives on the CO2 market , or through financial assistance .
There are measures to be taken in all sectors , including action on emissions from energy use , and forest depletion .
I will turn now to the scientific aspect of this discussion . The Commission fully agrees that scientific findings should be made known to the general public .
Consumers should be prepared and made more aware of how much greenhouse gas is generated by their lifestyle and consumer habits .
This increased alerting of the public should , however , be accompanied by strong financial incentives for companies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions arising from the products and services they provide .
A transition to a low-CO2 economy is necessary on a global scale . This can be achieved only through systematic , coordinated measures to reduce emissions in all sectors .
The package of measures on climate change and energy now at the co-decision stage gives us a head start in the transition .
It also enables us to show that an ambitious climate policy is both feasible and of broader benefit to our economies and societies .
We shall continue our highly constructive cooperation on this important package of policy measures and shall reach an agreement , I hope , as soon as possible this year .
To conclude , let me congratulate the European Parliament on its important contribution to the effort to combat climate change , and salute Mr Florenz for his excellent work .
I hope Parliament will continue in this constructive manner . May our cooperation and exchange of views continue , both on the package of measures on climate and energy , and on the international negotiations in the run-up to Poznań and Copenhagen .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , many thanks for your closing words which are very encouraging .
I think that we have been able to identify a consensus here in the House , and this consensus naturally obliges us to undertake further scientific studies and to eliminate the remaining doubts , for after all , in which area of human knowledge is there no room for doubt ?
That is something which , as rapporteur , I certainly want to see happen .
I am grateful for the praise which has kindly been expressed today , and I would like to pass it on to the staff behind the scenes who worked extremely hard on this report .
Let me take this opportunity to voice my warm thanks to them once again .
Listening to today 's debate might give the impression that we are arguing over CO2 .
Let me say this : we will have many other issues to argue about , for CO2 emissions are just the tip of the iceberg .
Yes , they are a serious issue , there is no doubt about that , but the real challenge is how we deal with our sustainability strategies .
How should we care for our planet Earth , which we hold in trust for our children ?
The energy sources that we are currently burning up took many millions of years to create , and we are squandering them in just a thousand years or so .
The challenge , then , is how to make a litre of fuel go twice as far as it does at present .
That is what we need to achieve , and then we will have fulfilled our task .
That is the major challenge ahead : increasing efficiency in Europe , developing state-of-the-art technologies , using these technologies at home - that goes without staying - and also selling them profitably worldwide in order to create jobs .
That is our opportunity , as I see it , and I would ask all of you to help us seize this opportunity with both hands .
Let me reiterate my thanks to everyone , but with an eye to the Rules of Procedure , I would like to draw your attention to one last point .
From the very start of this debate , there has been a dire mistake in the translation of Article 10 which says that I condemn something .
That is not at all in my nature .
I may disapprove of one thing and another , but I never condemn anything .
I shall not mince my words : I think it is important to point out that there is a problem with bad translation in the House , which is evident throughout this entire report , and I would like to draw your attention to the correctly phrased amendments in this area which have been tabled in the House .
I would like to thank everyone involved and invite you to work with us on the next and more difficult stage in this process , namely resolving the question of how we should now respond to these scientific facts .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
, in writing . - To successfully tackle climate change , markets need to adapt so they reflect the environmental cost of carbon .
Polluters must pay .
We must use every type of policy instrument including VAT reductions , emissions trading , and subsidies to change the behaviour of consumers and businesses so they have more incentives to take eco-friendly options .
As Sir Nicholas Stern has pointed out , the economic and social costs of climate change will be catastrophic .
Therefore , I strongly disagree with those in the House who deny climate change .
They only need to look at the increasing number and frequency of natural disasters worldwide to see its impact .
These disasters are clearly a wake-up call for us to take greater action .
The EU has a legitimate role in tackling climate change and it needs to set an example and provide guidance to other countries .
We need greater dialogue with emerging economies India and China to ensure that their growth contributes less to global emissions than EU and US 's has done over the last century .
There is a strong case for technology transfer from the EU to developing countries so they can avoid carbon intensive industrial development and leapfrog directly to a low carbon economy .
in writing . - ( HU ) It is absolutely vital to take into account the facts of climate change based on the scientific evidence when making decisions in this regard .
After all , the risk of taking the wrong decisions based on mistaken conclusions is at least as great as the risk of inaction .
One thing is worth noting here : climate change is a fact that can be substantiated scientifically , and rapid and effective measures are urgently needed to remedy it .
Sober consideration of the scientific facts can also help us to assess how market-based environmental protection instruments can contribute to enhancing the quality of the environment .
In our opinion , greater effort is needed on the part of the Member States to popularise market-friendly incentives .
The creation of the emissions trading system , which approaches the issue of emissions reduction on the basis of market mechanisms , is a welcome development .
The fact that the system works is proof that the market , competition and environmental protection are not mutually exclusive ideas .
In Hungary there are many examples that demonstrate how mistaken conclusions can result in wrong decisions being made .
Biomass production in reality means burning timber ; the harmful consequences of forced support for biofuels are becoming increasingly apparent .
The measures put in place in these two areas do not meet sustainability requirements , and besides , they fail to offer a market-friendly response to the problem .
We would like to stress that climate change calls for measures to be initiated that not only take into account the scientific evidence , but also allow market mechanisms to play a role .
, in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , our resolution on the scientific facts of climate change contains some important observations which it is difficult to disagree with .
It nevertheless needs to be said that it also contains some irritating remarks .
There are examples of these in the history of science which should serve as a warning .
As a philosopher I do not regard it as entirely harmless for a politician to interpret scientific results , draw hasty conclusions from them and try and control them , let alone ' condemn ' some other interpretations .
What is the point of this and why must such things be stated as a general rule ?
This is a matter of our credibility , something we are going to need badly in our fight against climate change .
In point 5 it says that it is scientifically ' proven ' that man is the main cause of climate change .
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change at no stage claims that .
The report talks of probabilities .
Man 's contribution to warming over the last decade is a strong probability .
Point 7 stresses that scientific results ' clearly demonstrate how climate change will occur in the near future , following different regional patterns . '
That is precisely what we do not know .
Last week , in their declaration at Reading , climate simulators appealed for a need for supercomputers .
The question of what sort of regional effects climate change will have cannot be answered by meteorologists at present , partly due to insufficient computer capacity .
Point 8 mentions that the deglaciation of Greenland and of the west Antarctic ice sheet are examples of tipping points of climate change .
Data on deglaciation is very contradictory at present , however , because the thickness of the ice in core areas of Greenland and the Antarctic is actually increasing .
Neither would I accuse or condemn climate change sceptics and critics , as is the case in point 10 .
Politicians especially should not do so either : they should leave the matter for the scientists to debate .
, in writing . - ( RO ) CLIM can make recommendations and provide solutions for the future policies of the European Union in the field , recommendations and solutions based on clear scientific proof and , especially , on the firm support of the European citizens .
The scientific proof is unquestionable .
Karl-Heinz Florenz ' report is exhaustive , proving that scientific data are sufficient in order to make firm political decisions and initiate concrete actions not only at European level , but also at a global level , for drastically reducing the anthropic phenomena responsible for the climate change and mitigate their effects .
The research efforts must be continued , especially in the field of new technologies , renewable energy and biofuels , in order to find the necessary balance for maintaining economic competitiveness , social development and ensure food and energy security , which are essential for European citizens ' wellbeing .
The scientific community and political representatives should join forces and support the activities of raising public opinion awareness and stimulating the participation of citizens in concrete activities , because the exchange of good practice , international , regional and , in particular , cross-border cooperation and dialogue , as well as direct involvement of citizens represent the most efficient means of fighting against climate change .
, in writing . - Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in recent years the European Union has been one of the international actors that has shown the way in the development of a sustainable global climate policy .
This is a position the EU must retain in the future too .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and the Committee for a successful report .
It will serve to strengthen the view of the scientific basis which work to control climate change must rest on .
It is worth noting that science and the knowledge it brings is continually changing as a result of new technologies and findings .
Accordingly , we must remain open to all information on this phenomenon and , furthermore , respect differing opinions .
It is extremely important to react decisively to climate change .
Until now , each of the four intergovernmental panels has had to review its predecessor 's estimates of the speed at which climate change is taking place .
The phenomenon has progressed faster than the Community 's earlier estimates for it .
Now too there appears to be a need to review the previous IPCC 's estimates .
Studies by the US space agency NASA show that the control of climate change will call for more radical action : the gas content in the atmosphere caused by climate change must be restricted more stringently to be able to avoid these radical changes .
The EU needs to take account of the growing scientific consensus that carbon dioxide emissions should be cut more dramatically to slow down global warming , as the IPCC recommended .
Having looked closely at this development , I fear that the targets in the EU 's climate package are not ambitious enough .
The Union now needs to make far more determined efforts to establish eco-effective societies in the Union .
Eco-modernisation must be the guiding principle for all the EU 's policy areas .
The ability to change in the face of this revolution will also be the main factor affecting the EU 's international competitiveness .
, in writing . - ( ET ) The climate is changing and it is doing so because of human activity .
Forty years ago , when I took ice samples at the Antarctic research station , we were as yet unaware of that fact .
Today the IPCC , which collates the work of thousands of scientists , has provided sufficient proof that climate change is happening , and our job is to act rather than to continue to provide proof .
On that point I am in full agreement with the approach taken by the rapporteur , Mr Florenz .
The European Union must be ambitious and adopt a target closer to a 30 % reduction in greenhouse emissions by the year 2020 .
Otherwise the matter will be complicated in anticipation of genuine contributions from other countries .
It is odd that a higher forum votes unanimously on the detail of general targets but when it comes to targets for the content of CO2 emissions in car exhausts or several other specific measures it no longer ventures to be so ambitious .
This is not how to tackle climate change effectively .
I support the proposals for amendments which focus attention on the need to make more detailed studies and models of the situation of the oceans and seas and the influence of climate change on fish fauna .
I am , however , unable to agree with several of the proposals for amendments in which doubts are expressed as to whether climate change is really happening , the importance of fossil fuels and nuclear energy is emphasised and the development of renewable energy is ridiculed .
I believe that Parliament 's Temporary Committee on Climate Change has helped to raise awareness among representatives of different walks of life and to set out a common position .
As a compromise the extension of the Committee 's mandate for nine months until the Poznan meeting is reasonable .
A longer deadline might have meant our doing important work with too much of an eye on elections .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the report .
The debate about climate change , which is urgently required , must be underpinned by sound scientific facts .
These are provided by Mr Florenz 's interim report .
This report should play an important role both in the public arena and in the Commission and the Council .
Scientific findings on the ' greenhouse effect ' have been available for more than 180 years .
It was due to specific social conditions that this knowledge about the threat to our natural and climatic bases of life was ignored , preventing timely action and continuing to do so today .
Either we start acting now on the basis of international cooperation to limit further damage and avert the disasters that are predicted and which will impact with full force on the world 's poorest people first , or we continue along the road to destruction .
The facts convincingly demonstrate that prompt action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is required , and that we must limit warming to less than 2 ° C through changes in our lifestyles and consumer behaviour and through the adoption of political and social criteria and frameworks . I support the rapporteur 's assertion that it is not a matter of arguing over emissions values ; now , the debate must focus on sustainability .
The EU Sustainable Development Strategy must take account of these problems and finally establish policies on a sustainable basis .
This requires a change in political priorities .
Every day lost is potentially devastating and cannot be justified .
Turkey 's 2007 progress report ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on Turkey 's 2007 progress report .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , since the last report on Turkey there have been a number of positive developments in that country .
I am thinking of the passing of the Law on Foundations and , even more recently , the first modification of Article 301 which must lead to further reforms that are necessary to guarantee full freedom of expression .
However , it is also clear that Turkey presents a mixed picture and that much more needs to be done , not just to comply with the agreements with Europe , but also to fulfil promises to its own people .
This report is balanced .
I hope that some hobbyhorses that are being ridden will not get anywhere , because then the report will remain balanced .
I have mentioned all the problems in the report and there are three important messages .
Firstly , we are concerned about the implications of the AK Party case before the court .
We expect the Constitutional Court to respect the principles of the rule of law , European standards and the Venice Commission guidelines on the prohibition of political parties .
We welcome the fact that in 2007 democracy triumphed over attempts by the army to disrupt the political process .
However , we are also concerned that there are still forces at work that are trying to destabilise the country .
Clearly modernisation of the country and reforms are now needed .
Prime Minister Erdoğan has promised that 2008 will be the year of reforms and we shall be pleased to hold him to that .
The government now has to use the substantial parliamentary majority to set about reforms with determination ; reforms that are vital if Turkey is to be turned into a modern and prosperous democracy based on a secular state and a pluralistic society and reform that is first and foremost in the best interests of the Turkish people themselves .
A third point . The constitutional process is an ideal opportunity to draw up a new civilian constitution , with the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms at its heart .
That is the only way to establish a system of checks and balances to safeguard democracy , the rule of law , social cohesion and the separation between religion and the state .
When you look at recent figures , they show that maintenance of the separation of religion and state causes tensions in Turkish society .
However , as many as 72 % of well-educated Turks have concerns about the secular nature of Turkey , 60 % of citizens in all the large cities and almost 50 % of other Turkish citizens .
That unease is seized upon by the judiciary and the prosecutors who use their scope to disregard a parliamentary majority and operate very independently .
A judicial system in a state under the rule of law should be independent but also impartial .
The new constitution is the only way in which the Turkish Government can reform the country and establish the separation of religion and state and a state under the rule of law , in order to gain new public trust .
That requires a guarantee of wide participation by all civil society bodies in the constitutional process .
To me , that means reaching agreement on modernisation with all political parties , ethnic and religious minorities and social partners .
Modernisation must ensure that the individual rights of citizens , citizens ' freedoms , are brought into line with the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights .
With respect , we must continue the negotiations between EU and Turkey , but also without hypocrisy , so that we can be open and honest with each other .
I find it very unfortunate that my colleague , Mr Lagendijk , is attacked when he says openly and honestly where mistakes have been made and when he also asks for cooperation by all political parties in the reform process .
To summarise , Mr President , there is still a great deal to be done on the position of religious minorities in Turkey , the position of the Kurds and other minorities , the socio-economic development of the regions , improvements in the position of women , the dialogue between the Turkish Government and social partners , in which I particularly call attention to the trade union movement which is often under pressure , constructive cooperation in a solution to the Cyprus question and good neighbourliness in the region .
In short , please comply with the arrangements that have been made .
Mr President , I stress again that , in my opinion , only a society that allows itself to be led by respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and that is based on democracy , the rule of law and a socially orientated market economy can develop into a peaceful , stable and prosperous society .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , let me first thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and the Foreign Affairs Committee for a very solid , firm and balanced report .
In the accession negotiations with Turkey six chapters have been opened so far and , as Mr Lenarčič said , it should be possible to open two more chapters during the Slovenian presidency , namely company law and intellectual property .
Let me recall in this context one simple but absolutely fundamental guiding principle of the EU enlargement policy , which applies to every candidate country , including Turkey : the pace of negotiations depends on the progress made in legal and democratic reforms - and especially on their implementation .
In other words , the technical talks on chapters make up the walls and rooms of the house - maybe even the roof one day - while the legal and democratic reforms constitute the very foundations of any new EU member 's construction .
And , as every builder knows , one must first make very solid foundations before moving on to putting the walls together .
So , first the reforms , then progress in the technical negotiations .
That is why I find Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report so pertinent .
The Commission shares her views on the slow pace of the reforms .
Yet certain legislative reforms have taken place .
I note that you welcome the new Law on Foundations , and at your request the Commission will report on this law and its implementation in our next progress report on Turkey in the coming autumn .
Moreover , the recent revision of the infamous Article 301 is a step forward .
What ultimately counts , however , is its proper implementation to guarantee the freedom of expression for everybody in Turkey .
In addition to the fundamental freedoms of expression and religion , further progress is essential in such areas as cultural and linguistic rights , the rights of women and children , and the rights of trade unions .
All in all , a renewed focus on EU-related reforms is absolutely essential , which should also assist in overcoming the current political crisis .
This is the message President Barroso conveyed during our recent visit to Turkey .
Both government and opposition parties should engage in dialogue and search for compromise on the sensitive issues dominating the domestic debate , including the constitutional reform process .
Both secularism and democracy need to be defended in this context .
I regret that the Law on the Ombudsman has been blocked for two years by the Constitutional Court .
I welcome the fact that you urge it to be unblocked , so as to set up the Ombudsman 's Office without delay .
We all know how important the Ombudsman 's function has been in keeping authorities accountable and enhancing citizens ' rights in the EU Member States .
The essence of these reforms is to ensure Turkey 's transformation into an open and modern society , with full respect for freedom and democracy , diversity and tolerance - that is , for democratic secularism .
The very existence of our Union rests on the basic values of democracy , the rule of law and human rights that we share among ourselves .
They are the basis of the family spirit and the contract of marriage , as Jacques Delors put it , to which we Europeans have committed ourselves .
The Negotiating Framework with Turkey spells out these values , and it is the Commission 's duty to monitor them .
The Commission 's role in the accession process can be described as ' the friend who tells the truth ' - even if the truth is sometimes unwelcome in parts of the EU or in Turkey .
Thus we cannot be indifferent to what is happening in candidate countries , least of all to events that affect our shared democratic values .
I note your concern about the implications of the AKP closure case .
Certainly , the ruling of the Constitutional Court should be compatible with democratic principles and the rule of law , including the guidelines of the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe .
We want to see Turkey move on from this case by respecting European values .
Turkey cannot afford another wasted year on reforms and we need to see progression , not regression , in meeting democratic principles .
Let me wind up with a few words on Cyprus .
Now it is time for the leaders of the two communities to end the deadlock and move towards reunification of the island .
I trust Turkey will fully contribute to a solution .
The Commission endorses a renewed UN process and will fully support both communities on the island to make the necessary difficult compromises .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( NL ) Important social and employment legislation has recently been passed in Turkey .
One important objective is to bring more women into the labour market , because participation in the economy is badly needed to strengthen the position of women .
It does not need to be said that women 's rights are human rights .
It is important for women to be able to claim fundamental rights as well as gender and reproductive rights and not be the victims of such vague criteria as ' against public decency ' . That is also essential for gay organisations .
Instruments are badly needed in Turkey to monitor that and introduce gender mainstreaming .
I would therefore like to see a women 's rights committee in the Turkish Parliament , with full legislative powers .
Local elections will be taking place in Turkey next year .
Nationally , the number of female members of parliament has doubled , but more needs to be done .
Local turnout is still less than 1 % , an enormous challenge if the fair representation of women in politics is now to become a reality .
Madam President , let me first congratulate Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on her report and also her cooperation throughout this time .
The report sends a clear message to Turkey that its path towards Europe and its ultimate entry into the European family will pass through the following stages .
Firstly , it must continue to strengthen reforms in all its sectors and structures .
Secondly , it must show complete and absolute respect for human rights and the rights of minorities .
Thirdly , Turkish troops must withdraw from Cyprus , and there must be a contribution towards a fair and lasting solution to the Cyprus issue .
Now is the time for all of us to lend our support to President Christofias 's initiatives in this direction .
Fourthly , Turkey must maintain good neighbourly relations in general , and with Greece in particular .
This means that violations of the Flight Information Region must stop , as must provocations of all kinds .
Of course , there are forces in Turkey wanting destabilisation , whereas some Turkish citizens hope for a more democratic , progressive , developed , environmentally conscious , socially aware , peace-loving and Europe-oriented Turkey .
These citizens need to be given the message that their struggles are not in vain , and this is what Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report achieves , as does the discussion we are holding here today .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for the very fruitful and constructive cooperation .
On behalf of my Group , I would also like to express our solidarity with Mr Lagendijk : we reject all the unfair attacks against him .
I would like to confine myself to one key issue , namely the threatened ban on two parties , the AKP and the DTP .
In both cases , we want to make it very clear that these bans would be completely unacceptable to us and would constitute major impediments to Turkey 's progress towards becoming a member of the European Union .
It is unfathomable , in our understanding of democracy , that a court should simply deny numerous voters the right , after the fact , to influence the political situation in their country by casting their vote for their preferred party .
This is unacceptable in the case of the governing party , and it is unacceptable , too , in the case of the Democratic Society Party ( DTP ) .
There are fundamental legal and democratic principles at stake which militate against such a course of action .
As regards the DTP , instead of taking the opportunity to talk to representatives of the Kurdish people and enter into dialogue , because - together with the Turks - we reject terrorism , an attempt is under way to ban this party as well .
I know that not everyone in the DTP is prepared to engage in dialogue .
In that case , an approach simply has to be made in order to develop this dialogue appropriately .
We therefore call unequivocally on all the moderate forces in Turkey to do their utmost to ensure that these two parties can continue to operate in Turkey 's political landscape .
We know that this is a protracted and open-ended process , but it must have a goal , and this goal must be accession .
It is a goal which , in the European Union , we must do our utmost to achieve , in communication with our citizens .
However , Turkey too must do its utmost , by carrying out the reforms that are required .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I too would like to start by expressing warm thanks to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for the good cooperation , which was just as constructive this time as it was last autumn .
Substantial consensus is a characteristic of this report .
The parliamentary groups agree that Turkey must continue to make ongoing improvements of its own accord , but must do so far more rapidly than before .
We also agree that this is something that we can , and indeed , must expect from an accession candidate .
We also believe that the reforms must be pursued despite the major domestic political crisis .
I would like to take up a point which Mr Swoboda has just made : the European Union is not party to this prohibition process .
Commissioner Rehn is right to say that secularism and democracy must be defended ; otherwise , like Mr Swoboda , I can see us facing a fundamental democratic problem which will place great strain on the accession negotiations .
What is important to note is that many of the problems that we are talking about have existed for some time , so only a few points need to be emphasised here .
Last year , we welcomed the fact that the Turkish Government had received a clear and unequivocal mandate for further reforms .
We called for this mandate to be utilised in order to genuinely drive forward the reforms .
We welcome the adoption of the Law on Foundations .
That is a positive step , but on balance , we must say - and I think there is unanimity here as well - that we are all disappointed , overall , by what has been achieved .
Let us take the constitutional reform : this is overshadowed by the headscarf debate to such an extent that no real progress has been made on the fundamental renewal of Turkey 's constitution .
The headscarf debate is also an issue of freedom of religion and freedom of opinion , but it must not be used for the cultural oppression of women who espouse secular attitudes .
Another important issue , especially for the Liberal Group , is freedom of speech .
The so-called reform of Article 301 is unsatisfactory from our perspective .
I have spoken to many people in Turkey itself and , there too , very few people believe that this reform of Article 301 is serious and well-founded , especially as it is now a symbolic paragraph .
There are many other paragraphs in the Penal Code which restrict freedom of speech . I do not want to list them all , but there is still a great deal of work to do here .
Another point which I would briefly like to mention concerns relations with Turkey within the EU and NATO frameworks .
We wish to stress that we expect Turkey to show a positive attitude towards European Security and Defence Policy ( ESDP ) missions .
We understand the difficulties that exist .
Nonetheless , we expect an accession candidate to show a European spirit when the security of European personnel in missions such as EUPOL and EULEX is at stake .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Ladies and gentlemen , as you have probably seen , in the last couple of weeks the Commissioner and I have come in for a great deal of criticism from certain circles in Turkey .
It is claimed that we do not understand Turkey properly , that we do not really realise what is going on in Turkey .
I must admit , sometimes there are a number of things in Turkey that I do not understand .
For instance , I cannot understand that many people in Turkey have no problem with the fact that the governing party , which won 47 % of the votes in the last elections , is in danger of being banned by the Constitutional Court .
What I also do not understand is that the Council of Europe recommendations on the prohibition of political parties were so easily passed over , because it is clear that the case against the AKP in no way meets the criteria .
What I also do not understand is that it is so easily overlooked that , by banning the AKP and the DTP , about 90 % of votes in the south-east were declared invalid , with all that that entails .
What I also do not understand is that so much fuss was made in Turkey about the Commissioner and I criticising the fact that , in our opinion , a political case is one that , if it leads to the banning of the governing party , will really have serious consequences .
In my view , it is our duty to say that and we should continue doing so .
However , there are other things I do not understand .
What I do not understand is why it was impossible for the authorities to allow the trade unions to demonstrate peacefully in Istanbul on 1 May , even in Taksim Square , such a symbolic place since 1977 .
What I also do not really understand is why it was impossible for the authorities to distinguish between rioters and trade unions seeking to exercise their democratic rights .
I also do not understand why so much excessive violence was necessary against peaceful demonstrators and innocent passers-by .
I shall end by expressing the hope that this Parliament will continue , as in this report , to encourage reforms , but also to criticise the government and the opposition if these do not take place , in a way that I would describe as clear , explicit , with respect for each other 's views , but without taboos .
I firmly believe that , if that happens , we in Turkey and the European Union will in the end understand each other better .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) This very good report will not be well received in Ankara .
On the one hand , we recognise the efforts made , namely adoption of the Law on Foundations , reform of the Penal Code regarding freedom of expression , and the constitutional changes announced .
On the other hand , certain issues still remain unresolved . These include freedom of religion for faiths other than Islam , interference in the activities of the Ecumenical Patriarchate , and the slow progress of investigation into the murder of Hrant Dink and the three Christians from Malataya .
It is also the case that certain provisions in the Association Agreement have not been complied with .
We wrote about each one of these issues last year .
One might well conclude that time passes very slowly in the region of the Bosporus .
Instead of pressing for the full integration process , we should perhaps set out a legal framework for a type of cooperation between Turkey and the Union that would be better suited to both partners . That could be done immediately .
The political dimension of such a framework could well transcend the European Neighbourhood Policy .
The alternative package would not cause tensions such as those currently experienced in Ankara and in European capitals regarding the debate about Turkey becoming a full member of the European Union .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we will abstain on this resolution , especially in view of the way the Kurdish issue is side-stepped .
In particular , I do not believe that Turkey 's actions in northern Iraq can be described merely as ' disproportionate military operations ' ; instead we should assert that this is an open violation of international law .
The Kurdish issue cannot be reduced solely to a social matter .
It is first and foremost a political issue and we must tell the government in no uncertain terms that it must open talks with the local authorities in the Kurdish region and with the DTP .
We cannot keep silent on the fact that there is no hint of a mention of the Luxembourg Court 's decision on the different status given to the PKK on terrorist lists as has been the case to date .
We believe that there have been many appeals to Turkey on the Kurdish issue but that hitherto no substantive change whatsoever has been noted .
This is the reason for our abstention .
Madam President , I have read the report by my fellow Member Mrs Oomen-Ruijten with great interest and respect , and I congratulate her .
However , try as I might , I cannot reconcile it with current events . Developments in Turkey are preventing us from seeing what kind of future will emerge for that country with its inherent Asiatic traits .
Turkey has tried in the past to carry out reforms .
Let us not forget the Tanzimat reforms or the reforms of Abdul Hamit and Hatt-ı Hümayun .
Reforms have been attempted for hundreds of years without success .
The decision of the Constitutional Court is an ominous threat : political parties are being abolished .
I do not understand why Turkey does not have to follow Europe 's example , if it is an accession country and if ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) I should like to say to Mr Swoboda that a political party has in fact already been banned in Europe .
I am talking about Belgium , where Vlaams Blok , the largest Flemish party , was actually banned in 2005 .
Obviously that is no excuse for Turkey to ban political parties as well .
Having said that , I am astounded , Madam President , that the Council and the Commission are satisfied with the cosmetic changes to the notorious Article 301 in the Turkish Penal Code , which will still put just as many restrictions on freedom of expression .
It is now a punishable offence to insult ' the Turkish nation ' , rather than ' insulting Turkishness ' .
It is simply a question of semantics , which can still lead to actual prison sentences .
Article 301 does not need to be amended , it needs to be abolished , along with all legal provisions that conflict with freedom of expression and democratic fundamental rights .
If that is not done , the negotiations must simply be stopped , as has always been promised .
It was promised that the negotiating process would keep pace with reforms in Turkey .
Well , that is really not the case , certainly since it is already believed that two new chapters are to be opened shortly .
If the European Union approves cosmetic improvements like this , it loses all credibility and the whole of the rest of the negotiating process becomes a grotesque farce .
( NL ) I also want to pay tribute to the rapporteur and the way in which she has drawn up this report .
The report clearly shows the direction that Parliament wants to go in , which is to negotiate on membership of the European Union and nothing else .
2008 was announced as the year of reforms in Turkey .
Of course we support that ambition , but we are waiting to see how internal developments in Turkey will turn out .
Mr Swoboda has said enough about that .
If it goes wrong , we shall have to deal with a Turkey that cannot really act .
Talking of reforms , I should also like to draw attention to Article 301 of the Penal Code , which is used to restrict freedom of expression in Turkey in a number of ways .
The government has announced that it wishes to amend this article .
We believe that this is a step forward , but what we would like most and what we think is the best solution is for the article to be abolished for good , along with other restrictive provisions , to put an end to a practice that , unfortunately , still persists , namely the misuse of these articles in order to restrict freedom of expression .
Secondly , I should like to join with Mr Lagendijk in saying that we were also outraged at the way in which the police intervened at the 1 May demonstration in Istanbul .
You will realise that , for us as social democrats , for whom 1 May is an important day , this was something very disturbing .
We hope that it will never happen again and appeal to the authorities to ensure that it does not .
Finally , a remark on the Kurdish question .
We want the political debate in Turkey actually to take place and we want a political solution to be sought through decentralisation , but also , for example , by promoting the use of Kurdish in general .
I think that is an important point to be stressed again today .
Finally , I also want to draw attention to a point that we have discussed repeatedly , the expression of support for the initiative by the Spanish Prime Minister , Mr Zapatero , and his Turkish counterpart , Mr Erdoğan , on what they call the Alliance of Civilizations .
We hope that Parliament will eventually support our amendments on that today .
Madam President , first I would like to defend Joost Lagendijk from the scandalous attacks upon his integrity by the CHP and certain nationalistic journalists .
Joost Lagendijk is a good friend of Turkey and a first-class chairman of the JPC .
Those who attack Lagendijk attack this Parliament and they seek to sacrifice democracy upon the altar of an aggressive laicism .
Our own message must be absolutely clear : if Turkey 's Supreme Court continues to close political parties , they will kill off all prospects of Turkish membership of the Union .

( DE ) Madam President , I would also like to start by thanking the rapporteur for her fair cooperation and very balanced report .
The report highlights the critical points being identified by the people in Turkey themselves : for example , the solution to the Kurdish problem on a consensus basis while safeguarding the rights of all ethnic groups in Turkey , the headscarf problem in Turkey , which includes respecting the interests of those who do not wish to wear the headscarf , and the issue of religious freedom which must apply to everyone in Turkey , including Alevites , Christians and the Ecumenical Patriarch of Istanbul , for example .
We are saying all this because we are friends of Turkey , and because we want to see a European Turkey within the European Union .
That is why we are expressing this criticism , as one friend to another .
The European Union can also do more .
Signals such as those sent out by Mr Sarkozy - that Turkey , regardless of what it does , will never join the European Union - certainly do not help .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the excellent work she has done to identify very clearly the current political , social and administrative situation in Turkey .
Regardless of whether one 's position on the accession of Turkey to the European Union is positive , lukewarm or downright hostile , there can be no argument that Turkey lags way behind in terms of modernisation and human rights .
Admittedly , some efforts have been made , but corruption is a genuine blight and the Cyprus issue remains unresolved , not to mention the fact that there is a lot of work to do in relations with the Armenians .
There is the Kurdish question , violence against women is still a sore point and the same is true for forced marriages and honour crimes .
Also cause for concern is the situation regarding registration of births and low levels of schooling .
This list is certainly not exhaustive and gives a snapshot of a very difficult situation which Parliament must continue to monitor very carefully and steadfastly .
There can be no compromise on freedom and basic rights ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( EL ) Madam President , provided that Turkey complies fully with all the Copenhagen criteria and the obligations it has entered into under the Association Agreement and the Supplementary Protocol to the Ankara Agreement , it can and should accede to the EU .
It is perfectly clear to us that the aim is Turkey 's full accession and that a partnership of some kind is not an alternative .
The prospect of Turkey 's accession to the EU will put pressure on the country to respect the human rights of everyone living in Turkey , including Kurds and religious minorities .
Despite our concerns about the court proceedings now in progress on the question of the ruling party and the superficial change to Article 301 of the Criminal Code , we believe that Turkey has made some progress .
However , if her accession course is to proceed unhindered , she must do as previous accession countries have done and comply with its treaty obligations to the EU as a whole .
Turkey must therefore honour its commitments , open its air and sea ports to the aircraft and ships of the Republic of Cyprus , and lift the veto on Cyprus 's participation in international organisations .
Today , as we watch progress being made thanks to the efforts of the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities following the agreement of 21 March between the leaders of the two sides in Cyprus , Turkey must not stand in the way .
( NL ) The Republic of Turkey is disqualifying itself from membership of the European Union .
I can draw no other conclusion from the mistreatment of its tiny Christian minority , perhaps 100 000 people , or just one hundredth of a per cent of the total population .
In the light of the Copenhagen criteria , the Council , the Commission and Parliament have no other choice either .
The direct persecution to which Syrian Orthodox and other Christians in south-eastern Turkey , Tur Abdin , have been subjected for many years is a direct indictment of the Turkish State .
Does a country in which citizens who attend Christian services and are regularly questioned about that by the police or security services belong in the European Union ?
Questioning that , moreover , is coupled with threats to their personal lives or employment and even , in some cases , torture .
Turkish situations , Turkish self-disqualification .
The point is , however , how honest is the European Union to itself about this ?

( PL ) Madam President , I have every respect for the Turkish nation and am fully aware of the centuries of close and neighbourly relations between my country , Poland , and Turkey . Nonetheless , I have to say that the idea of Turkey 's membership of the European Union defies comprehension .
Although Turkey has had a presence on European territory for many centuries , it is not , in cultural terms , a European country .
We should cooperate with Turkey to the best of our ability , but the implications of the accession of a Muslim country to a European club are hard to quantify .
Indeed , the current situation in Turkey indicates that the authorities in Ankara are not particularly eager to become integrated into Europe .
In addition to Turkey 's relations with the European Union , I should also like to refer to its relations with Armenia .
I am glad the motion for a European Parliament resolution calls on the Turkish Government to end its economic blockade of Armenia .
It is regrettable , however , that the document makes no reference to the Armenian genocide .
( FR ) Madam President , the report by our colleague Ria Oomen-Ruijten is thorough , honest and courageous at a very testing time for Turkey , and I wish to congratulate her on this .
The report , however , forms part of a genre that I feel is becoming increasingly unreal .
Parliament and many other institutions are carrying on with their pretences , as though our tireless teachings can change Turkey .
This , in fact , is the crux of the matter : the contradiction between this country , this nation , this great people , its evolution and the project we wish to operate together .
Turkey is a nation-state , one of the last of its kind , one of the strongest and one of the most aware .
Its unity is a nationalist unity , and this is clearly discernable in relation to the acknowledgement of genocide in Armenia .
Its policy is increasingly inspired by a single religion even as it backs away from the secular aspects that form the very basis of its constitution .
It manifests its desire for independence , while here we wish to implement a principle of integration and delegation of powers and sovereignty .
This is nothing other than a head-on collision between both parties .
Let us be under no illusions , let us refrain from telling the Turks anything and everything , and having them believe we are willing either to accept their accession without actually meeting the Copenhagen criteria , or reject it because of them , when what is actually at stake is us , and what we want our European project to be .
Furthermore , let us define a durable partnership structure that uses a win-win approach to allow Turkey to take up its role as a regional power , and the EU to continue the construction of its world identity .
( FR ) Madam President , since I only have one minute I will get straight to the point .
The conciliatory posture of the rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , has prevented quite a number of stumbling blocks .
One does remain , however , and that is the disagreement on Amendment 14 concerning reproductive health .
The Socialists feel that this amendment is not a minor detail , a mere woman 's problem .
It is an indication of a clear separation between the Church and the State , and a symbol of secularism .
If we no longer want Turkish secularism to be defended by the army or by judicial coups , let women take care of this .
They will defend it with their bodies .
In a country which still practises honour killings , calling for sexual rights for women means opposing fundamentalist excesses from any corner .

( HU ) Madam President , let us not put a gloss on the situation : the issue of Turkey 's accession has reached a critical stage .
It is being held back both by uncertainties in Turkish domestic politics and by hesitation on the part of the European Union with regard to Turkey .
In this situation it is important to reiterate that the accession process is an open-ended process , but the common goal is EU membership .
We have committed ourselves to this , and so has Turkey .
It is in our strategic interests that Turkey should become part of the political body of Europe in the long term .
Associate membership via the Mediterranean Union can complement but not take the place of the integration process .
Turkey must also do a great deal more than hitherto to strengthen democratic institutions , reinforce civilian control of the military , reform the legal system , and promote human and minority rights .
We have a joint responsibility to ensure that this process is a success , because it is our failure too , and not just Turkey 's , if the negotiations run aground . Thank you .
( DA ) Madam President , Turkey is too large and too different to become a member of the EU .
If Turkey really wanted to live by Kemal Atatürk 's famous words : ' There is only one civilisation ' , we would not be standing here year after year stating that Turkey is most certainly not willing to comply with the EU 's demands concerning the adoption of European values and give up Ottoman values .
Turkey clearly expects to tire the EU out simply by negotiating without complying with our pivotal demands for change .
For the 34th year in a row , Turkey is occupying over one third of an EU Member State 's territory .
Cyprus as a whole is suffering under Turkish occupation , and the occupied region is suffering the most .
It is obvious that the vast majority of European citizens do not want Turkey to become a member of the EU .
It would also seem that an increasing proportion of Turkish citizens do not want it either .
It is time to stop this theatrical performance .
Turkey can have an extended trade agreement .
Europe has no place in the future that Turkey is looking to create .
Mr President , I congratulate Ria Oomen-Ruijten for her balanced and fair but strict approach on such a controversial issue .
Military coups are now old-fashioned and are being replaced by a coup d 'état by the judiciary .
It is unbelievable that the constitution and laws allow the judicial overthrow of the government democratically elected by 47 % of the people , for a charge totally disproportionate to the requested sentence compared with EU , Council of Europe or Venice Commission standards .

EU principles are incompatible with a ' deep state ' or the military hindering the government from responding to its new challenges : on Cyprus , to demonstrate , now that negotiations have resumed , that Ankara has the political will to reach a settlement based on the principles on which the EU is founded , without the presence of Turkish troops on the island or the right of unilateral military intervention ; on human rights and the freedom of expression in Article 301 ; on respect for the rights of non-Muslim religious minorities and the Orthodox Ecumenical Patriarch ; on the obligations of Turkey relating to the Ankara Protocol ; on issues like crimes of passion against women and the conspiracy of silence that exists on this issue ; on the issue of the Armenian genocide and the blocking of Armenia and so forth .
These are the challenges Turkey faces if it wants to prove that it is a candidate country destined to become a member of the European Union .
( EL ) Madam President , Turkey has a place in the European family and our only aim should be full accession .
The Union must honour its commitments .
Turkey , in turn , must comply with the Copenhagen criteria and the obligations it has undertaken .
However , very little progress has been achieved in the field of human rights in the past year .
The repeal of the notorious Article 301 and of all the provisions that make a mockery of the freedom of expression remains the ultimate aim .
Furthermore , the situation in south-east Turkey needs immediate attention .
We condemn violence and believe that a definite solution must be found by peaceful means .
Violence cannot be met with violence .
This is why I believe there should be an in-depth investigation into the use of Turkish territory by US aircraft in connection with the secret abduction of suspects to Guantanamo Bay .
We should aim to create a peaceful , democratic and stable society .
For this reason , we are particularly concerned at the latest developments in Turkey resulting from repercussions of the possible banning of the Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) .
Let me conclude by congratulating the rapporteur ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , we all know that the main obstacle to Turkish progress towards democracy is the Turkish army , an army that not only controls millions of soldiers and their dependants , but also controls political parties and processes , the police and secret service , much of the judiciary ( including the supreme and constitutional courts ) , as well as the religious , educational , social and economic affairs of the country .
Since General Atatürk 's revolution in the 1920s , Turkey has in reality been under a military dictatorship , either directly or indirectly .
Recently , the prospect of EU accession has given the opportunity for some brave people like the leaders of the AKP party to challenge the army supremacy .
We have a duty to help these people not just with words , but in deeds .
The army derives most of its strength from the support of the West .
Billions of euros in direct aid and in lucrative joint defence ventures are given by the USA , Britain , Germany , Italy and Spain .
These countries and others , including Russia and China , have a duty to cease all such economic support to the Turkish army until and unless true democracy is securely established in the country .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , only strong geopolitical and geoeconomic interests , not the interest and will of our peoples , are in favour of Turkey 's entry into Europe .
This report seems to be an encyclopaedia of reasons against European Union membership on the part of a country which every day is becoming more Islamicised , where Muftis publicly preach that women who do not wear the veil are all devil-worshippers .
The Turkish Constitution is a compendium of rules which are upheld , but which are contrary to the human rights we hold dear .
The report does , unfortunately , gloss over essential issues : Cyprus , the Armenian genocide and the Kurdish question .
Moreover , on becoming a member of Europe , the rules of this Islamic country which strictly forbids the use of alcohol will also be imposed on our peoples , including the glorious Celts , from the Irish to the Bretons , and we people of the Po valley who are proud to love our wine and our beer .
( ES ) Madam President , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report which we will be adopting today is a serious report , generally balanced , and also a demanding document .
It cites the progress made , but also highlights reforms outstanding .
We are all pleased that the Turkish authorities consider 2008 to be the year of reforms , because we know that accession negotiations make them necessary .
Moreover , the changes themselves will be good for Turkey .
The Turkish Government 's large parliamentary majority means reform cannot be delayed .
Were it introduced , EU citizens would also perceive the extent of Turkey 's commitment in terms of accession to the EU and its values , including respect for rights and freedoms .
Thus the report emphasises our firm wish that no incidents should seriously disrupt democratic political life in Turkey .
Ladies and gentlemen , we support reforms . We also support compliance with commitments .
Commitments outstanding include the normalisation of relations with Cyprus and full implementation of the Additional Protocol to the Ankara Agreement .
Another important issue for the EU is immigration control .
We must prevent illegal immigration , which occasionally uses Turkey as a country of transit , and combat the mafias which extract profit from this .
External borders must be controlled , and mechanisms implemented to repatriate illegal immigrants .
These courses of action require cooperation by Turkey , and thus I regret that no readmission agreement has yet been reached .
Terrorism , ladies and gentlemen , is also a very real threat in Turkey and in the European Union .
We must step up cooperation to combat this scourge more effectively .
I am finishing up now .
There is another wider field , foreign policy , where the EU and Turkey must make a greater effort to merge their positions .
I refer , for instance , to the Mediterranean or Central Asia .
We also have many mutual interests in terms of energy security , one of the greatest challenges of our times .
In short , ladies and gentlemen , Turkey and the European Union need each other , and we must continue to work with this in mind .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am extremely pleased with the balanced nature of this report that sends out a positive signal to Turkey .
The Socialists will ensure accession negotiations continue their positive trajectory under the French Presidency .
It is precisely because we are in favour of accession that there cannot be any shadows over events concerning our common democratic values .
It is not acceptable that intellectuals such as the journalist of Armenian origin , Hrant Dink , risk their lives by discussing certain periods of Turkey 's history .
Nor is it acceptable to allow an official line to be perpetuated that trivialises the Armenian genocide as a great tragedy , dismissing the suffering of a people , the number of whose deported is comparable to the numbers of those suffering from influenza in the United Kingdom .
Like the philosopher Bernard-Henri Lévy , I feel that denying genocide is in fact part of the genocide .
I also urge the Turkish authorities to take the reasonable path of truth and help rehabilitate all national minorities .
Madam President , first of all I would like to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for this report .
It underlines that Turkey in many areas already is part of European projects , but it also underlines that there is development , there is a movement going on , regarding reform of Turkish society .
At the same time it underlines that those reforms and those changes are being made far too slowly , that there is much more to do .
But that leaves us with a fundamental question : is the European Union and are Europe and European values better off with a Turkey that is fulfilling all the requirements and has made all the reforms that are underlined in the report , or are we better off with a Turkey that will maybe lean in the future more to other parts of the world , to other values ?
I think the answer to this question is quite obvious , and that underlines that we must of course keep the pressure on regarding all the changes that need to be made in Turkey with regard to freedom of expression , reform of the Article 301 paragraph , freedom of religion , equal rights for women and men , not only in legislation but also in reality , and of course the need for a solution to the Cyprus issue and a number of other issues .
But with that perspective , if the accession negotiations deliver all these results , it is very important that the European Union is open for the membership of Turkey because this would strengthen European values , Europe and the European Union , and I think that is the necessary and obvious conclusion of this debate .
Madam President , may I begin by welcoming the balanced and conscientious approach of the rapporteur and indeed of the Commissioner and of the presidency on this important brief .
I emphasise three points .
To my Turkish friends : the detention of 530 trade unionists on 1 May 2008 was a breach of the fundamental ILO right of free association and of the Copenhagen criteria .
Please protect trade unions , including preventing further attacks against the Turkish road transport union Tümtis .
To the opponents of Turkish accession : do not exploit the case against the AK party in the Constitutional Court for your political ends .
After the crisis of the presidential nomination , elections were held and democracy won .
Today , one way or another , I expect democracy to win again .



To Mr Claeys , Mr Langen , Mr Belder , Mr Toubon and others who deliberately seek to undermine public support for EU accession in Turkey by the language and the threats used in this morning 's debate : Turkish public opinion should understand you are not in a majority , you do not speak for this Parliament and you will not succeed in obstructing its European perspectives .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today , Turkey is a more important country for the European Union than ever before .
The reform process in Turkey must therefore be supported and it is important for us to have a democratic Turkey based on the rule of law .
We must have some concerns , however , which are also expressed in Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report . The question is whether Turkey is sufficiently capable of reform .
If I look at what is happening with Article 301 of the Penal Code , freedom of religion and the Law on Foundations , minority rights and so forth , it is clear that the Erdoğan government is trying to make progress , but it has always stopped short of what is required because quite obviously , at a domestic level , the limits of Turkey 's reform capacity have been reached .
When I see , too , that there are moves to ban the governing party , just like that , and then a couple of weeks later , it starts up again under a different name without certain persons who are no longer welcome in politics , then this means that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Madam President , violent Islamic fundamentalism that targets the West but also harms Islam is on the increase in the Middle East and the Maghreb .
Radical Islamic fundamentalism , though non-violent , is also on the increase in a number of countries .
This indicates the major role that Turkey can play vis-à-vis the Muslim world in its relations with the European Union .
It can do this in its capacity as a country which is officially secular but obviously has Muslim roots and culture , and this is a true asset in terms of the relations between the EU and Muslim countries .
That is why my Group has tabled two amendments to congratulate Turkey as co-sponsor , along with Spain , of the official UN Alliance of Civilizations project .
This should not be forgotten , since it is through this project that Turkey shows its commitment to assist with relations between the West and the Arab-Islamic world .

( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , may I voice my praise and respect for this report .
It is balanced and fair , and that is a line which we should keep to today .
We are right to emphasise that Turkey has to make further efforts .
The goal of achieving a stable and prosperous democracy in Turkey is not only in Turkey 's own interests , but is also an important strategic interest of the EU .
I am concerned about the attitude of the incoming Council President , Mr Sarkozy .
His policy on Turkey does not aim to achieve EU accession for Turkey .
He is insisting on references to Turkey as an accession candidate being deleted from EU documents , and emphasises that France will only endorse the opening of chapters which do not aim at full membership .
The EU 's credibility is at stake here .
Let me underline one point : pacta sunt servanda !
The opening of accession negotiations was agreed unanimously , and that means that France agreed to it as well .
Instead of sending out negative signals , the EU should deal constructively with Turkey .
In this House , we have decided by a majority that , with Turkey , we ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has produced a very balanced and objective report on Turkey which is highly commendable .
There is a remarkable consensus among the neighbouring member countries that there should be a clear perspective for EU membership of Turkey .
This is not by chance ; the neighbouring countries always know the situation better .
Turkey has already made immense progress in the reforms introduced to reach European democratic standards .
Of course much remains to be done but we have to encourage Turkey in this process ; we have to encourage the pro-European reform forces in Turkey , both among the ruling party and the opposition .
With regard to the pending constitutional decision on the AK party closure case : of course it is not acceptable .
I believe we should stay calm because I am sure that Turkey will find reason enough to overcome a potential crisis .
We the neighbouring countries should encourage Turkey and make every effort to enhance the bilateral and trilateral transborder cooperation and reach a new quality of good neighbourly relations .
This includes solving all outstanding bilateral issues , such as the case with the ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has presented a sound and objective report .
She has highlighted some progress and drawn attention to many questions and unresolved problems .
The key question which has only been touched upon in passing is this : if Turkey were reformed , would it then have a right to membership ?
Our current EU law offers a political alternative at the end of the negotiating process , both for the European Union and for Turkey itself .
That is why in Austria , and elsewhere , we are calling for open-ended negotiations .
Accession is one option , but it is not a foregone conclusion .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , since Turkey forms part of European history , since Turkey is a component of European culture , since Turkey constitutes a considerable economic and demographic opportunity for the EU , this position in favour of accession means that I can demand even more : more with respect to democratic principles , more with respect to secularity and more with respect to human rights .
The European Union was built on values and principles that we cannot disown with a deafening silence during an accession procedure for the sake of diplomacy .
Turkey must acknowledge the Armenian genocide , a historic and symbolic act , and this will bear witness to its political maturity .
Parliament has insisted with all due conviction and force on this acknowledgement since June 1987 .
Twenty-one years on , must we come up with such a bland formulation ?
If Parliament accepts this , it means taking a step backwards .
Ladies and gentlemen , I urge you to vote for Amendment 23 , to drive home to the authorities ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) The mentality of the Turks has changed little since the times of Kemal Atatürk .
Their religious tradition is directing them along their own specific course , which differs from that of us Europeans .
Geographic proximity does not equate to cultural closeness . In addition , the unwritten social codes do not suggest that the Turkish people are gravitating towards a European identity .
The question then arises as to whether Turkey wishes to change and adopt our sociopolitical model , because Article 301 seems to deny this .
Are we entitled to lecture the Turks and tell them what they should do ?
Through its amendments , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament wishes to impose an ideologically based solution on the Turkish people , but the latter are happy as they are .
Hardly any progress has been made on reforms , and the army still plays a very important role .
Are we to impose well-being on the nation by force , changing its identity , tradition and culture ?
In any case , is all this actually susceptible to change ?
Madam President , the Council decided on negotiations in good faith , so that Turkey could become a bridge between Europe and Islam . Now it is no longer convinced that its own decision was right .
All we have left is wishful thinking .
( PT ) Madam President , in general I welcome and support Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report , particularly the concern expressed about the implications of the AK Party closure case .
Furthermore , we now have a fabulous window of opportunity which must be used to settle the Cyprus question .
As stated by the report , it is also essential that the Turkish Government pursues its reforms , with respect for pluralism and diversity in a democratic and secular Turkey , and that all citizens should be able to develop their cultural identity within the democratic Turkish state .
Clearly , progress is also needed in other areas , such as the defence of trade union rights and greater advances along the road towards effective gender equality .
However , the report recognises that much progress needed to modernise Turkish society has already been made .
Madam President , Turkey 's progress towards full integration must continue strictly in accordance with the conditions agreed by the European Council and adopted by this Parliament .
No more and no less .
( EL ) Madam President , we all know that there is a new climate in Cyprus today .
Both Greek and Turkish Cypriots want a solution to the Cyprus problem and are eager to serve the interests of their country for the good of both sides .
This is precisely where Turkey is intervening , as Turkish forces are occupying part of Cyprus .
Turkey is controlling the situation politically , and it is time it realised that it has to abandon this policy .
It is in Turkey 's interests that the Cyprus problem should be solved .
Above all , the army , which has been negatively interfering throughout the process , has to realise that the Cyprus problem needs to be solved .
It is high time for Turkey 's occupation and interference to come to an end so that Greek and Turkish Cypriots can coexist peacefully in the EU .
We can achieve this and I believe that we can live peacefully .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Given the shortage of time and the noise in the hall I shall try to be very brief .
The debate that has just been concluded , and above all the report prepared by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , have confirmed what the Council is also aware of : every reform process is difficult .
This also applies to Turkey .
In this process the State is faced with considerable dilemmas concerning values such as secularism , democracy and human rights .
This is evident from the trials that have been mentioned numerous times , which have been mentioned in the report and which the Council too has considered , from trials such as the proceedings against political parties , from the debate on ladies ' head-scarves , on the status of women in general , on religious freedom , and on freedom of expression , among other things .
I would emphasise this : in those areas in which Turkey has achieved progress , the progress is evident although not sufficient .
Progress is evident in changes made to the criminal justice system , basic legislation , the status of women - just look at the number of women in Parliament , which has increased - but of course , in all these areas the progress made is still not sufficient .
As regards Cyprus , I should also like to emphasise that the Council expects from Turkey primarily two things : a constructive role in the negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations , and the implementation of a protocol which was added to the Ankara Treaty .
These are the main tasks , but there are also others .
In all of this it is , of course , useful if Turkey has an objective .
And this objective has been provided , it has been mutually agreed when the European Union granted Turkey candidate status , and the accession negotiations have been continued under this precondition .
The Slovenian Presidency has set the accession negotiations with Turkey as one of its primary objectives , and we hope that this goal will be achieved , so that we can open additional negotiation chapters in the near future .
Of course , the achievement of the final objective is not certain ; it depends on the accession negotiations , on how successful the reforms are , and it depends on us , the Member States , as well as on the candidate countries .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I want to thank the rapporteur and the Members for a very serious and responsible debate at a very critical time for EU-Turkey relations .
I have taken due note of your messages which are also codified in the draft resolution and in the compromise amendments .
I would pick up three particular messages , the first being that it is essential to relaunch the reforms in full so that the fundamental freedoms of Turkish citizens are enhanced and Turkey is itself helped to meet the EU Copenhagen criteria .
The second message is that citizens ' rights must be respected in the everyday life of society .
I share your concern in compromise Amendment 32 about the excessive use of force by Turkish police against demonstrators at this year 's May Day rally in Istanbul .
It is important that we reaffirm that the freedom of association and the peaceful operation of trade unions represent a fundamental right under the European Convention of Human Rights .
The third and final message is that the European Parliament is clearly very concerned about the closure case .
Closing down a political party is not , and cannot be , business as usual .
It cannot be taken lightly in a European democracy .
So there is much at stake again this year in Turkey and in EU-Turkey relations .
The best medicine to truly revitalise Turkey 's EU accession process is to ensure that the reforms move forward , that a genuine political dialogue is started in Turkey and that both democracy and secularism are respected .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) I thank my colleagues who have worked together so excellently .
As I have said before , it is only if we are united that we can make it clear that the reform process in Turkey is necessary .
We can all send a positive signal by voting for the report by a large majority .
That will help Turkey reform and ensure that individual freedoms are guaranteed and the rule of law is established .
That is all necessary for a modern society in which men and women do well .
I once again urge my fellow Members to avoid any political games when voting on the amendments and to make sure there is a large absolute majority for this report on Turkey to be adopted in plenary .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
, in writing . - Turkey as the largest state with accession perspectives is and will be a strategically important partner and ally of Europe .
It is in the interest of all to develop a reliable relationship based on values and mutual respect .
The EU must support the democratically elected government and should condemn attempts to undermine it .
However , pursuing EU membership can only be reliable if the candidate country recognizes and conducts normal relations with each and every EU Member State .
Although the current situation shows signs of consolidation , I still call upon Turkey to finally meet the fundamental accession criteria in recognizing the Republic of Cyprus and withdrawing Turkish army units .
Fully meeting the Copenhagen criteria is continuously a key condition for EU membership .
The Turkish administration has made considerable efforts in this field .
In 2007 democracy was strengthened there .
Still , a political initiative for a lasting settlement of the Kurdish issue is expected , including real possibilities to study and use the Kurdish language .
We also look forward to convincing measures to stop religiously motivated violence against Christian minorities and the providing of equal opportunities for all religious communities to freely erect houses of worship .
, in writing . - ( FI ) Madam President , I wish to thank the rapporteur for a balanced report .
In my opinion it sends an honest and critical , though at the same time , positive and optimistic signal to Turkey .
It supports the attempts at reform made by Turkey 's progressive and moderate forces by clearly mentioning those aspects of society where the country has made progress .
At the same time it still expresses its concern for the situation regarding freedom of speech , gender equality , the Kurds and other minorities , and the use of violence by the authorities .
We have to remember that we are now engaged in accession negotiations based on the Copenhagen criteria .
If the country meets the criteria and fulfils the principles of a European state governed by the rule of law , I see no reason why accession should be blocked .
The Turkey which will perhaps join the EU ten or twenty years from now will be a different Turkey from that we see today .
If we really want a democratic , stable and peaceful Turkey , we should at least not close the door to membership in its face .
Do not let us be accused of cheap populism and xenophobia .
A European Turkey is in the interests not only of the EU and Turkey itself , but the world as a whole .
Turkey should be given a chance .
, in writing . - ( HU ) We are debating Turkey 's accession , in other words whether this country , with its Asian legacy , can become European .
Acknowledging the genocide of the Armenians , guaranteeing the rights of the Kurdish minority , equal opportunities for women - these are only a few among many fundamental problems .
We speak of European Union expectations and standards , but meanwhile there are persistent problems within the EU itself with regard to democracy and human and minority rights .
In Romania just now we are preparing for local authority elections .
In recent days the past has reared its head again in Timişoara , or Temesvár : by a majority vote , the election committee of Timiş County upheld a complaint lodged by a physical person requesting the removal of some posters belonging to the RMDSZ , the Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania .
The only votes in favour of the RMDSZ member came from the Democratic Liberal Party , PDL , and two female judges on the election committee .
The anti-minority , anti-Hungarian attitude demonstrated by members of some political parties is intolerable and unacceptable .
What can we expect of Turkey if we are still battling with problems like these within the EU ?
Anti-Roma sentiment in Rome , collective guilt in Slovakia , anti-Hungarian attitudes in Timişoara ...
, in writing . - ( DE ) Regrettably , since the start of this year , tragic and worrying reports have continued to pour in to us about cross-border incursions by the Turkish military , about deaths and injuries caused in combat in the south-east of the country and on Turkey 's border with northern Iraq , and about disproportionate and brutal assaults by the security forces , especially on children and women , during this year 's Kurdish Nevroz festival .
The report by the Dutch Member , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , makes some important points but is far too timid a response to the seriousness of the political situation in Turkey .
So as to avoid giving offence to the country 's political leaders , it fails to demand , with the requisite clarity , the core elements of the reforms that are necessary in Turkey .
In my view , these core elements can be clearly defined :
1. civilian measures to restrict and control the influence of the military in Turkey ;
2. a conclusive break with the notion that the Kurdish question can be resolved by military means , and a clear commitment to a political solution and reconciliation ;
3. the unconditional repeal of Article 301 of the Penal Code and all other articles which curtail freedom of thought and freedom of opinion ;
4. a declaration of a clear political commitment to the full emancipation of women .
The report should have expressed itself in less equivocal and far more resolute terms on these issues .
2 .
Banning of exports and the safe storage of metallic mercury (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , I thank the shadow rapporteurs once again for their excellent cooperation .
During or dialogue with their representatives who were present at all stages , we have arrived at a very satisfactory compromise with the Council , thanks to the Commission 's contribution .
However , there is a risk that this compromise may collapse , leaving us back at square one , if Amendments 37 and 41 on Almadén are approved .
Let me remind you , ladies and gentlemen , that at first reading I , too , as rapporteur , supported the Almadén amendments , but we are now faced with reality .
Neither the Council nor the Commission accepts these amendments .
If they are approved , we shall be back at square one .
A year ago , the Council accepted only one of the European Parliament 's amendments .
Now , with the cooperation of all the political groups , we have succeeded in having 22 amendments accepted in the text of the agreement .
I ask you : are we going to sacrifice this success ?
Yesterday , Commissioner Dimas was quite clear .
The Commission does not accept Amendments 37 and 41 .
In the Council , not even the Spanish Government insisted on these amendments .
I therefore call on you to reject these amendments so that we can make good the significant progress achieved in our agreement with the Council over protecting the environment and public health .
This will allow us to approve a satisfactory move towards banning the export of mercury by a very large majority .
3 .
Protection of the environment through criminal law (
- Before the vote :
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this declaration may not amount to the same rhetoric as Mr Cohn-Bendit 's .
I have to read this declaration and I quote : ' The Commission took note of the following amendment adopted in the Committee on Legal Affairs : " Where a continuing activity proves after a lapse of time to give rise to environmental damage which may in turn give rise to criminal liability under this Directive , the question whether or not the perpetrator of the damage acted intentionally or negligently should be determined by reference to the time when the perpetrator became aware , or should have been aware , of the facts constituting the offence and not to the time when the perpetrator commenced its activity .
It should be borne in mind in this connection that the prior grant of an authorisation , licence or concession should not constitute a defence in such circumstances . ”
We fully understand the concerns expressed in this amendment .
These matters fall within the competence of Member States and we are confident that they will take due account of these important concerns . '
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the two declarations prompt me to point out , for the benefit of those fellow Members who may not have fully understood what is going on , that these declarations form part of the compromise which we have agreed .
We asked for clarification of two or three problems which has been provided in this way .
However , the subject of the legislative procedure is of course solely the text as agreed jointly by us .
I have the letter here from the Chair of Coreper - which is currently chaired by Slovenia - which confirms that this text , if we adopt it today , will also be approved by the Council . That means , of course , that we will have agreement at first reading which will give us the legislative success that we want to achieve .
4 .
Farm structure surveys and the survey on agricultural production methods (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , farm structure surveys are some of the oldest Community-level statistical surveys , and they provide substantial and necessary information on agricultural holdings in the European Union .
Especially now that we have an enlarged EU that includes twelve new Member States , and since we are working at this very moment on the reform of the Common Agricultural Policy , it is exceedingly important to be able to conduct a new and comprehensive survey as soon as possible .
We need comparable and uniform data to enable us to devise an equitable and properly functioning agricultural policy .
This is why I have tried to ensure that we will be able to reach an agreement at the first reading , and get these surveys under way as soon as possible .
I would especially like to thank my fellow Members who participated in the trialogue for their exceptionally constructive approach ; I would particularly like to thank Mrs Elisabeth Jeggle and Messrs Nicolas Meves and Alexis Kuhl for their work .
The amendments tabled as a result of the trialogue have been put into block one .
I would ask you all to support the amendments in block one and then we will be able to close this dossier . Many thanks .
5 .
Conditions to be complied with to pursue the occupation of road transport operator (
- Before the vote on Amendment 108 :

( DE ) Mr President , Amendments 108 and 117 are not compatible in my view and so , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , I propose that we support Amendment 108 and withdraw Amendment 117 .
6 .
International carriage of passengers by coach and bus ( recast ) (
- Before the vote :
( DE ) Mr President , in the interests of fairness , I announced on Monday that we would be requesting the postponement of the vote on this report , not because Mr Grosch has done a bad job - quite the contrary - but because we want to take more time to look at the issue of rest periods and integrate it in precise terms in this report .

We have held talks with the groups and have found that there is considerable backing for this proposal .

Even Mr Jarzembowski , who was most difficult to convince , advised me this morning that he now supports the proposal .
I therefore hope that we can deal with the matter in this way , and so I request postponement to one of the two next part-sessions .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , as the rapporteur , I agree with the proposal , as does the PPE-DE Group , and I would like to make it clear that we have taken note of the agreement between the social partners .
However , we are using the time with a view to incorporating this into an amendment .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
7 .
International carriage of goods by road ( recast ) (
8 .
Mobile satellite services ( MSS ) (
9 .
A simplified business environment for companies (
10 .
Women and science (
11 .
Green Paper on better ship dismantling (
12 .
Scientific facts of climate change : findings and recommendations for decision-making (
- Before the vote :
On the Florenz report , I should state that Amendments 5 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 and 15 are inadmissible for this report .
However , they may be tabled when we deal with the main report .
I have received a number of e-mails on this issue .
All the services and the Legal Service have looked at this in detail and have concluded that these amendments are inadmissible for this report .
They are , however , admissible for the final report .
Mr President , I must say that I am able to accept this argumentation for all amendments with the exception of 15 .
I do not know why 15 is not acceptable for voting just now .
Mr Březina , the answer which I have received - and I have received an e-mail about this specific amendment - was the same as for all these particular amendments .
I have to rely on that .
Amendment 15 may be tabled for the main report , however , so it could become part of the main report .
13 .
Turkey 's 2007 progress report (
- Before the vote on Amendment 11 :
( DE ) Mr President , we agree with our fellow Members that we should give appropriate recognition to the role of the Kurdish language in Turkey .
Paragraph 11 requires some linguistic clarification on one point , however .
I would therefore like to propose an oral amendment which has been agreed with the other shadow rapporteurs and the rapporteur .
In the amended version , the sentence would therefore read as follows :
' including real possibilities to learn Kurdish within the public and private schooling system and to use it in broadcasting , in daily life and in access to public services ' .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on paragraph 19 :
rapporteur . - ( NL ) We want to drop the word ' neighbouring ' because we want the Ombudsman to work with all European ombudsmen and ombudswomen .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For the outcome and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Mr President , before we take the vote on the calendar , could I raise the point about tomorrow 's intended strike .
I understand that Air France will be on strike , the trains will be on strike and the airport workers will be on strike .
This makes our life as parliamentarians impossible .
I have spent the morning trying to reschedule flights in order that I can return to my constituency .
It means that I will miss the voting session tomorrow .
It is interfering with our work as parliamentarians .
We are about to vote on the calendar , which requires us to come here twelve times a year , and yet France does nothing to make our life easy in coming here .
It is almost impossible .
If we are going to continue to come to Strasbourg , perhaps we could make some changes to the transport systems to enable us to come here ?
( Applause )
Mr Stevenson , we note what you have said but we should not start a debate at this juncture before we adopt the calendar of part-sessions on this general basis .
( FR ) Mr President , I simply wish to tell the Member that the right to strike exists in the European Union , the right to strike is the right to strike , and I also find it incredible for a country to be asked to provide a strike calendar .
This is ridiculous , completely ridiculous .
I also wish to tell our colleague that Belgian workers have been on strike on many occasions , and so where would this Parliament go if the Belgians went on strike ?
It is a ridiculous discussion .
If he wishes to go back , he can go back ; if he wishes to stay , all he has to do is stay another day and have some asparagus .
( Applause from the left )
Ladies and gentlemen , these two contributions have made it clear how pluralistic the European Union is in nature , and I think that in principle we should be grateful for that .
However , I would like to add - and I say this in all seriousness , not as a criticism but as an example of how the law of the European Union works - that if someone starts to question applicable law , we will end up in chaos .
I therefore suggest that we now proceed to the vote and respect the law of the European Union .
We all know who decides on the seat of the European Parliament , so I would ask all of you , please , to allow us to proceed calmly to the vote on the calendar of part-sessions .
Mr Stevenson , you will receive notification from the administration , as will everyone else , on the situation with regard to travel conditions tomorrow .
Rheumatic diseases ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , I have only a brief remark regarding the parliamentary calendar next year .
Although the parliamentary elections have been fixed for the period from 4 to 7 June , thus cutting my term one week shorter than 5 years , I am glad that the elections are not being held from 11 to 14 June .
Sunday is traditionally the day when elections are held in Estonia , but had the European elections been held on 14 June - the national day of mourning commemorating the mass deportation of 1941 carried out by the Soviet authorities - the flags would have been flying at half mast all over Estonia .
It would not have been a very happy day to hold the elections to the European Parliament .
( DE ) Mr President , this was the last calendar vote in this legislative term and we have averted five attempts to challenge Strasbourg as the seat of Parliament , and as the sole seat of Parliament , through irrational amendments .
Nonetheless , may I say that we should have a comprehensive reform , because it is after all a matter of money and CO2 emissions .
May I make the point that , if we were to concentrate on the 12 plenary weeks in the year and fully utilise all five days in these weeks once more , we could then do away with the expensive and unnecessary mini-plenaries in Brussels and replace them with constituency weeks . This would bring us closer to our citizens and give us more time for our real work .
It would also be much cheaper , we would cut our CO2 emissions , and all this could be achieved through our own decisions without an amendment of the Treaties .
As long as there is no Treaty amendment , we should use the current Treaties as rationally and efficiently as possible .
That is why I believe that we should adopt the approach that I have proposed .
Mr President , when this regulation came before Parliament at first reading , I opposed attempts to allow mercury to be stored , not only in salt mines but also in underground facilities adapted for waste disposal .
It was clear that anhydrite mines were being included in the expanded definition and this was very worrying for the people of Billingham in my constituency , who are fighting plans to use the former anhydrite mines under their homes for waste disposal .
Unfortunately , the text voted today at second reading has reintroduced the possibility of storing mercury in sites other than salt mines , specifically in deep underground hard rock formations .
As the Billingham anhydrite mines may come under this new definition of permitted sites , I felt it necessary to abstain on the vote on the compromise package since there is no final vote at second reading .
This is despite agreeing very much with the ban on the export of mercury from Europe .
( CS ) Today it is no longer tolerable for serious environmental crimes and crimes concerning public health to be considered merely an offence , as they have been to date in some countries , for example in Italy or Cyprus .
That is why I supported the directive obliging all countries to include relevant criminal sanctions in their legislation within two years , in spite of objections from Eurosceptics .
On the other hand , the Czech Republic , as well as many other countries , will have to introduce liability under criminal law for legal persons , which for post-socialist countries is an unknown historical concept .
We will have to decide whether to go for the German model in which violations of law by legal persons are decided by administrative authorities or whether to choose the judicial authorities model typical of France , Britain and now also Slovenia .
We will also have to decide whether it should be the entire legal person or the management who will be held liable .
I fear that the two years we have to complete implementation will not be enough .
Mr President , I voted against this measure .
It seems that climate alarmism and environmentalism are rapidly taking on the characteristics of a religion .
They are based on faith not fact .
And the possibility of carbon offsetting has been rightly compared with the medieval purchase of papal indulgences .
Now we have Mr Nassauer introducing what appears to be a sort of environmental blasphemy law .
I have considerable reservations about these environmental issues being dealt with by criminal law rather than civil law , in any case .
But the real problem here is the extension of European law .
The people I represent want to have trade , want to have cooperation in Europe but they do not want political union and they do not want a European legal system .
We should resist every further move to create Europe responsibilities and European competence in these areas .
Mr President , while this report seems to remove references to specific sanctions , it does make reference to what actions should be considered criminal activity within Member States .
So let us consider a scenario where someone in my constituency - London , the greatest city in the world , capital of the greatest country in the world - commits an act which is not considered a criminal act under English law ( a body of law that has been arrived at through common law tradition and through reason ) but which , because we have decided to impose this EU law from above , setting reason aside , over the heads of the citizens of my constituency , is now considered a criminal act under EU law .
What will that lead to ?
How will my constituents respond ?
I will tell you how they will respond .
They will say : ' What nonsense is this ?
Why is it that what is not considered under reasonable English law to be a criminal act , is a criminal act under European law ?
It is time to leave the European Union ! '
Therefore we have to be careful we are not driving the UK out of the EU .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I asked the President for the floor for a moment following the adoption of Mr Nassauer 's report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament on protection through criminal law .
I particularly wanted to congratulate the rapporteur because this is a report of great importance .
There was a major debate in committee and we reached a very intelligent , high-quality compromise through the intervention of Monica Frassoni .
Indeed , I feel the need to highlight this particular area of the committee 's work and especially congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Nassauer .
( PL ) With reference to the report by Mr Nassauer , I have to say that I voted in favour of it .
Although all Member States have adopted the same provisions , the latter are being implemented in many different ways .
This encourages undesirable behaviour whereby irresponsible entrepreneurs relocate their economic activity to countries where criminal sanctions for offences against the environment are less severe .
This affects the new Member States of the Union in particular .
It should be emphasised that offences committed within the framework of criminal organisations are becoming more and more significant , and that offences against the environment are increasingly of a cross-border nature .
I agree with the rapporteur 's stance that the legal framework defined in the proposal for a directive represents an important contribution to effective protection of the environment , and can guarantee uniform and responsible implementation of environmental protection law within the Community .
Appropriately trained officials are a sine qua non for effective implementation of the law and actual reduction of offences against the environment .
The proposal to specify the obligations of Member States in this regard clearly is therefore entirely relevant .
I should like to make the following comment for the benefit of the Member from the United Kingdom who may be labouring under a misunderstanding .
We are not creating new Community legislation to impose sanctions . That proved impossible .
Instead , we are insisting that every Member State implements the necessary legislation within its own legal system so as to ensure that across the length and breadth of Europe uniform penalties are applied for similar offences .
( CS ) Today , 21 May , marks another nail in the coffin of the Eurosceptics because , together with the Council , we have voted for a joint decision that will help to partly transfer the telecommunication spectrum rights of the 27 Member States to the European Union .
This shows the importance of the European Union .
If the Member States cannot successfully manage something themselves , they entrust the Union with it , in the interests of European citizens .
Today it is a matter of removing legislative obstacles to the future development of mobile satellite services for emergency communications , for saving the lives , health and property of half a billion citizens .
Ships and aircraft already use this system which , thanks to modern technology , could perform further functions as two-way multimedia , satellite television broadcasting and broadband internet access .
However , this decision should not become a standard in the area of telecommunications .
The exclusive rights to other parts of the spectrum continue to remain a matter for the national regulators .
I hope that in countries that are somewhat Eurosceptic , such as the Czech Republic or Britain , the media will pay sufficient attention to this subject , which represents good news for citizens .
Mr President , I am pleased to be able to support this report because it does not seem to be an example of coercion but rather of cooperation .
In fact I worked in this area in a previous career .
I advised companies on mobile satellite services .
One of the things that the companies had to face up to was the fact that they misunderstood the market .
About five operators launched global satellite services in the late 1990s .
Despite their best estimates , they completely misunderstood the market because they thought the market was the international business traveller , but the technology in this market was superseded by developments in cellular technology .
I am pleased that we have an opportunity for these companies to try again to create a global mobile satellite service market , which I think would be of great benefit , particularly to people in developing countries where terrestrial networks have no reach .
Therefore I welcome this report and I voted in favour .
( CS ) I would like to explain why I voted the way I did on the report by Mr Karl-Heinz Florenz .
In the final vote I voted against this report and I want to emphasise , as Chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , that the reason was not my lack of understanding of the seriousness of this subject or an intention to dismiss or dispute the rapporteur 's work in any way .
I did not agree with several statements and phrases which I not only found to be politically incorrect but also - in some cases - untrue .
I also consider the decision of the Tabling Office regarding the inadmissibility of the proposal without giving any reasons to be unacceptable , scandalous and somewhat erroneous . Thank you for your understanding .
( CS ) I did not vote for the report by my colleague Mr Florenz either .
Everything that is branded , and presented , as a scientific fact must explain the scientific opinions expressed by both groups of scientists , those who agree as well as those who do not agree .
The statements in the report are presented as a clear scientific consensus .
However , this is not the case .
The opposing camp is also important .
The principle of tentative caution was often stressed during the debate .
Could we not also use this in regard to overly strict and one-sided conclusions concerning climate change policy ?
As a geologist I can assure you that , many times in the past , the earth has warmed up much more than by those demonised 2 ° C , and no tragic events took place .
After all , humankind has always been living in a time of continuous climatic change .
( SK ) I voted for the interim report by the rapporteur , Karl-Heinz Florenz , in which the scientific knowledge of climate change plays an important role .
At the same time I find it regrettable that some amendments by my colleague Mr Březina and 40 other Members , in particular Amendment 15 , were not accepted in this report .
These amendments would have enhanced the text .
Scientists constantly keep revising their theses , which means that we too must be open to new ideas .
Some of the global climate change brought about by human activity manifests itself , to a large degree , as water drainage in certain regions .
Consequently , containing rainwater in a region and draining away only the natural surplus water is a prerequisite for ensuring environmental security and global stability and , last but not least , for maintaining economic growth .
I trust that the New Water Paradigm will become a new useful idea over the next few decades , and that it will become humankind 's manifesto for the future of civilisation .
( PL ) Mr President , we have today adopted an exceptionally important report on combating climate change .
There are close links between the latter and problems relating to energy . We are experiencing more and more frequent droughts , floods , desertification , and the melting of glaciers .
It must surely be clear to everyone by now that our climate is changing . Social , environmental and financial problems are emerging due to the rising temperatures .
If we really want to protect our planet , our own Earth , then all of us , all the countries and societies in the entire world have to slow down or halt further increases in the level of CO2 emissions and emissions of other greenhouse gases .
Environmentally friendly investment should be promoted , along with clean energy and energy-saving installations . Above all , priority should be given to convincing people to save energy , and to increasing their knowledge and awareness .
That may well prove the quickest way to achieve results .
We need to find a compromise solution on restricting emissions of greenhouse gases within the Union .
The new Member States should be treated differently from the more developed ones . The former would then have a chance to catch up and eliminate differences in the level of economic development .
( DE ) Mr President , first of all , may I comment on Mr Florenz 's report which , in my view , has summed up the current scientific consensus very well .
Nonetheless , I voted against the report .
The climate is an important issue , and I agree that we must take action here .
However , the scientific consensus is only a provisional consensus , just as every scientific consensus of the past hundred years was short term in nature .
In every case , we move on from them .
The report before us does not offer us enough opportunities here .
What is more , the specific measures outlined are one-sided .
We must ensure that Europe does not forfeit any of its economic capacities . Europe cannot save the world on its own .
Other countries need to be involved as a matter of urgency in addressing this global problem .
That is the only way to implement the scientific consensus .
We cannot bear this burden on our own .
Against this background , what I feel is lacking in the report is the catalogue of measures which are required to mitigate climate change .
We probably cannot stop it altogether .
That being the case , I believe that measures that will permanently alter our industrial structures cannot be adopted on the basis of what is only a provisional scientific consensus .
Mr President , I voted against the Florenz report .
One of the greatest myths of climate alarmism is that there is a scientific consensus and that all scientists agree .
As a member of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change I know why Mr Florenz 's report turned out the way it did : they only listened to one side of the debate and therefore they concluded there was a consensus .
In the debate earlier today , Mr Booth reminded us of the Oregon Declaration , which 30 000 relevant scientists have signed , challenging the whole basis of climate alarmism .
There is no consensus ; there is a powerful and growing body of scientific opinion which takes the other view .
In the mean time we are going to do huge economic damage to the people we represent in a futile and doomed attempt to influence a speculative problem , which , in the view of many people , does not exist .
It is the economic damage which will crucify us , and it will crucify specifically Europe because developing countries like China and India have far too much common sense to be taken in by it .
( BG ) The delegation of the Ataka Party voted against the so-called Report on Turkey 's Progress because we do not see what this progress might involve .
What we do see in Turkey is a state where an Islamistic party is in office , the head of state is an Islamistic president .
A state which does not even come close to respecting human rights , a state which exercises oppression against an entire nation and wages a war , even as we speak , on an entire nation with the aim to destroy it , and that nation is the Kurdish people .
A state which is heavily militarized , where there is a covert military junta , and Turkish policy takes whatever direction the generals point it to .
A state which continues to occupy the territory of an EU Member State even as we speak .
A state like that is not eligible for any negotiations until these severe problems have been eliminated in real terms .
( NL ) To my mind , the Oomen-Ruijten report is yet another missed opportunity to get down to business on the potential accession by Turkey to the European Union .
The report focuses on what are , in my view , a number of side issues , whereas the main point about all this is still , of course , that Turkey is in no way a European country , will never in any way be a European country and consequently there can be no question of a non-European country acceding to the European Union .
End of story !
However , I should also mention , by the way , that I was surprised to hear in the debate , from my Socialist colleague Mr Swoboda amongst others , that it is absolutely unacceptable for parties to be banned in Turkey .
I remind you that in my country in 2004 the biggest party in the country , Vlaams Blok , which won 24 % of the vote , was simply proscribed and had to be disbanded .
I do not recall any protest from the Socialists at the time .
On the contrary , their solidarity is confined to the Islamic fundamentalists , which is duly noted .
( CS ) Mr President , I have been saying , for many years , that a privileged partnership between the Union and Turkey would have been far more beneficial than the promise of Turkey 's entry into the European Union .
Unfortunately , the progress report confirms that , although accession negotiations have been opened , the Copenhagen criteria have not yet been met .
This is not the case with just one area .
It affects freedom of religion , minority rights , equal opportunities ( for women in particular ) , corruption , Kurdish and Cyprus issues and of course also the power of the army over government policies .
Just like the rapporteur , I also welcome the government 's efforts to ensure progress but , alas , this progress is not visible .
On the contrary : Turkey is banning a political party , has a new Article 301 used to prosecute writers and intellectuals for insulting Turkishness , and politically or religiously motivated hostility and violence are also on the increase .
The murder of Hrant Dink has not been solved so far , and neither have other murders .
That said , I accept that the report is well-balanced and honest .
( PL ) Mr President , we have adopted an important report .
We should give due recognition and support to the changes implemented in Turkey pursuant to the accession negotiations .
In view of its particular geopolitical position , Turkey is a strategic partner for the Union where the latter 's negotiations with countries in the Black Sea area , Central Asia and the Middle East are concerned .
Turkey is also vitally important to ensuring Europe 's energy security , because energy resources from the Caspian and Black Sea areas are transported to Europe across Turkish territory .
In addition , Turkey has enormous economic potential .
It has a dynamic economy , a huge internal market , and a society largely of an age to be active on the labour market . I am confident that all this will contribute to the development of Europe 's economy in the future .
One further aspect of Turkey 's accession merits a mention . As an Islamic country that is also a Member State of the Union , it will be able to play an important role in developing relations between the West and the Islamic world .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report although it contains many compromise phrases .
I did so because , at the start , it contains a crucial sentence , namely that the opening of negotiations is the starting-point for a long-lasting and open-ended process . That is the only reason why I was able to vote in favour of the report .
Let me make it quite clear that my party , the Christian Social Union , has always been , and continues to be , pro-Turkish .
We campaigned and worked hard for the Customs Union which was adopted by this House by a majority of just one vote .
It could be argued that , at the time , it was my vote .
We have supported Turkey in NATO and on a wide range of issues .
Let me also make it quite clear , however , that Turkey is not a European country , and I share Mrs Roithová 's view that a privileged partnership , a tailor-made special status , is the right solution .
This is the solution which will ultimately be achieved .
We should finally stop pursuing this blind alley towards supposed accession .
This accession is not going to happen , so it would be more honest and better for both sides if we could get together as soon as possible and agree to pursue another route , a route towards a partnership of equals , without common institutions but with common interests and a practical and agreed programme of cooperation .
( DE ) Mr President , although Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report contains many criticisms of Turkey , I voted against it because , in my view , full membership for Turkey cannot be the aim of the accession negotiations .
Mr Posselt has already made this point .
I believe that we should start as quickly as possible to offer Turkey this privileged partnership .
Turkey is not part of Europe nor does it perform a bridging function to the Islamic countries .
In Sudan , persecution of Christians has been taking place for years in Darfur .
Turkey has had the opportunity for many years to play a part in ending these crimes against Christians in Sudan .
However , I have yet to see Turkey make any moves in that direction .
That is why I voted against the report : because Turkey does not belong as a full member of the European Union .
( BG ) Mr. President , I supported the Report on Turkey 's Progress although there are still certain risks related to that country 's way to the European Union .
I was motivated by the fact that the report includes texts dealing with protection of human rights , protection of the rights of women in two important areas : reproductive health and equal opportunities , particularly in terms of access to education .
The second point I would like to note refers to the safeguards demanded in the report in relation to neighbourhood policy .
The issues still outstanding in terms of neighbouring countries need to be resolved , and one such issue refers to Bulgarian refugees from Thrace .
This issue also has to do with fundamental human rights .
Its dimensions go beyond property and financial aspects .
Its moral aspects are particularly important .
Without getting preoccupied with the past , we would like to see clear actions in the future and observation of the agreement signed between our two countries ; that is why I supported the report .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - I supported all the amendments to the calendar that reduced our time in Strasbourg and increased it in Brussels .
The current situation is bizarre , trekking as we do backwards and forwards between Brussels and Strasbourg at vast cost in time and money .
We should meet at a single location .
I do however reject Mr Stevenson 's complaint regarding the current transport strikes .
We recognise and support the right to strike .
Our objection to Strasbourg is not based on any opposition to the exercise of workers ' rights in France , but the inherent waste involved in our current institutional arrangements .
I voted against making an exception for the Monday of Orthodox Easter when we make no provision for not meeting on 14 July .
Secular celebrations deserve the same treatment as religious festivals .
in writing . - ( SV ) We actually want all the sittings of the European Parliament to be held in Brussels and we want the travelling circus between Brussels and Strasbourg to end as soon as possible .
We have therefore voted for the proposals that the Monday sittings and Thursday afternoon sittings during Strasbourg part-sessions should be discontinued , in the hope that the sittings in Strasbourg will be phased out completely .
The European Parliament should have a single seat and a single place of work .
It is regrettable that there are Member States whose political leaders consider themselves to be strong supporters of the European idea but at the same time will not give an inch when their national interests are at stake .
in writing . - I am generally in favour of what is proposed for the 2009 calendar of part-sessions .
However , I believe that amendments requesting an extension of the time spent in Strasbourg would not contribute to the efficient running of the Parliament .
Indeed , efficiency and logic demands that there be one single Parliament seat in Brussels .
My views on this issue are reflected in my vote .
in writing . - ( PT ) We regard as positive the recognition of the environmental and social problems arising from the closure of mercury mines in the Community . We also regard as positive the acceptance that projects and other initiatives must continue to be supported , based on the available financing instruments , in order to allow affected areas to find viable solutions for the local environment , employment and economic activity .
It has also been agreed that the permit applicant must take the necessary measures , through a financial guarantee or equivalent mechanism , to ensure that the obligations arising from the permit ( including maintenance operations after closure ) shall be fulfilled and that the closure operations shall be carried out .
It has also been approved that industry sectors that gain mercury from the cleaning of natural gas or as a by-product from non-ferrous mining and smelting operations must provide relevant data to the Commission and the competent authorities of the Member States concerned .
The Commission shall make this information publicly available .
We also feel it is right to encourage the provision of technical assistance to developing countries and countries with economies in transition , especially assistance which facilitates the shift towards alternative mercury-free technologies and the eventual phase-out of uses and releases of mercury and mercury compounds .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for this report which aims to bring the ban on exports of mercury forward to 15 March 2011 , three months before the date proposed by the Council .
Mercury can be produced by waste recycling ( fluorescent tubes or batteries , for instance ) , cleaning of natural gas or industrial processing of non-ferrous metals .
I am pleased that , in addition to metallic mercury , the ban includes mercury-containing products that cannot be sold or distributed in the European Union , cinnabar ore and mercury compounds .
It is likewise extremely important that compounds used for research and development , in medicines or in analytic processes not be included in the ban , as stated in the report .
Storage must be made secure , as suggested by both the report and the Council .
Mercury waste stored temporarily for more than one year must be kept in deep underground hard rock formations or in above-ground facilities in such a way as to prevent any risk to human health and the environment before it is processed .
in writing . - I generally support Dimitrios Papadimoulis ' report on the banning of exports and the safe storage of metallic mercury .
Bringing forward the date of the export ban to 2010 allows for greater coherence with the EU 's overall mercury strategy .
I also support the extension of the types of mercury covered within the ban .
I further feel that , before the ban comes into force , more research is required regarding safe disposal methods for mercury .
I voted in favour of the report .
Does hypocrisy have no limits ?
The European Commission rightly proposes banning the use of mercury and creating suitable infrastructures to store it , in view of its high toxicity and the risks to public health .
The Commission nonetheless insists on promoting fluorescent bulbs to save energy , knowing that they contain at least 5 mg mercury each , a particularly dangerous amount , given the number of bulbs in every home or workplace .
Profit is everything .
The investments and profits of monopolies must be protected even if they are demonstrably at the expense of public health .
The EU prohibits the use of mercury but allows companies to offer free light bulbs containing mercury in order to promote their sales .
Responsibility for public health is assigned to the companies . They have to manage waste collection , although it is known that waste will end up in dumps and refuse bins .
Society as a whole , and not just those who use the bulbs , will be exposed to the considerable risk of contamination .
This , of course , is why in general they can be disposed of in landfills . Indeed , to forestall protests that would affect sales , not even the most basic steps are being taken to inform the public of the risks they run from leakage of the contents of these bulbs into the environment .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mercury is one of the most powerful environmental poisons .
Under normal circumstances this metal is a liquid with high vapour compressibility .
It does not biodegrade and therefore remains in the environment for a very long time . Mercury accumulates in trophic chains that can pass into the human body in significant concentrations .
Industrial development resulted in the use of mercury because it is a metal with special properties and is cheap to obtain .
It seems difficult to eliminate the use of mercury in the production of low-energy light bulbs .
Effective collection systems for such waste should be developed , however , together with safe technology for its recycling , so as to prevent further degradation of the natural environment .
One of the most serious cases of poisoning with mercury compounds took place in Japan between 1953 and 1960 .
There was mass illness amongst the inhabitants of the gulf of Minamata who showed symptoms of nerve damage that often resulted in death .
The European Union should do all it can to ensure mercury is safely stored .
The export of metallic mercury should be banned .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the report by my esteemed German colleague , Hartmut Nassauer , drawn up at first reading of the codecision procedure on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of the environment through criminal law .
I support the position of reinserting this mechanism within the strict jurisdiction of Community law by limiting the effects of the directive only to cases of infringement of Community legislation on environmental issues , and thus allowing the Member States to determine the penalties that they will apply in the event of any infringement of such laws .
This wise position follows that of the Court of Justice of the European Communities which ruled that the EU has the power to adopt criminal measures only in cases of ' justified need ' , in other words , concerning common transport and environment policies .
It should be pointed out that the directive aims to oblige the Member States to lay down criminal sanctions within their own legislation for serious infringements of Community law with regard to protection of the environment , without creating any obligations for application of these penalties that may be invoked in individual cases .
in writing . - Given the trans-boundary nature of environmental crime , we believe that an established set of minimum standards and sanctions concerning environmental crime at international level would be a useful instrument in maintaining a comprehensive and effective environmental protection strategy .
However , we do not believe that the EU has or should have the competence to establish criminal measures in first-pillar matters .
Therefore I voted against the report today
in writing . - ( PT ) Importantly , the rapporteur has recognised that , pursuant to the Court of Justice judgment of 23 October 2007 in Case C-440 / 05 , criminal law and the rules of criminal procedure do not fall within the Community competence and therefore the type and level of the criminal penalties to be applied cannot be determined .
Amendments have therefore been made to the European Commission 's proposal for a directive which was not acceptable .
It is also important that the Commission and the Council have accepted these proposed amendments .
However , despite this , they are insisting on the possibility of the Community legislator being able to require Member States to make provision for sanctions of this kind to ensure that the laws that they enact in the area of environmental protection are fully effective .
As the role of the Member States in the whole process has not been sufficiently clarified , we chose to abstain in the final vote .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report as it will allow criminal sanctions for serious environmental offences .
Member States must take a strong stance on environmental protection and ensure strict application of this directive .
In particular I am voting for the inclusion of an annex to the directive which clarifies which legislation is subject to criminal sanctions .
An annex is crucial to give greater legal clarity about what Community legislation is affected .
It should both cover existing legislation , where this Directive will have competence to impose criminal sanctions , and allow for future legislation to be covered .
Furthermore , an annex will ensure the directive is restricted only to enforcement of Community law and implementing national legislation and has no impact on what is purely national law .
in writing . - ( FR ) The adoption of common criminal law within the EU , thus depriving the Member States of their sovereign exclusive right to determine , in an independent fashion , what types of behaviour they consider to be offences and also of the chance to define the qualifications and limits of criminal penalties , is on its way .
An impressive power play by the Court of Justice of the European Communities in its judgment of 13 September 2005 on the case known as ' protection of the environment ' granted it the right to interfere in the criminal law of Member States in the event of infringements of environmental legislation .
Now , in an all-new phase , the idea is to draw up a harmonised set of infringements to be sanctioned by criminal law in all the Member States and to harmonise the criminal penalties in cases of environmental infringements .
The Court has seized power and has handed it over to the Commission with total disdain for the countries , national constitutions , parliaments and sound application of laws .
Those of us who are sovereignists and defend the freedoms and rights of countries to decide for themselves reject these methods .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Nassauer report on the protection of the environment through criminal law .
Whilst substantive criminal law is and should remain a matter for Member States , it is equally clear that environmental protection is something which can best be coordinated at the EU level .
I am satisfied that the compromise package will allow the EU take the lead in environmental protection whilst respecting the integrity of national legal systems .
The proposed directive opens the way to imposing unified EU criminal law on the Member States .
It uses environmental protection and workers ' concerns about environmental problems to promote the adoption of common EU criminal law .
It even revokes the rule of the Member States ' unanimity that has applied to criminal matters until now .
This paves the way to acquis communautaire , giving the EU the right and power to institute and impose criminal penalties wherever it deems this necessary .
In the final analysis , certain provisions of the European Constitution are being reinstated . From now on their application comes under the new name ' Treaty of Lisbon ' before it has even been ratified or entered into force .
This is a dangerous development at the expense of the peoples of Europe .
Investing the EU with the power to adopt unified criminal law without the unanimous agreement of the Member States is tantamount to abolishing one of the fundamental sovereign rights of nations : to decide what actions constitute a criminal offence and to specify the type and level of penalties . The primacy of Community law is thus established over national legislation and even national constitutional provisions .
The aim is to impose directly on the people of Europe the will of legally sanctioned European capital monopoly . At the same time , the personal rights and democratic freedoms of peoples will be drastically reduced .
in writing . ? ( PL ) Caring for the environment is a duty incumbent on us all .
The world is not discharging this duty very well , however . There is a tendency not to recognise its importance and to put it off until later .
In 1998 the European Council took the decision to protect the environment through criminal law .
Adoption of the new directive means that the set of offences subject to criminal sanctions in all countries is now clearly defined .
I believe it is also necessary to emphasise the responsibility of manufacturers , exporters , importers and carriers for the products and services they provide , to ensure there are no loopholes or opportunities to evade responsibility .
Resources are needed , however , to provide the necessary equipment and staff training for example , so that the new principles can be properly implemented and offences against the environment reduced .
I believe resources should be made available from the European Union 's budget , at least for the new Member States . They are the ones with the most work to complete in a short time .
Only if all the Member States act in solidarity will it be possible to achieve the aims set .
In the absence of such solidarity , regional differences will simply become more pronounced .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of the environment through criminal law because the introduction of new legal provisions and the establishment of a common list of offences against the environment for the entire Community will ensure more effective implementation of Community legislation .
The same provisions are in place in all Member States of the Union , but the way they are implemented varies considerably .
This encourages undesirable behaviour whereby irresponsible entrepreneurs relocate their economic activity to countries where criminal sanctions for offences are less severe .
This affects the new Member States in particular .
It should be emphasised that offences committed within the framework of criminal organisations are becoming more and more significant , and that offences against the environment are increasingly of a cross-border nature .
I agree with the rapporteur 's stance that the legal framework defined in the proposal for a directive represents an important contribution to effective protection of the environment , and can guarantee uniform and responsible implementation of environmental protection law within the European Union .
Appropriately trained officials are a sine qua non for effective implementation of the law and actual reduction of offences against the environment .
The proposal to specify the obligations of Member States in this regard clearly is therefore entirely relevant .
The adoption of a set of offences against the environment and the associated penalties will constitute a very helpful instrument for the common implementation of environmental protection legislation within the European Union .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the report by my Hungarian colleague , Gábor Harangozó , that amends , at first reading of the codecision procedure , the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on farm structure surveys and the survey on agricultural production methods .
I support the idea of allowing derogations for Member States that wish to implement the farm structure survey in 2009 rather than 2010 due to the decennial population census in 2011 .
I likewise support any simplifications envisaged .
in writing . - ( PT ) The proposal for a regulation is justified by the Commission 's new political approach involving the simplification of legislation and better regulation .
I agree with the Commission proposal which aims to simplify procedures by reducing the number of internal inspections while , at the same time , maintaining the necessary level of rigour imposed by previous legislation on the performance of structural surveys on crop and animal production , agricultural work and equipment used .
Furthermore , and with the aim of simplification , the proposal introduces only one new type of inspection and does not in any way require Member States to alter their administrative systems .
in writing . - ( PT ) As agricultural subsidies come from public money , it is essential to ensure their fair distribution based on objective criteria .
We therefore agree with the need to carry out surveys to determine conditions on agricultural holdings .
However , the application of these principles cannot be allowed to impose yet another bureaucratic burden on farmers , particularly small and medium-sized farmers whose resources are limited or non-existent .
Likewise , this cannot form a way of preventing farmers , due to technical or other errors of which they are unaware , from getting the support to which they are entitled , as has sometimes happened in Portugal with satellite recognition and identification .
We therefore feel it is positive that the report recognises the significant methodological and technical difficulties in many Member States and also that it insists on the need for the Commission to provide farmers with the necessary technical and advisory assistance in respect of the satellite recognition of agricultural holdings .
In this respect , we also wish to draw attention once again to the need for the Member State authorities to guarantee access to and use of the data gathered during satellite recognition exclusively for the specified purposes .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the report by my Romanian colleague , Silvia-Adriana Ţicău , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing common rules concerning the conditions to be complied with to pursue the occupation of road transport operator .
The former Directive 96 / 26 / EC on admission to the occupation of road haulage operator and its four Regulations on access to the haulage market , with deregulation of the prices of international road haulage implemented a number of years previously , have shaped the internal haulage market , albeit with minimum haulage quality , while the opening of the market as arranged by the Regulations has created more competition .
Experience has demonstrated that these measures are wrongly or unequally applied since they are ambiguous or incomplete , or can no longer be applied due to changes in the sector .
Companies remain subject to unequal surveillance and monitoring , depending on the Member States , with some extremely different levels of professional qualifications and financial solvency .
Thus there was an urgent need for legislation , demanding conditions relating to good repute , financial standing and professional competence , and implementation of mutual acknowledgement of certain documents required to obtain permission to operate .
in writing . - ( PT ) Aside from the criticism of certain aspects included in this proposal for a regulation , its contents should not be assessed without taking into account its ' role ' in the increasing liberalisation of international road haulage and passenger transport as promoted by the European Commission and by the European Union institutions with codecision power , namely the European Parliament and the Council .
As a matter of fact , this central idea is highlighted by the European Commission itself in its proposal : ' Directive 96 / 26 / EC on admission to the occupation of road transport operator , the four Regulations on access to the road transport market , together with the deregulation of international transport prices which took place a few years earlier , shaped the internal market in road transport ' .
In other words , ' common requirements for admission to the occupation ' were laid down while ' the opening-up of the market as a result of the Regulations has made for greater competition ' .
As we highlighted with regard to the proposal for a regulation on common rules for access to the international road haulage market , this proposal aims to increase the liberalisation of international road transport by seeking to promote greater competition between operators in a sector that is already overwhelmed with countless heavy costs for its workers .
in writing . - ( DE ) Harmonisation of the existing rules in this field is important as a means of optimising road transport in Europe .
Moreover , a regulation is more expedient than a directive in this context .
The rules governing the occupation of a road transport operator must fulfil precisely defined criteria if we are to achieve the highest possible level of safety on our roads .
These rules must encompass both requirements and sanctions .
A key element is the monitoring and checking of data , which must be carried out with due respect for personal privacy .
It is very important that the national electronic registers containing the data should be interconnected so that data can be compared and the regulation therefore serves its intended purpose .
I am opposed to Amendments 7 and 102 which seek to water down the six-day rule .
A reintroduction of the 12-day rule , which has already been rejected , would be inconsistent with the substance of this report .
in writing . - ( PT ) Mrs Ţicău 's report is part of a package of measures that , together with two other reports , aims to regulate road transport activity .
This activity is supremely important within the European Economic Area as it enables the open and competitive market of which we are nowadays so proud .
Under this new proposal , companies must hire a transport manager with certified training who shall be responsible for managing the company 's transport activity .
The conditions already laid down for accessing the occupation - namely good repute , financial standing and professional competence - are maintained .
This recasting is intended to make the existing legislation more intelligible and demanding in terms of safety and efficiency in this type of business .
I therefore welcome the work carried out by the rapporteur to increase responsibility in terms of safety and guarantees of commitment in this sector and also the measures on professional competence which involve high-quality training and mutual recognition of diplomas and licences .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the report by my esteemed colleague , Mathieu Grosch , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules for access to the international road haulage market which aims to merge the texts regulating access to the international road and cabotage transport market , currently governed by previous regulations and directives .
Within the internal market , international transport between the Member States has been fully liberalised , although a number of restrictions still remain for cabotage .
I welcome these indications and simplifications , and also the stepping up of penalties for infringements committed in Member States other than that of establishment .
in writing . - ( PT ) This is just another step towards and another instrument aimed at increasing the liberalisation of international road haulage by seeking to promote greater competition between operators in a sector that is already overwhelmed with countless heavy costs for its workers .
One of the current aims is to find a way of facilitating the inclusion of ' cabotage ' operations by road transport - in other words , carrying out up to three transport operations following an international journey , provided that these are carried out within seven days - in a market which is already so liberalised that this will profoundly impact on the finances and survival of national operators .
This decision will also have harmful consequences for road haulage workers .
This can be seen , for example , in the proposal by a majority of this House to remove the reference to ' working time ' , just leaving the terms ' driving time ' and ' rest periods ' , in other words allowing longer working hours which will adversely affect working conditions and worker safety .
If we take account of the recent Court of Justice decisions , not even the reference to Directive 96 / 71 / EC on the secondment of workers will protect the labour rights of many workers in this sector .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of adoption of the report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules for access to the international road haulage market ( recast ) - C6-0146 / 2007 - 2007 / 0099 ( COD ) ) .
I agree with the rapporteur that adoption of the Commission 's proposal will be instrumental in simplifying and clarifying the principles applicable to road haulage .
I support the report by Mr Grosch , aimed at providing opportunities for neighbouring Member States to open their markets still further to cabotage transport operations .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted for Mathieu Grosch 's report on access to the international road haulage market .
The merging of the existing Regulations and Directive 2006 / 94 / EC will simplify and improve access to the road haulage market .
I endorse the rapporteur 's view that the restrictions on cabotage must be eased and that the rules governing cabotage must be brought into line with those that apply to cross-border haulage within the internal market .
It is therefore important to define cabotage clearly in order to guarantee a uniform approach .
Although empty runs must be avoided for the sake of the environment and efficiency , and although cabotage on the homeward route from other countries should also be supported , subject to the restrictions set out in the report , it must not be forgotten that such measures also weaken the position of the railways .
in writing . - ( EL ) We are voting against the report on access to road transport . It liberalises the Community road transport market and opens up international carriers to national transport .
International and internal road transport of goods and passengers is thus handed over to the monopoly companies . The consequences are disastrous for small and medium-sized transport companies and especially for the workers and drivers who will be exploited even more by the monopoly groups .
The European Parliament 's proposal is heading down an ever more reactionary path than that of the Commission . It removes even the minimum proposed restrictions and demands full liberalisation of the market for international and national transport .
The possibility of limitless loading and reloading operations in the Member States , and unlimited time spent by vehicles and personnel in other Member States after carrying out purely international transport operations , is intended to reduce labour costs . It will violate the rights protecting the wages , labour and insurance of international transport workers and promote the concentration of activities in large multinationals , ravaging the sector if unchecked , and downgrading the quality of services .
The working-class labour movement must vigorously oppose this in a show of insubordination and disobedience to the EU 's anti-labour , anti-popular policy .
in writing . - ( PT ) This proposal is part of a package of measures within the road transport sector .
This particular proposal aims to improve the coherence of Community legislation in the area of international road haulage by merging two existing Regulations , thus ensuring greater efficiency in the application of rules and clarifying and facilitating the application of the cabotage concept .
It also lays down measures to simplify and standardise the Community licence and driver attestation , thus reducing administrative costs and delays , particularly in the event of checks at the roadside .
Member States will also be able to beef up their communication systems which will help with the reporting of offences committed by a road transport undertaking in the Member State in which it is established .
I believe that this text is extremely important to the development of this sector in the European market and will give it the necessary efficiency , regulation and structure conducive to an open , regulated and fair market .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the report by my British colleague , Fiona Hall , who did an excellent job and amended , at first reading of the codecision procedure , the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the selection and authorisation of systems providing mobile satellite services ( MSS ) .
As rapporteur for my political group , the PPE-DE Group , I fought for optimum geographic coverage of services on EU territory .
I am pleased that I have made a contribution to the requirement that applications must include the undertaking that the mobile satellite system proposed will provide a service in at least 60 % of the aggregate land area of the Member States , from the time the service commences .
Moreover , the service proposed must be provided in all the Member States for at least 50 % of the population and in at least 60 % of the aggregate land area of each Member State by the time stipulated by the applicant , but no later than seven years from the date of publication of the text .
Finally , applications will include a commitment on the part of the applicant to allow the mobile satellite system proposed to be made available to public protection and disaster relief services .
There are positive points in this report which we welcome , in particular the proposals on the importance of mobile satellite services covering areas outside the main urban centres of Member States and of providing the best possible services in order to bridge the digital divide , and also the argument that the initial service coverage area of the proposed mobile satellite services should be set at a sufficient level , therefore leveraging the coverage capacity of such systems .
However , we cannot ignore the context in which these proposals are made , namely the liberalisation and advance of the internal market for telecommunications .
We therefore had to vote against this report .
Likewise , we do not agree that Member States should give up their national rights on spectrum allocation because mobile satellite services have a large satellite footprint making it difficult to avoid interference across national boundaries .
In fact , the February 2007 Commission decision did recognise that Member States should retain the right to grant authorisation for the operation of complementary ground components within their territories .
in writing . - ( SV ) The report on the selection and authorisation of systems providing mobile satellite services is about how we are to provide a common European system of satellite services , an important factor in strengthening the continued competitiveness of Europe in advanced technological research and industry .
The report is good and focuses on how this work can be improved .
However , one crucial question regarding the coverage of this service has presented problems from a Swedish point of view , since the compromise settled on 60 % of the EU 's land area .
This means that parts of Sweden will not be covered , which is negative from the point of view of the development of the technology and research .
I therefore chose to abstain .
in writing . - ( FR ) The adoption of this decision is a decisive step towards reinforcement of the internal electronic communications market .
The objective is simple : to give everyone high-speed Internet access and to provide mobile multimedia services and public protection services in the event of natural or human disasters .
The means implemented match the expectations of our fellow citizens , particularly in terms of Internet access : a service for 50 % of the population and at least 60 % of each Member State does constitute an effective means of bridging the digital divide , and it can also be utilised by rural areas .
This decision is even more of a success since it entails much greater harmonisation of management of the radio spectrum on a European scale which , as if we needed any reminding , is an increasingly scarce resource .
This is also the result of the wishes of all the Member States to provide the telecommunications industry with the means to create a services market on a European level , which had previously been much too fragmented .
In short , mobile satellite services ( MSS ) are set to be a success in the industrial sense and also as an enhancement of cultural diversity and pluralism in the media .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the own-initiative report by my German colleague , Klaus-Heiner Lehne , on a simplified business environment for companies in the areas of company law , accounting and auditing , in response to the European Commission 's communication on the subject .
Like my colleagues , I welcome the Commission 's general aim of reducing the administrative burden for businesses in Europe .
This reduction , however , cannot be implemented at the price of legal or accounting uncertainty when the internal market begins to be penetrated by SMEs .
I am pleased that Parliament did not accept the suggestion of raising the thresholds referred to in the communication for micro-entities , below which the entities are exempted from the accounting , auditing and disclosure requirements under European law .
I am also very glad that Parliament voted for an amendment that I proposed in committee which was not adopted at that stage . This recommends that consultations be held relating to the necessity and feasibility of creating a European accounting and audit services regulator .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the Klaus-Heiner Lehne report on a ' simplified business environment for companies ' because I was convinced of the need for ' new ' reforms in company law , accounting and auditing .
Company law is now strongly and , in my view , positively influenced by European rules .
We must prevent this from imposing unnecessary , excessively bureaucratic requirements while avoiding overlap with burdens which are already imposed under national rules .
These reforms will have to be aimed at making for easier reading of the applicable rules and reducing bureaucratic and administrative burdens , especially in accounting .
Simplification will be to the great benefit of undertakings , especially SMEs which as a general rule do not have large legal and accountancy departments .
I am convinced that understandable rules which are easy to apply will first and foremost foster compliance with the law .
At the same time , through clear rules which are easy to identify , the creation of a positive , active economic environment will be fostered .
I believe that the work both of the committee involved and of the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , has resulted in a fair compromise between requirements to comply with the principle of subsidiarity and the creation of a harmonised route for Member States which are engaged in a joint effort to simplify company rules at European level .
We must avoid creating bureaucratic obstacles which serve to muzzle dynamism and entrepreneurship to the point of suffocating them .
in writing . - Amendment 11d calls for the deletion of Paragraph 26 .
There are two ways of interpreting Paragraph 26 .
Some are concerned that it could be a call for ' one share , one vote ' and for that reason have voted for the deletion of the paragraph .
This is not my interpretation .
The paragraph does specifically refer to ' special individual obstacles to the freedom of movement of capital ' and refers to a specific judgment concerning Volkswagen .
My interpretation of this is that the paragraph invites the Commission to remedy special , and extreme , protectionist measures .
For this reason I voted against the amendment and for retention of the paragraph as a statement against protectionism .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am in favour of simplifying reporting procedures and methods of communication between public administrations and entrepreneurs .
At present , the bureaucratic procedures imposed on entrepreneurs are unduly complex .
The report sets out to improve communication and also recommends introducing the XBRL standard .
This is an open standard , which means that it is easily accessible even to the smallest companies .
I therefore decided to support this report .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues wish to make clear that we strongly oppose Paragraph 23 of this report which supports the establishment of a ' common consolidated corporate tax base ( CCCTB ) ' in the EU .
We have , however , made our policy on this clear on many occasions , and the balance of the rest of the report in promoting simplification of business rules has our support , subject to this clarification .
in writing . - ( PT ) The report generally aims to simplify and reduce Community legislation on the grounds that this will particularly benefit SMEs .
It is true that there may be some positive aspects to this simplification and normally we support the simplification of measures relating to company legislation , provided that this results in the removal of red tape .
However , we cannot vote in favour of a report which , on the one hand , calls for simplification while , on the other , it calls for the creation of new Community legal frameworks .
The following proposals in the report led to our abstention due to their dubious and negative nature : legislation on possible coordination between Member States ' tax authorities so as to harmonise the information requests made to businesses ; review of the Statute for the European Company to bring it more closely into line with the rest of Community law ; creation of a new legal framework for undertakings , and establishment of a common consolidated corporate tax base on the grounds that this would render the Statute for the European Company more useful and effective .
in writing . - ( PL ) The Commission communication on a simplified business environment for companies in the areas of company law , accounting and auditing sets out measures aimed at reducing the administrative burden on European companies and ensuring that they can compete effectively at global level .
Not only do the Member States fail to take advantage of the optional measures to reduce bureaucracy , but they also often counter Community concessions through stricter national provisions , thus depriving local companies of the opportunity to simplify procedures pursuant to Union legislation .
The Commission should therefore concentrate on encouraging Member States to harmonise classification of requirements concerning reporting in the area of financial information . It should also press Member States to adopt new technology in order to reduce costs .
Furthermore , a solution involving establishing a common consolidated corporate tax base would render the European company statute more useful and effective .
The proposal to exclude so-called micro-enterprises from the scope of application of the directives on accounting is also to be welcomed . In practice , this would mean exempting them from the requirement to keep accounts , submit an annual financial report and publish the reports required under European legislation .
The proposed changes are certainly commendable . Nonetheless , further simplification of the Union 's acquis in the area of company law and its effective implementation in Member States would seem essential , if European companies are to compete successfully on the ever more demanding global market .
in writing . - I supported Mr Lehne 's report on simplifying the business environment for companies .
The EU has a vital role to play in ensuring that businesses operate in a competitive environment , yet often businesses and Member States find themselves hindered by over-complex rules .
Moves to simplify the business environment are therefore to be welcomed .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of this report , but I consider that we should implement a more comprehensive package of actions to ensure the simplification of the European business environment .
I refer in particular to the problems met when starting a business .
Eurostat shows that , in the EU Member States , the period required in order to fulfil the administrative formalities for starting a business vary between one day and several months .
Moreover , some Member States were ranked far below the OECD average in a ranking of the ease of doing business in various world countries .
Last but not least , the different rules in the 27 Member States as regards company law prevent the transnational movement of capital and the starting of new businesses in a Member State other than the one of origin .
I believe these two elements are essential for achieving the economic growth objective of the Lisbon Strategy and , consequently , they should be promoted more by the European company legislation .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , the European Union is not perceived as an area where the provisions concerning running a business are particularly straightforward , in terms of ease of use .
In fact the general feeling is that this is an overly regulated area by world standards , which creates particular difficulties for small enterprises .
Every step towards simplifying provisions , as indicated in the Commission communication of 10 July 2007 should therefore be welcomed .
The most important and most desirable effect of simplification should be to encourage small companies to operate on the common European market . To date , the latter has not been very accessible to new enterprises from Central and Eastern Europe .
If that aim is to be achieved , national provisions must be harmonised , in addition to repealing unnecessary provisions further to the two options proposed by the Commission .
This does not , however , require harmonising taxation , as suggested in paragraph 23 of the report by Mr Lehne , the so-called light formula for consolidating the corporate tax base .
The rapporteur favours the second of the options proposed by the Commission which is less far-reaching .
Nonetheless , against the background of the European Union 's current tendency to regulate , it would certainly amount to a reversal of the unfavourable trend that definitely restricts opportunities for European firms to compete on the global market .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Commission communication raises fundamental questions which are to determine European policy on company and accounting law .
The Lehne report put forward good answers to these questions , which I can also approve .
However , there is one problematic point where the Commission proposes the introduction of a ' micro-entities ' category .
These are smaller enterprises below a specific threshold which are to be exempt from the European financial reporting and annual accounting obligations .
The Lehne report is in favour of that approach and even suggests raising the thresholds .
In Belgium , 75 % of undertakings would be released from the present transparency requirements .
At first sight , abolition of the accounting system for small enterprises seems a major simplification of the bureaucracy , but , given the importance of financial information for all the parties concerned ( providers of credit , for example ) , it could lead to more bureaucratic red tape and higher costs .
Since there will be no generally accepted financial reporting , enterprises will be asked to provide figures à la carte , in a variety of ways .
Furthermore they are depriving themselves of a useful tool for internal company monitoring which is certainly important for an SME .
I therefore abstained from the final vote .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , higher education has become more widely accessible and growing numbers of women are gaining university degrees .
Nonetheless , women are still poorly represented at the highest levels of academia . Although the majority of lecturers are women ( over 50 % ) , they tend to hold less senior posts .
I am in favour of the idea of promoting family-friendly measures by providing for the introduction of flexible working times and better childcare services . I also support the provision of access to social insurance abroad and the introduction of parental leave conditions that would allow men and women freedom of choice .
The career breaks taken by female scientists for family reasons should not impact negatively on their subsequent career options thus giving men an undue advantage with regard to furthering their scientific career .
I supported the report by Mrs Thomsen because I believe that it rightly tackled issues relating to gender stereotypes . The latter still exist in many European Union Member States .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Britta Thomsen 's report on women and science as I consider it essential to facilitate equal access for both genders to scientific careers .
Factors such as the stereotypes associated with natural science or the obstacles created due to the difficulty of reconciling personal and family life with professional life result in numerous disadvantages and difficulties for women scientists and researchers which exclude many women from scientific research .
The disparities between men and women in relation to their presence in positions of academic and scientific leadership , the respective salaries and the demands of personal life require measures to counteract these gender stereotypes in science , to attract women to scientific careers and to remove the existing inequalities .
in writing . - ( PT ) We know that there are more women than men in higher education , yet when it comes to choosing the research career , women are still outnumbered by men .
The huge increase in participation of women in higher education has neither led to a corresponding change in the ratio of women to men in particular fields of study or professions nor has it eliminated the gender-specific wage gap .
As the rapporteur points out , women researchers are still a minority in the government and higher education sectors with both sectors having an EU average of 35 % women .
In all countries these two sectors nevertheless have higher proportions of women researchers than the business enterprise sector with an EU average of 18 % women , but there are large cross-country variations .
The countries with the fewest women in business research are Germany ( 11.8 % ) , Austria ( 10.4 % ) and the Netherlands ( 8.7 % ) , whereas Latvia , Bulgaria and Romania all have over 40 % .
The distribution of researchers by main fields of science shows different patterns for men and women .
Among male researchers in the higher education sector , 54 % work in natural science and engineering compared to 37 % among women researchers .
in writing . - ( SV ) Improved access for women to activities in the scientific field , as the rapporteur states , is of crucial significance .
How we can arrive at that result in each individual country , on the other hand , is something that varies depending on the country 's culture and other specific features .
The problem manifests itself differently in the EU 's 27 Member States , hence solutions must also vary .
It is not possible to generalise on the situation of women in all 27 Member States .
Junilistan is convinced that the route to equality in practice must be mapped out at national level .
We have therefore chosen to vote against the report .
in writing . - ( PL ) In my capacity as a female professor with many years of experience working in a Polish university , I am aware of the magnitude of the challenges involved and therefore support the report by Mrs Thomsen .
The report takes an interesting approach to the problem of gender discrimination in the scientific world , identifying the social , cultural and financial obstacles causing women to remain under-represented .
There are few of us in the state sector and in higher education , a mere 35 % , and only 18 % in the private sector .
How are we supposed to build a knowledge-based society , develop Europe 's science and economy , meet the challenges of the Lisbon Strategy , and fulfil Europe 's expectations at the threshold of the 21st century without the involvement of women in science ?
We have to create conditions that will enable women to become more widely involved in the scientific world and that will open the doors of university laboratories to them . It must also be made possible for women to aspire to the highest academic posts .
Promotion in the scientific world depends on academic achievement , and a woman 's chance of being appointed to a Chair is three times lower than that of a man .
This is regrettable and cannot be explained exclusively by women 's heavier family commitments .
Few women are members of the decision-making bodies of European higher education institutions , and it is therefore difficult to implement policy on gender equality in these institutions .
We only need to refer to the shameful example of the Scientific Council of the European Research Council . Only five of its twenty-two members are female !
in writing . ? ( PL ) Women 's participation in the labour market is increasing systematically right across the European Union .
Poland is no exception , although women 's participation in the labour market in Poland remains below the Union average .
I should like to emphasise , however , that more Polish women hold positions of responsibility than their counterparts in Western Europe .
I believe that increasing women 's professional activity is an important issue .
In this context , it is important to consider the situation of female scientists , as it has similarities with the situation of all women faced with the need to reconcile professional duties with family life .
Nonetheless , I do not feel that imposing parity should be the way to increase women 's participation in the labour market .
Decisions on employment should be made above all on the grounds of qualifications and competences acquired by women through appropriate education .
The proposal aimed at increasing the transparency of recruitment procedures , competitions for managerial positions and the award of grants for scientific research does seem appropriate , though .
These changes should be accompanied by reform of the labour market , however .
European Union science requires support .
Scientific and technical courses should be promoted as attractive studies for both genders , given the importance of science for economic development .
We should therefore encourage young people to take up higher education courses of this nature .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of Britta Thomsen 's report on women in science because women remain under-represented in the world of science .
The report outlines important steps towards a balance between men and women in the academic sphere .
The promotion of academic careers for women must play a key role .
Great significance is attached to the elimination of gender stereotypes .
The current tendency to assign male and female attributes to individual academic disciplines is detrimental to a fair balance between the sexes .
With the aid of new programmes and recruitment procedures , it is possible to ensure that the skills and qualifications of candidates are paramount , not their sex .
The same must apply to promotion opportunities and pay levels .
A non-binding target quota of at least 40 % women and at least 40 % men on selection panels is one way of ironing out imbalances between the sexes in academic occupations , but applicants ' skills and qualifications must always be paramount .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the report regarding the situation of women in science , which I consider vital for achieving the Lisbon Strategy objectives of growth and employment .

In the new EU Member States , the number of women researchers is approximately 40 % , as compared to the Western countries , where it is approximately 11 % but , unfortunately , a very high percentage of them are employed in fields where research and development expenses are among the lowest .
I would like to call attention to the importance of the article on the integration of the family angle through possibilities for flexible working hours and the creation of child-care facilities , for reconciling family life and a professional career .
I believe the rapid implementation of this report 's provisions will provide an essential support for having a 25 % percentage of the women working in research in management positions in 2010 . I congratulate Mrs. Britta Thomsen on her report .
in writing . - ( ES ) Since I was unable to attend and join in the debate for health reasons , I wish to justify my support of the report .
It was an excellent and comprehensive piece of work covering all the major issues to secure a balanced representation of women and men in science and technology .
It is also a most timely report since , if the EU needs 700 000 more researchers to meet its objectives by 2010 , this is the right time for the Commission and the Member States to implement the specific measures set out in the report to correct this anomaly .
Qualifications and merits are shared equally between men and women .
In fact , at the present time women outnumber men at university and also obtain better results .
There are objective data for all this .
Moreover , governments in particular ought to favour the presence of more women in science and technology , since using only half the brains is not intelligent or efficient .
I am glad Parliament has finally initiated an in-depth examination of this issue .
in writing . - ( FR ) Distorted truths , erroneous statements and sexist remarks primarily stigmatising men represent , in a few words , a few brutal words , the substance of this report .
Equality between men and women and better integration of women in professional careers cannot be conceived in an authoritarian and repressive fashion .
This can only make the results negative and counterproductive .
It is certainly true that delays in terms of integration , wage gaps or a lack of career profiles are legion for women , particularly in the field of science and research .
Once again , however , it is dialogue , implementation of non-restrictive measures to encourage girls to study science long term , and active support for women throughout their careers that will finally move them forward in society .
in writing . - ( SV ) Britta Thomsen 's report notes that female researchers are in a minority in the EU .
They have inferior financial security and in their professional careers , and they are penalised to an increasing extent by their family responsibilities .
This is serious , both on grounds of principle and as regards practical consequences .
Modern economies - and democracies - cannot afford to give negative special treatment to persons of academic eminence .
I therefore voted for the report .
Nevertheless I would point out that parts of the report were not put to the vote and I find it difficult to see how that is reasonable .
Paragraph 7 asks that age be taken into account as a criterion of excellence together with family situation , including the number of the researcher 's dependents .
I think that would be difficult to apply in practice and might even be counter-productive .
There is always a risk in simplifying the gender roles and speaking of ' qualities that tend to be more prevalent in women scientists ' or creating absolute standards to measure the performance of researchers .
On the other hand , I wholeheartedly support the recommendation to introduce non-binding targets requiring that both genders be represented by at least 40 % each in scientific committees of various kinds .
I also agree with the criticism that the EU sometimes aims short when it comes to equality .
The policy of presence must not be underestimated - although it should not be turned into a religion .
in writing . - ( PL ) Women make a major contribution to the development of science .
The Polish Nobel Prize winner for physics and chemistry , Marie Skłodowska-Curie , is one fine example .
Streets , hospitals and a university have been named after this famous scientist .
When opting for a career in science , women face a greater challenge than men do .
This is partly due to their role in childbearing and bringing up their families .
Women scientists therefore need to be supported through the development of preferential maternity leave conditions , and through special grants for women who are bringing up children whilst simultaneously pursuing a scientific career .
Contrary to what is advocated in the motion for a resolution before us today , however , it is not desirable to impose percentages for female representation on academic staff , or on committees of various sorts , in order to ensure gender equality .
Decisions on jobs and careers in science should not be made on the basis of gender .
Instead , they should be made on the basis of the particular person 's individual choice , ability and knowledge .
in writing . - ( SK ) I would like to thank Mrs Thomsen for her report which points to a certain type of discrimination against women in science and research .
Although women make up more than 50 % of EU students , they hold only 15 % of senior academic posts in science and research .
University study is seldom followed by a result matching the significant amount of time and finances invested in it .
After many years of study , women often sacrifice their personal and working lives or have to reconcile them .
It should be in the interest of society to cooperate with and support citizens with a high intellectual potential and to let this potential reflect in the cultural , spiritual , historic and scientific heritage of the nation .
Motherhood in particular has an impact on women 's career opportunities , paradoxically punishes them in terms of the opportunity to get to top positions , fulfil themselves and be justly rewarded , and does not offer them adequate compensation for the social investment of giving birth to and bringing up children who will be responsible for tomorrow .
I think that this could be solved by a reform in the area of study conditions for young women , long-distance studying and working , and life-long learning , as well as by encouraging fathers to support mothers who want to become scientists .
The state too has a responsibility for supporting women participating in scientific work : for supporting them during their studies , helping them to reconcile their family and working lives and to receive just rewards for their work , providing them with direct social benefit payments and helping , in as natural a way as possible , with child care .
in writing . - ( PT ) The dismantling of ships continues to have a major social and ecological impact , both because of the way in which this is done , which can be harmful to the environment , and because the number of ships under construction has been increasing for years .
This explains the continuing importance of innovation and development in the shipbuilding industry in the Member States in order to improve ships and make them less environmentally damaging .
Since 2005 , the IMO ( International Maritime Organization ) has been cooperating with the ILO ( International Labour Organization ) and UNEP ( United Nations Environment Programme ) to draw up binding international rules on the clean dismantling of ships .
Negotiations are now proceeding on a draft convention which should be adopted by 2009 but would then only enter into force a few years later .
According to the current draft , the convention would not apply to warships or other ships which are the property of the State .
No agreement has yet been reached on standards outside the framework of the IMO , basic standards for ship-recycling businesses , reporting obligations ( including inter-state notification ) and enforcement instruments .
in writing . - I welcome the Blokland report on the Green Paper on ship dismantling .
Ship breaking is a dangerous trade which has a high cost both in terms of human life and on the environment .
It is unacceptable for the EU to turn a blind eye to the export of ships to developing countries for breaking up .
These ships are in effect hazardous waste and it is vital that the EU acts to prevent this export .
I welcome this House 's support for my own group 's amendments which highlight the urgency for action to be taken in this area .
in writing . - Johannes Blokland 's report on the Green Paper on better ship dismantling seeks to achieve environmentally and socially sustainable ship dismantling .
The report aims to address problems currently encountered in that sector , particularly the major health and safety concerns for workers in the shipyards of Bangladesh and India .
I therefore voted in support of the report 's recommendations .
in writing . - ( PT ) European concerns about the environment and working conditions in third countries merit our agreement in principle .
The export of conditions of misery , whether for the environment , labour or in any other respect , can never form part of our vision of worldwide trade and exchange .
It is vital , however , that we do not defend such an absolute and modern view of our position on certain values that our focus on a single part obscures the bigger picture .
The adoption of drastic measures to stop practices that are in truth social or environmental dumping , but which would also lead to the destruction of an economic sector in a third country and would therefore cause even greater misery for an extremely vulnerable part of the population is not in line with what we defend .
Gradual reforms and the imposition of tailor-made standards that promote development are a more effective and desirable solution .
We cannot put a stop to misery and human degradation if we can only offer , as an alternative , misery and human degradation .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the interim report by my German colleague , Karl-Heinz Florenz , on the scientific facts of climate change as considered by Parliament 's Temporary Committee .
Scientific consensus on the origins and causes of climate change is well-established and recognised worldwide .
Scientific evidence from all continents and most oceans shows that many natural systems have already been affected by regional climate changes due to historical carbon emissions from the industrialised countries .
It has also been scientifically proven that the underlying causes of global warming are predominantly man-made .
I welcome the fact that the report stresses the need for further analysis and research into the consequences of climate change , such as the effects on economic competitiveness , energy costs and social development in Europe , the role of land use , forests and deforestation , the role of the marine environment and calculation of the external costs of climate change in industry , not least the transport sector , including quantification of the effects of air transport pollution .
in writing . - ( IT ) The last intergovernmental conference on climate change and the various conferences within the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCCC ) have shown that the greenhouse gases produced by man are the cause of climate change and that the increase in the world 's temperature must be halted at 2 ° C above pre-industrial levels .
I therefore agree with the Temporary Committee on Climate Change and the rapporteur on the need for more urgent , major studies into the effects of climate change , monitoring phenomena such as desertification , melting of the ice-caps , changes in the marine environment , catastrophic atmospheric incidents and so on .
The latest reports of the European Environment Agency point to the need to do much more to comply with the Kyoto and other targets for reduction set out at the March 2007 EU Council .
In the light of the energy and climate package in the communication on ' Limiting Global Climate Change to 2 degrees Celsius ' , I am nonetheless persuaded that further measures can be taken to improve ' energy efficiency ' , which would give rise to considerable savings in greenhouse gas emissions .
This would include a labelling system stating the greenhouse gas footprint .
I am of the view that individuals , European citizens and the peoples of third countries should be more directly involved in promoting awareness and active involvement in the fight against climate change through small steps to save energy .
in writing . - ( DE ) Climate change is a serious issue and presents mankind with a formidable challenge .
The extent to which it is the result of human activity , however , is completely unclear .
The latest scientific findings certainly cannot yet be regarded as hard and fast evidence and are still in a state of flux ; they are not the be-all and end-all .
Besides , the report refers to some alleged facts which are actually fallacies .
Assumptions and false assertions , however , cannot serve as a basis for the development of any rational , effective , affordable and socially acceptable measures .
This is why I voted against the report .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have today voted for the interim report on the scientific facts of climate change .
It requires strong backing and determination to achieve the best possible results in meeting the political challenges of climate change .
In this context we want to stress the importance of ensuring that research is free and that criticism and questioning are a key prerequisite for the progress and development of all research .
To limit this possibility is not just a threat to research itself but also a restriction of the right of every individual to express his or her views .
Poverty is the biggest polluter and the ambition to mitigate climate change does not conflict with growth and modernisation .
An essential condition for the progress of poor countries to prosperity , hence also for the development of resources and possibilities of investing in more modern and cleaner technology , is that they should be able to trade their goods freely .
Against this background , any carbon dioxide tariffs or the like on imports constitute an inappropriate solution which risks running counter to its purpose .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the interim report of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change on the scientific facts of climate change ( findings and recommendations for decision-making ) because I am convinced that the broad scientific consensus on the human origins of climate change urgently requires increased action by the political powers , with particular emphasis on reducing greenhouse gas emissions and a future international climate change agreement .
Increasing and disseminating scientific understanding of the climate change phenomenon will make people more aware of the need to alter their lifestyles and will make the decision-making processes more responsible , informed and effective .
Encouraging research into the economic and social impacts of climate change must be a priority .
in writing . - ( PT ) This is yet another report which , despite starting off with some correct statements about the current situation , makes little or no progress with regard to the solutions required .
It is unclear on the recommended measures and limits itself to listing some vague proposals and justifications .
It seems more aimed at facilitating the launch of new companies seeking to make ever greater profits from new activities in the areas of the environment and energy , at the cost of climate change .
I therefore want to say that it would be good to show the same effort and persistence , and also concern , with regard to other global problems that are fundamentally ignored or merely confined to a list of chronic concerns : elimination of curable diseases , protection of soil and habitats , exhaustion of finite resources , especially hydrocarbons , and so on .
In conclusion , the rapporteur considers that the scientific basis of climate change is settled and recommends that the European Parliament 's Temporary Committee continues its work and presents , at the end of its mandate , a report to Parliament containing , as appropriate , recommendations as to actions or initiatives to be taken on the EU 's future integrated policy on climate change .
We will await this future report .
in writing . - ( PT ) The scientific facts set out in this report were discussed at length with world experts during meetings of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change and cannot therefore be lightly called into question .
Like the Florenz report , I welcome the fourth report of the IPCC ( Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ) as the most comprehensive study on climate change . I agree that it is absolutely essential to avoid an increase of more than 2ºC in the global temperature , so as to avoid the most catastrophic scenarios , suggesting that the ambitious EU targets for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions should be maintained .
As this is the most credible compendium of information currently available , cutting off at the root those recurrent ideas of certain isolated extremists who continue to question whether human activity is really the main cause of global warning , the Florenz report sends a clear signal that the European Parliament will maintain its strict and ambitious position in the fight against climate change . It therefore has my support .
in writing . - ( FR ) In the 1960s , having agreed the benefits of planning , the French Parliament voted a growth rate for the economy every year with a view to taking its decisions on that basis , since it turned out for several years in succession that actual growth was exactly as it had voted .
I get the same impression from reading Mr Florenz 's report : the impression that this Parliament intends to vote on the world 's temperature .
Let me make this clear : what I am criticising is not man 's need to protect his environment , to preserve the immense diversity of nature or , in terms of economics , to find the means to use natural resources better in order to save them .
It is the ritual sacrifice to the new religion of climate and its new gurus , these partially-minded scientists who pour anathema on all those whose work opposes their untouchable conclusions .
It is the systematic stigmatisation of Man as a supposedly evil entity , especially the Western and European variety .
This is institutionalised repentance .
It is the industrial and economic suicide of Europe , alone at the altar of so-called global warming , with no benefit to the environment worldwide , but the worst human and social consequences for the peoples of Europe .
That is why I voted against this report .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Florenz report on climate change and think that it is right that this Parliament takes the issue so seriously .
Efforts to combat climate change require action at all levels , and the EU institutions as well as the nations of Europe must all work together to move towards a low-carbon economy .
The vote on the report comes on the same day that a major energy conference takes place in Aberdeen .
The Scottish Government has signalled their intention for Scotland to become the green energy capital of Europe .
That government fully supports the EU 's targets for renewables and is committed to a non-nuclear Scotland producing 50 % of its electricity demand from renewable sources by 2020 .
I hope that other nations throughout Europe can look to Scotland as a good example in the fight against climate change .
in writing . - Scientific findings prove the human origins of the current global warming trend and Mr Florenz 's report re-iterates these results .
There is an urgent need for action at EU level to combat climate change and limit the increase in global temperature to no more than 2 C above pre-industrial levels .
Unlike some members from the Conservative Party , I fully accept these facts and voted in support of Mr Florenz 's report " Scientific Facts of Climate Change : Findings and Recommendations for Decision Making " .
in writing . - ( DE ) When we here in Europe invest in the latest environmentally friendly technology and in renewable energy , at however great an expense , while a country like China has a new coal-fired power station coming on stream every week , our best efforts here can only be a drop in the ocean .
We have a ludicrous situation in which those nations that accelerate climate change through unbridled industrialisation and overexploitation of natural resources and which are not prepared to exercise restraint expect the West , and particularly Europe , to help them out when they are hit by disasters .
We are supposed to protect the environment , often to the detriment of our industry and our import trade , and then even provide the polluters with humanitarian aid in the event of a disaster .
Unless we are all content with a global situation in which any hope of improvement will always be a pipe dream , we must sharply increase the pressure on those six countries that are responsible for almost 50 % of global greenhouse gas emissions .
The interim report of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change does not contain any new ideas , thoughts or recommendations useful to the peoples of Europe regarding environmental protection .
It perpetuates the EU 's well-known anti-popular policy of providing a ' green ' excuse for the over-accumulation of capital . It confines itself to reproducing the findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change .
The report considers the 2 ˚ C ceiling on global warming to be a ' strategic objective ' of the EU , while accepting that ' such a level of warming would already heavily impact on our society and individual lifestyles ' .
It says nothing about the responsibility capitalists have assumed in over-exploiting natural resources . Instead of calling for measures at least to make monopolies more accountable , it fully adopts the multinational propaganda that we are all to blame for the aggravation of climatic conditions and stresses that ' individual changes in lifestyle patterns are necessary ' .
The agreements reached in Kyoto , Bali , etc. have proved ineffective : their primary objective is not environmental protection , but the protection of capital and its profits . They commercialise the environment and develop a new , profitable economic sector : the green economy .
The solution to environmental problems will not be provided by the multinationals and monopolies responsible for today 's situation , but by the peoples who have to suffer the consequences .
in writing . - ( PL ) History teaches us that new scientific findings can prove that theories previously widely believed to be true may lack any factual basis .
I believe the science relating to climate change , confirming global warming , has not yet proved to be sufficiently well-founded .
It certainly has not been proved to such an extent as to allow us , with a clear conscience , to draft law resulting in the imposition of specific behaviour in Member States of the European Union .
We can see the increase in the average temperature of the global atmosphere . No answer has yet emerged , however , to the question as to the extent to which this is due to human activity .
The scientific world is divided on the subject .
Certain scientists believe major climate changes are a natural cyclical phenomenon that has affected the world for millions of years . They maintain that those scientists that issue warnings concerning the impact of human beings on climate change do so in order to attract funds for research and spread alarm amongst the population .
Other scientists state that human beings ' ability to predict long-term climate change is very limited . They allege that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) is guided by politics rather than by science .
In addition , the claim that a majority of scientists support the view that climate change is due to the action of human beings is dubious .
The aforementioned counter-arguments are readily accessible .
They are also irrefutable , and raise doubt and the question : can any sort of cohesive policy be built on uncertain scientific arguments put forward by lobby groups ?
in writing . - ( FR ) I am in favour of the report by Mr Florenz on behalf of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change since he analyses the incidences and effects of climate change , insofar as they are vouched for by scientific proof .
Thus the claim that the costs of climate change could account for between 5 % and 20 % of GDP by 2050 unless some extremely ambitious measures are taken ought to concern us .
Even if all the Member States have made good progress to date , we must nonetheless be much more ambitious in our efforts to reduce emissions .
We must also remain vigilant as to the potential harmful effects of promoting biofuels over world food supplies and deforestation .
in writing . - ( PT ) Scientific discussions cannot involve debates about beliefs , and doubts about the accuracy of the majority opinion cannot be interpreted as negativism or as a political choice .
Furthermore , recent episodes such as the debate about the unwanted or unexpected implications of the incentive to increase biofuel production clearly reveal how constant doubt is the only scientific certainty that we must embrace without hesitation .
On the other hand , in discussions about the options given the scientific facts , here we are clearly in the area of political choice .
Although I do not regard myself as scientifically competent to give an opinion on the first question , on the second I consider that I have a duty to do so .
I have argued and I would stress that , faced with the predictable increase in consumption ( particularly of energy ) by our enormous population due to the positive effects of globalisation , we must find scientific answers and technological solutions .
Some changes in behaviour , both individual and collective , are certainly welcome .
However , it is in science that we will find the basic solutions that we need .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted against this report in the final vote because I take the struggle against climate change seriously and cannot subscribe to dogmatic and apocalyptic formulations that would spread alarm among the people of Europe .
The report presents scientific findings with a 60-70 % probability as proven facts .
If I were one of the four Horsemen of the Apocalypse in John 's Book of Revelation , I would rather be sitting on the white horse than on the pale one .
Climate change is a sensitive issue that cannot be reduced to slogans .
in writing . - ( FR ) I abstained on the own-initiative report by my Dutch colleague , Ria Oomen-Ruijten , on Turkey 's 2007 progress report with a view to accession , even though , like our Committee on Foreign Affairs , I welcome the undertaking by Prime Minister Erdoğan to make 2008 the year of reforms and to turn Turkey into a modern and prosperous democracy based on a secular state and a pluralist society .
However , we would do well to recall Turkey 's undertaking to ensure good neighbourly relations with Greece and Bulgaria and the need to secure a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus question based on EU principles .
Furthermore , Turkey is not answering the call to end the economic blockade of Armenia and start a process of reconciliation , allowing for a frank and open discussion of past events .
These negotiations are important for the EU and Turkey since the latter is taking up the Community acquis .
Under no circumstances , however , should the negotiations prejudge the final political decision on Turkey 's accession to the EU .
in writing . - The Fine Gael delegation of the EPP-ED Group voted in favour of the overall Oomen-Ruijten report on Turkey 's progress in 2007 .
We support the reforms which Turkey is undertaking towards democracy , good governance and the rule of law .
These steps are positive both for Turkey and the EU and we support Turkey 's efforts towards reform .
However , we the undersigned , voted against Amendment 14 relating to paragraph 16 in the report which included the words ' sexual and reproductive rights ' .
We voted against this section of the amendment for the reasons set out in our joint declaration to Parliament in the plenary of 13 March 2008 .
in writing . - I voted for the Oomen-Ruijten report on Turkey 's progress towards membership of the EU in 2007 .
I do believe that Turkey should be capable of joining the Union .
Currently there are difficulties on issues of trade-union and human rights and the rights of minorities such as the Kurds and the Christians .
However , progress is being made , albeit slowly , and should be acknowledged .
I did support the amendments dealing with the Armenian genocide .
I know it was a long time ago , but a nation must come to terms with its history and so far Turkey has failed to come to terms with this bloody stain on its record .
It may not be a final barrier to membership of the EU , but we cannot in all honestly just sweep it under an all too convenient Turkish carpet .
in writing . - ( FR ) The remarks by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten in her report on Turkey 's progress with a view to accession show , as though any further proof were required , that Turkey , in terms of its civilisation , its mindset , its traditions - all perfectly respectable , of course - is not a European country .
Moreover , it is not necessary to look elsewhere to uncover the reasons for the immense difficulties encountered during the accession negotiations .
The French Presidency , commencing on 1 July , may be the chance to raise this essential ambiguity : the fiction of Turkey 's European vocation as set out in the 1963 Treaty .
Betraying his electoral promises , Mr Sarkozy now says he wishes to continue negotiations , and in fact start up fresh negotiations in areas ' not directly linked to accession ' , according to a formula as demagogic as it is hypocritical which solves no problems whatsoever .
Who can be persuaded that discussions merely concern a ' quasi-accession ' ?
I fear that the sole objective in retaining the French Constitution 's compulsory consultation of the people on any new European accession is to let citizens and citizens alone take responsibility for 45 years of political and diplomatic cowardice not attributable to Turkey itself , but only to their governments .
in writing . - ( PT ) Despite certain contradictions , it is a fact that Turkey is strategically important for the EU 's ambitions , particularly given the current deepening crisis in the capitalist system .
While its final status remains in doubt - full member of the EU or of a future Mediterranean Union - what seems certain is that the EU is trying to find solutions which best serve the interests of the major economic and financial groups in the main countries , in particular Germany .
Turkey offers a huge market which is awakening various appetites .
It is a vast country , with a huge and cheap workforce and a plentiful supply of consumers , which , however , is not permitted to commemorate the first of May , as was recently seen in the brutal repression by Turkish security forces of trade union members and demonstrators .
It is a vast territory that occupies an important geostrategic position between Europe , Asia and the Middle East , that is playing a central role in the dispute about ownership of and access to the energy resources of Central Asia ( such as the Nabucco project ) and that has a key role to play in the US-NATO-EU partnership .
Turkey is also a country whose authorities are militarily and illegally occupying part of the territory of an EU Member State , Cyprus .
in writing . - ( CS ) Although the motion for a European Parliament resolution quotes a number of documents , the fundamental information is missing .
This country has been a candidate country since 1963 .
Conditions for opening negotiations have been discussed all the time .
The so-called Copenhagen criteria , laid down in 1993 , cannot be found in the opening preambles of the text .
When we sink our teeth into the European Commission 's Turkey 2007 progress report , we find out that , although some progress has been made , the legislation adopted in regard to national minorities has not yet been sufficiently implemented .
The fact that approximately 10 % of the Turkish population capable of work are employed in the countries of the EU is an indicator of the depth of the long-standing relations between Turkey and the EU .
What will surprise us is the state of implementation of regulations in the economic area , rather debatable so far .
Although these regulations are formally enshrined in Turkish legislation , we often see a very ' un-European ' approach in dealing with individual cases .
We can say that , although Turkey has achieved significant success , in many areas the differences between Turkey and most countries of the EU ( including the Balkan States ) have not significantly diminished so far .
The army 's influence over the country 's political system and the powerful status of Sunni Islam are the most obvious features of Turkish society , distinguishing it from EU countries .
The report portrays the present situation of the society rather accurately .
Although paragraph 12 of the resolution is not balanced , the GUE / NGL Group will not vote against it .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report illustrates the autistic side of the leaders of Brussels ' Europe in their denials of the evidence : Turkey is an Asian country .
Their blindness leads them to deny the foreseeable consequences of its accession .
With a population of over 100 million by 2020 , Turkey will have the EU 's largest population and will therefore be the major state in the European institutions .
This means our Parliament runs the risk of being dominated , not by the PPE-DE Group or by the Socialist Group , but by AKP Islamists .
Turkey will also be the country receiving most assistance : Turkish regions will absorb the vast majority of structural funds , and its ten million farmers will destroy the common agricultural policy .
This refusal to accept reality also leads our governments to ignore the wishes of the peoples of Europe .
Thus , having imposed the European constitutional treaty on France which the country rejected in 2005 , Mr Sarkozy is making ready to remove Article 88.5 of the Constitution , submitting the accession of new EU states to a referendum .
If Brussels succeeded in imposing Turkey 's accession , we would have to suggest our nations quit such a setup , which would be European only in name , in order to build another Europe , a European Europe : the Europe of nations .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the report on Turkey 's progress towards EU membership in 2007 .
I must express my dismay , however , at reading in the German newspaper Die Welt that Turkey , which likes to be portrayed as a moderate Islamic country , has enacted a law prohibiting the purchase and public serving of wine in glasses .
Wine is a European cultural asset which is legally manufactured in most Member States of the EU and which can be sold and consumed in all Member States .
Such a law is incompatible with full membership of the EU .
All legally manufactured products - and that includes wine - are goods , the free movement of which within the internal market must be guaranteed .
Such a ban also infringes the anti-discrimination rules of the EU .
A country that restricts the free movement of any legally manufactured good from other Member States cannot be a full member of the EU .
The Prime Minister , Mr Erdoğan , pledged that 2008 would be the year of reform , designed to make Turkey a modern democracy based on a secular state and a pluralist society .
In view of the Turkish ban on the sale and consumption of wine in glasses , I have to ask whether this pledge amounts to ' words , idle words ' .
in writing . - Ria Oomen-Ruijten 's Turkey 2007 Progress Report is a comprehensive and encouraging analysis of the country 's progress towards accession .
Turkey appears to have made progress on areas such as freedom of speech and judicial reform .
The Government 's proposals to reform Article 301 , a hurdle to full democratic freedom in the country , are also to be welcomed .
Of course , further effort is needed in areas pertaining to rights for minority groups in the country and the current case going through the Constitutional Court is of concern .
I support the report 's recommendations and I voted in favour .
in writing . - ( SK ) I welcome Turkey 's 2007 progress report by my colleague , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , which urges the Turkish Government to fulfil its promises to pursue reforms and modernise the country .
I also want to express my long-held view , which is a view of the vast majority of Europeans as well , that the EU should not offer Turkey the prospect of full membership .
Geographically , culturally and spiritually , Turkey is outside the European identity concept .
In addition to that , the budget of the Union is not and will not be capable of coping with the burden that Turkey 's full membership would bring .
That said , I support the vision of close cooperation , the so-called ' strategic partnership ' between the EU and Turkey .
I also see the significance of the report in this light .
I welcome the fact that Turkey has achieved some progress in several areas in 2007 .
In spite of that , the dismal human rights situation still persists .
In the context of this report , we should insist more on improving the situation of the national minorities ( namely the Kurdish minority ) and on introducing complete freedom of speech and religion .
I also support the call for Article 301 of the Penal Code to be abolished and for the Greek Orthodox Halki Seminary to be immediately re-opened .
We also must make demands on Turkey to look back upon its past and accept the fact of the Armenian genocide , as well as the illegality of its military interference in Cyprus .
in writing . - ( DE ) Time and again , Turkey demonstrates that it is not ready for EU membership by oppressing its minorities , by launching air strikes against a neighbouring country and , most recently , by vetoing the appointment of the head of the Austrian archaeological excavation team in Ephesus , apparently because of anti-Turkish comments made by a member of her family .
The cosmetic amendments to the article of the Penal Code prohibiting the denigration of Turkey and Turkishness are diverting the attention of Brussels from the use of brute force against demonstrators and from the acts of military aggression against northern Iraq .
In view of Turkey 's lack of readiness for EU membership , the only option is immediate cessation of the accession negotiations ; talks on a privileged partnership could be conducted as an alternative .
Every report on Turkey is an expression of the EU 's imperialist competitive designs on that country .
This particular report has opted to support the Turkish Government by trying to place undue emphasis on the progress Turkey is making in various areas , which is contrary to reality .
As usual , the report sings the praises of democratic rights , despite the well-known autocratic , repressive policy of the Turkish Government , as was recently proved by the brutal suppression of the May Day demonstrations .
The report tolerates Turkey 's anti-Kurdish policy .
The report indirectly supports Turkish attacks on Iraqi territory . While condemning the ' violence ' perpetrated by the PKK and ' other terrorist groups ' , it merely advises the Turkish army not to engage in any ' disproportionate military operations ' .
The report glosses over the continuing Turkish occupation of Cyprus and avoids categorically and unconditionally demanding the withdrawal of Turkish military forces .
The report welcomes Turkey 's active participation in the imperialist missions and interventions of the EU and NATO .
Given Turkey 's position in the imperialist system and its competitiveness in the wider arena , the EU aims to use the accession process to its advantage in order to gain control of the energy and geostrategic resources in the same arena .
For these reasons we are voting against the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report is extremely balanced : it welcomes the legislative initiatives made by the Turkish authorities to continue the process of reforms , but also presses Turkey to step up the pace of reform in order to guarantee respect for the principles of the rule of law .
The Kurdish issue , including its cultural and economic aspects , must likewise be addressed .
In the same way , the matter of equal opportunities for women must be enshrined in the new draft constitution .
The Turkish Government is also asked to respect pluralism and religious diversity in a secular democratic state .
Negotiations may continue only with full adherence to the principles and values of the European Union .
in writing . - ( PT ) The progress made in various areas of society , the economy and politics in recent years gives us good reason to note how the desire to accede to the European Union can successfully lead to major reforms in countries where this possibility exists .
As this is the case with Turkey , and as these negotiations have always remained open , there is no longer any need to stress the importance of taking full advantage of this opportunity in order , whatever the outcome of the negotiations , to promote the most comprehensive and essential reforms in Turkey .
Alongside the recognition given by this report - and also the statements made by senior EU officials , in particular the Commission President - we cannot fail to be concerned about the legal proceedings brought against the AK Party .
Although the fact that there has been no military intervention is preferable , we still regret this attempt to obtain , through the courts , what the ballot boxes have denied .
On the other hand , the persistent doubts about the true intentions of the AK Party are also worrying .
The defence of religious freedom , as we understand it in the European Union , merits our agreement .
The widespread imposition of one religious view on the whole of society would be unacceptable .
in writing . - Having supported the report , may I remind you that the first speech that I made in this Chamber , on 13 December 2004 , concerned Turkey 's progress towards accession , insisting that before even considering their membership , Turkey should first recognise the legitimate Greek Cypriot government , acknowledge the 1915 Armenian genocide and improve the situation of the world 's largest stateless nation , the Kurds .
In four years none of those issues has been resolved .
There has been no remarkable progress in Turkey 's relations with Cyprus , no sign of willingness to admit past crimes .
Instead , the Turkish Army , with the authorisation of the Turkish Parliament , is carrying out genocide against the Kurds .
The European Union must take a firmer stance on Turkey and halt the negotiations until the aforementioned issues have been resolved .
in writing . - ( FR ) By voting against the report by the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the situation in Turkey , the French UMP Delegation wishes to state that the Commission , the Member State Governments and the European Parliament are wrong to continue stoking the illusion of Turkey 's accession .
The UMP is not opposed to Ria Oomen-Ruijten 's report , which is an excellent piece of work , but to a refusal to take into consideration the reality of Turkey and its policy , at odds with our project for European integration .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against this report and the resolution proposed in order to state once more my opposition to the principle of Turkey 's accession to the EU .
The European Commission , the Member State Governments and the European Parliament are wrong to continue stoking this illusion , which is duping both Turkish citizens and European citizens .
I refuse to associate myself with a political posture that takes no account of the reality of Turkey and its policy , at odds with our project for European integration .
If Europe is a space of shared values , we cannot close our eyes to the disturbing tendencies of the Turkish authorities in relation to the principles of the rule of law , freedom of expression and thought , or respect for minority rights .
Taking a soft line with the Turkish authorities vis-à-vis their responsibilities is a strategic error that distances them from the progress to be made , not towards accession to the EU , but to allow the Turkish people to reap the benefits of their basic rights and social and economic development in Turkey .
A privileged partnership with Turkey will help these objectives to be met , with respect for the integrity of both parties .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Tragic situation in Burma ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the tragic situation in Burma .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) We are all still shaken by the human suffering that the destructive cyclone Nargis caused to the poor and oppressed population of Burma , or Myanmar .
We expressed the European Union 's deepest sympathy in numerous statements published in the aftermath of the disaster .
Moreover , the European Union immediately promised urgent funds in aid of humanitarian needs .
So far the Union 's commitments have exceeded the sum of EUR 60 million .
At the same time it should be emphasised that the amount that has been promised will top up the already existing aid provided by the European Union , which is not a small amount .
In spite of this , the key issue continues to be the access to areas that have been affected , and how to distribute help quickly .
Last Tuesday the Presidency , in cooperation with the Commissioner Louis Michel , convened an extraordinary session of the European Union Council .
On that occasion the development ministers agreed that there was a danger of an even greater tragedy if the Burmese authorities were not ready for a better cooperation .
The situation is still critical .
This is why the European Council urged the Burmese authorities to introduce urgent measures facilitating access to help for people who are in dire straits .
The Council welcomed the efforts made by the Commissioner Louis Michel to convince the authorities in Burma / Myanmar that the humanitarian help is urgent and neutral .
At the same time we regret that the Burmese authorities were not prepared to make use of all the help that the European Union and the international community are prepared to provide .
In addition , the Council has expressed its full support to the UN General Secretary and to all the initiatives given by the UN bodies that would help to meet humanitarian requirements .
We also welcome the UN General Secretary Ban Ki-moon 's visit to Burma , scheduled for tomorrow .
The Council has raised the issue of the situation in Burma at all political meetings that have been recently held with its Asian partners .
The Asian countries have been invited to influence the Burmese authorities and to convince them that the nature of the international humanitarian aid is neutral and unbiased .
On 19 May the Foreign Ministers of the ASEAN Member States met in Singapore .
The European Union had previously presented this group with a demarche asking the countries in the region to influence the Burmese authorities to open the borders to humanitarian aid and humanitarian aid workers .
On Monday , 26 May , the General Affairs and External Relations Council will have a debate on the humanitarian situation in Burma , and on the denial of access to humanitarian aid experts and the delivery of aid to the affected area .
Burma , or Myanmar , also continues to be a priority topic in the Council 's debates because of the political situation in that country .
The fact that , in spite of the huge scale of the humanitarian disaster , the Military Junta has not cancelled the national referendum is a cause for concern .
We believe that this may lead to irregularities in the new constitution 's adoption procedure .
We are also concerned due to reports of escalating intimidation during the period of preparations for the referendum .
I should emphasise that the European Union is also disappointed because the authorities have not paid any attention to the calls of the United Nations for a more inclusive and more legitimate transition to democracy .
I should like to affirm that the European Union will continue to support the endeavours of the United Nations .
Finally , please take note that on 29 April the European Union revised the common position adopted back in November 2007 .
This position , which was adopted as a response to suppression of peaceful protests , from now on includes firmer restrictive measures against Burma .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first and foremost I wish to thank you for placing Burma on the agenda for this sitting .
In view of the scale of the catastrophe caused by Cyclone Nargis on 2 May , we suggested the Presidency call an extraordinary meeting of the Council of EU Foreign Affairs Ministers .
The Council meeting was convened as soon as possible by the Slovenian Presidency , who I wish to thank , and was held on 12 May .
At the meeting the EU called for increased cooperation by the Burmese authorities to allow access and distribution of international humanitarian aid .
I decided to follow up the call directly by visiting Burma on 15 and 16 May .
During my mission , which I made clear was strictly humanitarian and non-political , I was able to meet the Burmese authorities and the representatives of humanitarian organisations in Burma , and I made a visit on the ground to the areas affected around Yangon .
I had two and a half hours of quite intense meetings and discussions with the Minister for Planning - who obviously held most authority and was certainly the most authoritarian of the three I met - the Minister for Social Welfare and the Minister for Health .
What emerged very clearly from my mission was that the Burmese authorities are still extremely reluctant to create the operational conditions normally required to provide an international humanitarian response to meet local needs .
It is equally clear to me that an approach seeking to impose international humanitarian aid on the Burmese authorities , in due consideration of our current means , is doomed to failure and could even be counterproductive .
All the humanitarian organisations in Burma told me this , and confirmed that the problem is obviously not the lack of organisations on the ground , or even a lack of funds , since a lack of means also certainly depends on access to international experts and professionals , but rather lack of access .
My mission certainly made a modest contribution to opening up a tiny window to gradually create a minimum humanitarian space for international humanitarian aid .
The Burmese authorities provided a partial response to various specific demands : for example , visas for experts working for the Commission were extended by two weeks .
They had been issued with three-day visas and these were extended for two weeks .
We had requested one month .
We also clarified a situation that appeared genuinely serious .
At certain locations , the local authorities were demanding a permit , and therefore written authorisation , even for local workers , meaning people employed by our agencies , by the UN or by NGOs , and in most cases this was of course impossible .
This was clarified , and obviously no authorisation is required for local workers .
Authorisation is also no longer required to enter the disaster areas , in particular Pathein airport .
I also asked for a second airport to be opened up for planes arriving with equipment , in other words Pathein airport which is a military airport .
I was told that this was not possible because the technical standards used by the control tower differed from international standards and , in any case , that this would not make the work any easier since the roads between Rangoon and the delta , the area worst affected , were in much better condition and much easier to use .
Unfortunately I had no authorisation to check this kind of information for myself .
I feel it is important for international pressure to be maintained , both by neighbouring countries and by the international community as a whole .
I ought to say that , in my discussions with the authorities , I also made a specific request - I made , in fact , five specific requests which I will tell you about in just a moment - that doctors and medical staff from neighbouring countries be allowed to deploy in the areas worst hit , and they obtained authorisation for this on the day I left .
This means that 140 doctors were deployed and also medical staff from Laos , Cambodia , India , Bangladesh and Thailand .
They were thus able to visit the areas worst hit .
The role to be played by neighbouring countries is crucial , and I was also able to have quite a long discussion with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon while waiting for my plane to return to Bangkok .
I passed on all this information to him , told him my feelings on the issue , and also how the mission had gone .
The UN Secretary-General agreed with this analysis , but had two specific suggestions to make himself : to deploy a joint UN / ASEAN humanitarian aid coordinator , and to quickly organise a donor conference co-presided by the UN and ASEAN on 24 and 25 May in Bangkok .
Following on from the recent visit by the United Nations humanitarian aid coordinator John Holmes , Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is visiting Burma tomorrow to discuss how to channel international aid .
In relation to needs , the humanitarian situation in Burma remains dramatic . There is a danger that the first catastrophe caused by the cyclone could be worsened by a second humanitarian disaster : the risk of famine , since harvests were destroyed , and also epidemics among survivors whose living conditions are deplorable .
There is a risk of epidemics .
When we were there , the World Health Organization did not see identify risk of cholera , but large numbers of children were suffering from diarrhoea and so on .
This meant there was a risk of epidemic caused by water pollution .
There is also a risk of famine .
The region stockpiles large amounts of rice , and all food in storage has been destroyed .
There is one practical problem : this land ought to be sown to ensure a harvest in October .
The timeline is therefore a maximum of three to four weeks .
A number of people at the temporary camps , as they call them , do not wish to return to their own areas for all sorts of reasons , while others do wish to return , but need special kinds of seeds since all the soil has been salinated , and therefore they need much stronger plants , and also fertilisers .
I thus attempted to engage in constructive , practical dialogue with the authorities on this matter .
It was thought that the UNDP micro-credit scheme could be used as a finance mechanism .
We are still discussing this at present .
I must tell you it is no rapid process .
The Commission provided a rapid response , with an emergency decision of two million euros adopted on 5 May .
As you know , I am authorised to release three million euros right away with no official procedures .
Of course , since we had no identification , we began by releasing two million .
We subsequently decided on an envelope of five million euros in food aid , and also an additional emergency envelope of ten million euros .
We are , of course , willing to do more on the basis of needs assessments and assurances in terms of aid monitoring .
When I left after my two and a half hours of discussions with the authorities , I sent them a specific written note of the various requests I had made .
My first request concerned visa extensions for those working temporarily on the mission , namely the Commission staff .
We were given a two-week extension .
I also asked for final clarification , and for them to notify our local authorities that Burmese workers at our agencies and other operators no longer require official authorisation or a travel permit .
This point has obviously been clarified .
I asked for multiple-entry visas for six months to allow the EU-financed NGOs working there to triple their international personnel .
When I left Burma there were one hundred or so visa applications outstanding for UN agencies , and just over one hundred NGO applications .
I asked to be informed regularly .
Some have been issued since , but it is a far cry from what was requested .
I also requested visas and travel permits to visit the delta and to ensure that sufficient personnel could be mobilised .
As I said , I then asked for permits to be issued rapidly to doctors in the area and local medical staff .
It would appear they understood this point perfectly .
As for Pathein airport , which could have acted as a kind of redistribution hub for products arriving in planes sent by the international community , the answer here was an outright no . The reason was , according to them , that the control equipment and means were not in line with international standards , and that it was much easier to go via Rangoon .
I doubt this because , when I was there , Rangoon was already overwhelmed and had a number of problems which were subsequently rectified to a certain extent .
I am not sure that these were sorted out thanks to me .
It was simply that they could not find a way to operate Rangoon airport either .
I also feel that operations were handled in this manner for reasons relating to institutional comfort .
All in all , it was an extremely frustrating mission , I can tell you .
I feel there is total distrust of the international community .
There are some very deep-rooted a priori concerns in the country .
One occasionally has the distinct impression that nobody is listening to anyone else .
It is extremely difficult to reach the conscience and mindset of the person we are talking to .
The talks went well because for two and a half hours we had a genuine discussion , all quite courteous but firm too , because one nagging question persists : why say no to the international personnel that is so necessary to assist with operations ?
I also mentioned the responsibility to protect , in this way in particular , and even this led to a problem of principles .
At that point I was told that certain questions required no answers .
That was how the mission went .
Obviously I was sad I had not secured anything more specific , but I cannot pretend I was not glad to return to Europe .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commissioner has provided us with a persuasive and graphic portrayal of the way in which the ruling military government in Burma is cynically and brutally betraying its own people .
I wish to address myself here to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the ASEAN Member Countries .
For many years , the European Parliament has maintained friendly relations with the parliamentarians of the ASEAN countries .
Not too long ago , those countries signed a new ASEAN Charter in which they explicitly affirm their adherence to the principle of respecting and protecting human rights .
It goes without saying that ASEAN bears some responsibility for Burma , which is one of its Member Countries , and that the global reputation of the ASEAN countries will suffer if it continues to let the Burmese military junta act as it is acting at the moment .
I appeal to the Member Countries of ASEAN , in their own best interests and for the sake of their good and friendly relations with the European Union , to do whatever they can to persuade the Burmese military junta that it must let the outside world help its country 's population .
As I have indicated , this lies within the power and responsibility of the ASEAN countries .
They will be asked how they are exercising this responsibility , and whether or not they use their scope for action in this matter will influence our relations with ASEAN .
They need not act by means of public appeals - there are other ways - but the European Union expects that Burma 's neighbours in particular will do whatever they can to change the attitude of its ruling regime .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) I shall begin by complimenting the Commissioner on behalf of my Group . Today he has stated clearly that he is doing what he can , in very difficult circumstances .
He himself referred to a dialogue of the deaf .
We must note that the situation in Burma takes bizarre forms .
It is nearly three weeks now since the cyclone hit the country , and the government is still letting in hardly any outside aid .
The authorities themselves seem to be remaining rather passive .
The country has been closed to aid workers , experts and media for weeks .
It is almost Kafkaesque that the junta did let a referendum designed to strengthen its own position go ahead a week and a half ago .
According to a number of sources , the official death toll is around eighty thousand .
Tens of thousands are still missing and the number displaced is over two million .
These are gradually becoming Pol Pot proportions , or at least we believe so , because there is just as little information coming out of the country as there is aid going in .
Former UN coordinator Jan Egeland said at the beginning of this week that refusing to allow aid in is murder .
The Burmese Government is turning its responsibility to protect into a farce .
The contrast with China , tragically struck by a violent earthquake last week , is remarkable .
The widespread devastation was not covered up and could be seen on TV everywhere , including in China itself , and the Chinese Government issued an international appeal for help .
The image of the Burmese Government can no longer be damaged much more .
It has more or less reached an all-time low .
China is in a position to do much more to urge the Burmese Government to accept help .
So area Russia and India which must put pressure on the junta either in the UN or in ASEAN .
I agree with the comment by Mr Nassauer on that point .
Last Monday agreement was reached within ASEAN on international aid to Burma .
All aid is to be coordinated through ASEAN .
This is a step forward , but direct aid from the West is still ruled out .
A donor conference is to be held next week .
I appeal to Europe to contribute generously and wholeheartedly , but that is only if guarantees are given that our contribution will actually go to the right place and that journalists will also be allowed into the country , so that we can get a proper picture of the situation there .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) How many times have we stood in this House before talking about Burma ?
Several times a year we stand here and still the case remains hopeless .
However , the situation in Burma has become even worse than last time we spoke about it .
One point four million victims have still not received any help .
Thirty thousand children are suffering from acute malnutrition .
Hundreds of thousands are homeless and at risk of cholera , pneumonia and infectious diseases .
I understand that this morning as many as eight foreign doctors from Médecins Sans Frontières have been allowed into the disaster area .
I should like in any case to back the appeal that Mr Nassauer has made to ASEAN .
It must now finally show determination , because it is clear that the junta is more interested in the survival of its own regime through the referendum that is not worthy of the name - Mr Wiersma calls that ' Kafkaesque ' - than the survival of its own people .
The generals think that foreigners coming into the country would threaten the survival of the military regime .
It is clear , though , that Médecins Sans Frontières , Oxfam , the British , French and US ships are bringing aid goods , not regime change , however much I might wish for that myself .
However , we can apparently not convince the junta of that , so we have to look for alternatives .
I think the best alternative is the Security Council .
Europe and the United States must insist that the situation in Burma is put on the agenda .
All the United Nations Member States have signed up to the following two principles : accepting responsibility for the protection of citizens and , if a country is no longer able or willing to do that , the right of the international community to intervene in disasters .
The United Nations has to act .
I understand the problems and I am proud of Commissioner Michel who , instead of wringing his hands and convening working groups , just got down to it with the motto ' deeds , not words ' .
That impresses me .
I also think the support promised by the European Union is exemplary .
I believe the French Minister , Mr Kouchner , is right in saying that the junta is guilty of a crime against humanity .
I do wonder why we , the other 26 EU Member States , are not listening hard .
Mr President , aid must be brought to the Burmese people , with or without the consent of the junta .
Withholding essential support is a crime against humanity .
I would like to see the European Union take the initiative in getting the United Nations and the Security Council to refer this case to the prosecutor at the International Criminal Court in The Hague .
Enough is enough , patience has run out .
I would say , drag the junta into the International Criminal Court .
That is what we want .
The way the situation is now , they are the ones who belong behind bars , not the dissidents in Burma !
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , I feel we ought to be slightly more precise in the way we talk about this issue ; for example , the concept of neutrality .
We are not neutral .
If we are for the people of Burma , this means we are against the military junta .
Since the military junta has no intention of helping the people of Burma , we are against the military junta .
We must not support it , and this is exactly how we are perceived .
Louis Michel held discussions for two and a half hours .
The entire story has a surrealist ring to it : he says he went there , he talked to them for two and a half hours , he was told that such-and-such an airport could not be mobilised in 24 hours , whereas technical facilities were provided to open an airport in Sarajevo . This is not really the problem .
It is therefore obvious we are at an extremely specific juncture , and I agree : the responsibility to protect means the military junta is committing a crime against humanity , against its own population .
This is a fact .
We will see what becomes of this state of affairs in the public debates to follow .
It is , however , true that this obvious case must be submitted to the International Court of Justice .
What is most interesting is that in doing this we are addressing the Security Council , and Burma 's protectors , the Chinese , are in fact talking a rather unintelligible language .
We could say , in fact , that China may have done the right thing by opening up its borders , but at the same time it continues to protect Burma , and continues to protect a government that is massacring its own people .
Thus I feel that in this situation it is obvious nobody can impose food .
We must nevertheless exert pressure , all the pressure we can .
Even a possible solution involving assistance manu militari would give us and countries in Asia some chance of putting pressure on Burma .
I think Louis Michel 's speech to us today was quite explicit : talk to me honey , talk to me , I 'm listening , but I couldn 't care less .
That is what he told us in his diplomatic way , for which I have the utmost respect .
Today , however , the authorities in Burma are deaf .
They will not listen , they are not interested in a constitutional referendum , as has been mentioned .
They are laughing at us all .
Henceforth , therefore , pressure must be stepped up to the maximum , and we must ask for the consequences to be submitted to the Security Council and the International Criminal Court in The Hague .
Mr President , nearly three weeks have passed since cyclone Nagris hit Burma destroying the harbours and the deltas of the Ayeyarwady .
It destroyed houses and towns killing thousands of people and leaving thousands of others homeless .
History has taught us that , unless we react immediately when people suffer , their suffering is bound to increase by multiples and factors way beyond our conception .
In many ways , the failure of the Burmese regime is a reflection of what we have been saying in this Parliament over the last number of years concerning the military junta that is presently in place in Burma .
However , despite our objections to that military junta , we must find mechanisms - however they are arrived at - to deliver aid directly to the people .
I welcome the fact - and little did I think I would be saying this today - that the military junta has now allowed in five United Nations helicopters to distribute food , despite the fact that a French naval vessel and American naval vessels are in the bay waiting to deliver food and medical aid to the people .
It is incumbent on all of us to guarantee that we can make the best possible efforts to assist human beings when they are suffering .
Indeed , with regard to those great defenders of Burma , the Chinese , Burma could learn from the way in which the Chinese reacted to their most recent natural disaster by appealing for international aid and assistance from Japan and other countries .
Hopefully among these different alliances we can create conditions whereby the aid and succour can be delivered .
The issue with regard to the International Criminal Court is a matter for another day .
Our first and most immediate aim and task , following what Louis Michel has already said , is to guarantee that we put in place the mechanisms to deliver that aid , to rebuild the infrastructure , to rebuild homes and , most importantly of all , to prevent the continuing suffering of the Burmese people .
Madam President , a regime which wantonly allows its own citizens to needlessly suffer in pursuit of its own xenophobic paranoia is not just amoral but evil , and sadly such a junta rules in Burma .
Unmoved as it is by the plight of its own people , it is unlikely to be influenced by what is said in the European Parliament , but in the name of humanity we must speak out .
We are not trying to control Burma , we are just trying to help its people , though the reality is that without regime change little will improve in the long term for the Burmese .
Yes , we must maximise humanitarian aid , considering food and supply drops as a necessary tactic ; but ultimately the restoration of democracy is how this once-thriving country will reclaim its position and put the people 's needs before the junta 's preservation .
Madam President , firstly let me express my heartfelt sympathy for all the Burmese people who have been bereaved or injured by the effects of Cyclone Nargis .
The people of Burma are in the thoughts and prayers of many Europeans .
However , our condolences are not enough .
We must discuss practical measures and see how we can implement them so that we alleviate the suffering of the survivors .
Many countries and international organisations are both willing and able to provide immediate humanitarian aid ; they have been for a matter of weeks now .
Unfortunately , the ruling military authorities consider the preservation of their own power as of prime importance ; the suffering of their own people seems to be of little consequence .
They fear any kind of foreign involvement in Burma , even if this is of aid workers .
The Commissioner 's first-hand account of his discussions with the Burmese military authorities makes for sobering listening and there is not much hope that the Burmese authorities will change their position .
So while we talk and wring our hands in dismay over the impossibility of getting the Burmese authorities to accept help and over the impotence of ASEAN , hundreds of thousands are suffering .
The UN Security Council can and should call on its principle of responsibility to protect and provide aid without the consent of the Burmese authorities .
I would strongly urge the UK Government - which currently holds the Presidency of the Security Council - to sanction immediate airdrops of aid .
The Burmese authorities are responsible for a crime against humanity , but we cannot sit by passively allowing them to continue in this crime .
And while I agree that an airdrop is not the ideal way of getting aid into a country - for we would rather have trained aid workers distributing help - it is better than nothing , so , please , let us get some help in and let us get it in now .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I want to add my voice to those who have expressed their sincere sympathies with the bereaved families of the tens of thousands of victims of the deadly Cyclone Nargis in Burma ( Myanmar ) .
I also want to express my full solidarity with the hundreds of thousands of people who have lost , as a result of this natural disaster , their livelihoods and roofs over their heads .
I welcome the speed with which the European Commission 's humanitarian aid was offered and I also appreciate Commissioner Michel 's quick action .
Unfortunately I cannot approve of the behaviour of the Burmese Government and the Burmese authorities .
It was inhuman and cruel how they were preventing their own people , victims of this horrible disaster , from receiving foreign humanitarian aid .
Consequently I want to call on the Burmese Government and on the Burmese senior officials to fully open the borders to foreign aid , and to allow the goods and the workers of foreign humanitarian organisations to enter the country .
I also call on China , India , Singapore and other countries in the region , including the ASEAN Member Countries , to use their influence to persuade Burma to open up to foreign aid .
No country in the world is capable of coping with a natural disaster of this magnitude on its own .
Madam President , the situation in Burma following the recent catastrophic cyclone is tragic and is getting worse every day .
Those civilians who survived when the cyclone first struck now face illness and death by hunger , lack of shelter and appropriate medical care .
Yet the military dictators ruling Burma remain largely apathetic to the urgent need to allow proper help to reach the victims .
These heartless military generals care much more about clinging to power and far less about the destiny of the disaster survivors .
The way the Burmese regime has acted and continues to act is unacceptable and criminal .
The international community , and the EU in particular through Commissioner Michel , has done its best to convince the junta of Burma to listen to reason but , alas , without the desired effect .
I think there is now no other way but to proceed with some form of forced aid delivery to the affected region .
Such an undertaking can be launched with urgent approval from the UN and with the necessary logistics provided by appropriate military delivery systems in close coordination with other countries such as the USA .
This is truly a last-resort , exceptional measure , but is absolutely necessary in my view in order to save thousands of innocent lives .
We just cannot remain inactive and watch the suffering and demise of the Burmese people go on any longer .

( DE ) Madam President , the scale of the crisis in Burma is horrific : 100 000 deaths , 200 000 people missing and more than two million homeless in a country of 54 million inhabitants .
The Irrawaddy Delta is Burma 's largest rice-producing region and plays a key role in food production .
The tidal wave swept inland for 22 miles , flooding fields and leaving many of them heavily salinated .
In other words , the present humanitarian disaster is set to be compounded in the medium term by a food production crisis in the Irrawaddy Delta .
The people of Burma urgently need immediate as well as long-term help from the international community .
That help , unfortunately , must be forced through against the will of the generals , come what may .
A government blocking emergency aid is a scandal without precedent in the history of international relations .
The victims of the cyclone are being held hostage by a paranoid and murderous band of soldiers that has ruled Burma for several decades .
Last September the popular pro-democracy movement led by Buddhist monks was brutally crushed . Thousands were killed or abducted , and now tens of thousands are dying because the government is not letting aid through .
Its refusal to accept aid for the people is killing them .
This murderous regime belongs at the very top of the United Nations ' blacklist , and the members of the junta belong in the dock at the International Criminal Court .
( PL ) Humankind has not yet learnt how to prevent the tragic consequences of natural disasters .
These consequences are even more dramatic in the case of countries governed by dictators .
The plight of the Burmese nation is a contemporary example of this . The people of Burma have suffered both as a result of the cyclone and as a result of the behaviour of the military regime in power there .
It became evident how heartless the ruling Burmese generals were when they refused international aid to save the Burmese people , even though the generals themselves were unable to do so .
That decision amounted to a premeditated crime against the entire nation .
Despite widespread international condemnation , the Burmese generals are maintaining their criminal course of action .
Humanitarian aid seems to be ending up in the hands of the military and their families , or is being traded .
At the same time it is ever more urgently needed , due to the spread of hunger and disease .
Particular attention should be paid too to the situation of Burmese orphans .
There are more and more indications that people traffickers are turning to these orphans in their search for sex slaves for brothels the world over .
Respect for human rights does not just mean that national authorities should refrain from torture , murder and arrests .
Failing to assist disaster victims or deliberately hindering assistance amounts to committing genocide .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his work to date on this matter .
It is now clear that over 125 000 people have died as a result of the cyclone which hit the southern regions of Burma on 2 and 3 May .
The United Nations estimates that in excess of 2.4 million people have been directly affected by this tragedy .
Many are severely injured and it is likely that there will be an outbreak of disease due to lack of food and clean water .
It may already have taken hold in the area .
The policies of the military junta in preventing humanitarian aid workers from getting access to the affected areas are unprecedented .
These aid workers and the agencies that they work for have the expertise to put in place a comprehensive relief operation which would bring assistance to a large number of people in a short period of time .
Will another similar number have to die before the military regime allows the aid agencies in ?
The combined efforts of the EU , China , India , all of the South-East Asian nations and the UN have the power to force the Burmese authorities to remove the restrictions .
It is by working together that we can change the mindset of this corrupt government .
In particular we must bring China and India on board to force the change .
It is now 18 days since the cyclone hit the region .
The international community must continue to work so that every person affected by the disaster receives food , clean water , the necessary medical care and shelter .
Let us continue to keep the pressure on the Burmese leadership and force them to allow the international aid agencies to carry out their work .
Let each country within the EU , and the EU itself , continue to apply diplomatic pressure .
This is where immediate action is required .
We must not allow another 18 days to pass before action is taken .
The time for removing the restrictions is now .
( NL ) Two weeks after the disaster , some of the Burmese people have finally received rice , beans and medicines , but that aid is still not reaching a quarter of all victims and is arriving criminally late through the fault of the junta .
The UN World Food Programme says that it was able to give rice and beans to 212 000 of the 750 000 people who are the worst affected .
Therefore a special UN aid fund is needed , as the Social Democrats are also asking .
I am grateful to the Commission for all its valuable efforts in Burma and also from Brussels .
However , millions of people are being abandoned to hunger , thirst and sickness .
That is a form of torture , that is murder and a total failure of the duty to protect .
These are actions verging on genocide .
Therefore the army is responsible for crimes against humanity .
For our Group and tomorrow for this Parliament , that is a matter for the International Criminal Court .
The Security Council has to have an investigation opened into the crimes of the regime .
What is the view of the Commission on that ?
As rapporteur on Burma , I ask myself when do you reach the limit of respect for the sovereignty of a country ?
The limit was , after all , somewhat closer in the case of Iraq .
When does respect for fundamental human rights become inviolable for the same international community ?
Now the credibility of human rights is tarnished all over the world by the refusal , mainly of neighbouring countries , to deal with the Burmese Government , and the unwillingness to come to the aid of the people without the consent of the generals .
Sovereignty does not entitle you to throttle your own people .
Hence the request to the Council of the European Union , and particularly to the United Kingdom as current President of the Security Council , for the situation in Burma to be discussed again in the Security Council .
China and Russia must understand that the situation there now is even more criminal , even more serious , than shortly after the cyclone .
( DE ) Madam President , 130 000 dead and more than two million homeless : that is the bitter reality in Burma .
In addition , widespread famine is threatening .
The floods are causing diarrhoea pathogens , such as Salmonella , to spread like wildfire .
There is a high risk of illnesses such as typhoid , cholera , malaria and dengue fever .
Children , who have weaker immune systems and whose bodies dehydrate faster , are particularly endangered .
The survivors of the disaster need clean drinking water , which cannot be provided on a sustainable basis without good treatment plants .
They need emergency accommodation , not least to prevent the spread of respiratory diseases .
The military junta remains unwilling to admit Western aid workers , as Commissioner Michel just confirmed in his powerful speech .
It is thereby jeopardising the existence of tens of thousands of people .
What is the responsible approach ?
Exerting pressure by petitioning the Criminal Court in The Hague ?
Absolutely !
However , is there also a need to amend international law so as to restrict national sovereignty in the event of a humanitarian crisis ?
That would be difficult to achieve , and the Chinese would be sure to veto it in the UN Security Council .
China is one of the few allies of the Burmese dictators .
It must , however , make every effort - and so must the Member Countries of ASEAN , as Hartmut Nassauer stated - to ensure that the international teams of experts and aid materials , which have been in place for some time now , are allowed to enter the country .
One of the reasons why Myanmar is blocking the numerous aid operations mounted by the international community is evidently a desire to influence the donors ' conference in order to obtain multimillion sums and be able to use them as it sees fit .
Like the Burmese regime 's contemptuous and brutal treatment of peaceful demonstrators during the Buddhist monks ' revolt in September 2007 and its subsequent imposition of a news embargo lasting several months , this is a totalitarian act which is directed against the interests of the population .
This alleged exercise of national sovereignty is entirely unstatesmanlike and totally inhuman .
( PT ) Over 63 000 people dead and missing and two and a half million homeless is now the combined result of the cyclone and the cruelty of the Junta which is mismanaging and oppressing Burma and which has prevented international aid from reaching those in need .
What a contrast to the openness and promptness of China in helping the survivors in Sichuan !
The UN Security Council can no longer refrain from holding the Burmese Military Junta responsible for the protection of its people , by allowing international humanitarian NGOs and agencies to access the country in order to help the abandoned population of the Irrawaddy Delta .
It also cannot refrain from bringing the Burmese Military Junta before the International Criminal Court for crimes against humanity .
This Parliament hopes that the European governments will bring immediate pressure to bear on the UN Security Council .
It is time that all members of the Council , including China which has supported the Burmese dictatorship , accept their responsibilities towards the sacrificed people of Burma .
( LT ) Today we are talking about the tragic situation in Burma in the aftermath of the cyclone that swept across the country at the beginning of the month .
The disastrous consequences of the tragedy are that hundreds of thousands of people are dead , injured , sick and lost , with huge numbers losing their homes and in need of food and water .
Every day on TV we witness haunting scenes from a country ruined by this cyclone and it is impossible to remain indifferent .
It is true that humankind still remains powerless in the face of natural disasters , especially when they happen without warning .
However , the recent situation in Burma is different , as we are aware of the fact that the Indian Government warned Burma 's leaders of the impending cyclone two days before it reached the country , so they had been informed .
Nevertheless , the cyclone hit the country 's people with all its might , because the generals in charge of the country could not be bothered to warn their people about the disaster that was imminent .
Such a government is worthy of condemnation , as its recent actions demonstrate absolute inefficiency and indifference towards citizens , which is an obvious breach of human rights .
The generals in charge are to blame for having given their blessing to this natural disaster developing into a catastrophe of such proportions .
The list of criminal acts committed by Burma 's leaders , which will never be forgotten , comprises forbidding international aid workers to enter the country , refusing to assist those seeking help and showing total disregard for the international community 's efforts to help the suffering .
The generals ' shameful attempts to hold a referendum on the constitution in such circumstances only add to this list .
I truly believe that the European Union must pursue every possible avenue - I repeat : every possible avenue - of cooperation with the governments of India , China and other Asian countries and make use of all the institutions in the United Nations network to ensure that the people of Burma receive the maximum possible help .
Madam President , in today 's debate I would like to raise three issues .
First , the problem of a new constitution .
The Myanmar junta announced that a pro-military constitution has won overwhelming support in the referendum which was held despite widespread criticism and the needs of a national tragedy .
Human rights groups have dismissed the vote as a mockery .
A referendum conducted in those conditions has to be of dubious credibility .
Probably it will be impossible to hold the second round of voting in most areas of the Irrawaddy delta on 24 May .
Second , there is a more general problem about sanctions , particularly EU sanctions .
Do they really work ?
The people most affected are the population at large .
Some observers - seasoned journalists , diplomats , former EU ambassadors in South-East Asia - say that isolating Burma in this way does not help .
Third and last but not least , the time has come for the UN Security Council to act .
The United Nations Security Council should insist that aid deliveries and humanitarian workers be given unfettered access to Burma .
The EU countries delivering aid should insist on monitoring to ensure that aid reaches the cyclone victims most in need .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the few seconds available I would like to draw the House 's attention to the cry of alarm which has reached me from volunteers working for the international organisation Save the Children , informing us of the imminent risk of a tragedy to compound the tragedy .
Rescue crews have reported that , in the marsh area of the Irrawaddy Delta , over 30 000 children are dying through want , children who have survived Cyclone Nargis and , in many cases , their own parents , who are now the victims of hunger and thirst , ill with dysentery and exhausted by rain and the cold .
Commissioner , in this context , the policy of refusing aid adopted by the regime of Than Shwe and his military coadjutants is madness .
There is no time to lose !
With malnutrition already present , a lack of drinking water , the spectre of disease and the absence of aid , these children will not survive long : either we intervene immediately or we will be responsible fair and square for not having done enough !
Madam President , I would like to thank and commend the action taken by Commissioner Michel .
We have heard today that Cyclone Nargis has brought devastation to two and a half million Burmese people and , as the Commissioner said , the situation has been exacerbated by the regime 's intransigence in denying foreign aid , so that only a quarter of those in need of urgent help have actually received it .
This is unbelievable and a heartbreaking denial of the Burmese people 's most basic human right .
But it is also verging on criminal negligence .
Recently we have heard about some limited flexibility by the junta but I urge the Commission and Council to exercise caution towards this softening , because this is the regime that ruthlessly repressed its own pro-democracy movement .
I would stress that it is vital to keep up the pressure on the junta so that all UN agencies with the experience and logistical know-how to deal with the situation are allowed in .
I am especially concerned that , as the Commissioner stressed , it is the children who are suffering the most .
Accordingly UNICEF needs to be allowed in , to alleviate the threat of disease and malnutrition .
Finally , I call on those who have influence with Burma , namely the neighbours and EU partners - India , China and the ASEAN countries - to encourage the junta to accept relief from others .
I also call on the Commission and others to take steps to make it clear to the junta that democracy and engagement with the outside world are the only viable ways out of the crisis .
I hope that Commissioner Michel will provide an answer to the questions ' Where do we go from here ? ' and ' How do we move forward ? '
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the very failure of the mission described by Commissioner Michel , who I do , however , thank for his utmost sincerity , gives us an understanding of how at this moment in time it is appropriate to focus on the doctrine of humanitarian intervention to foster not only relations with the Burmese authorities , but also with the Chinese authorities who are currently demonstrating a different kind of sensitivity in light of the serious disturbances and disasters which have also occurred in their country .
Focusing on relations with the Chinese may serve to open windows for humanitarian intervention which may move from establishing a no-fly zone for direct aid drops to the opening of a genuine humanitarian corridor .
I have a question for the Council too : the European Union appointed a representative to Burma ; while thanking Commissioner Michel for his dedication and for visiting what he has called an area of frustration , what is the representative 's purpose ?
What is he seeking to achieve ?
Madam President , there is one human priority : to get international humanitarian aid to the millions of human beings who have been pushed to the verge of extermination .
It is a military junta that bears responsibility first for failing to warn their population in time about the approaching cyclone and secondly for refusing to let humanitarian aid enter the country .
Now I think it is time to take this gang , which has committed crimes against humanity , to the International Criminal Court in The Hague , but this needs a concentrated international effort .
In the mean time , all possible pressure should be put on the Burmese rulers and their allies , including China , to engage first in the humanitarian relief phase before starting the self-proclaimed reconstruction phase .
Madam President , the tragedy of Burma has been only compounded by the refusal of the military junta to allow the delivery of aid and assistance .
They have refused more than token assistance from a US task force , home-based in Okinawa , which was fortuitously deployed off Thailand .
While hundreds of thousands have died in the initial disaster , this can only be multiplied massively with the refusal to receive aid and therefore control the outbreak of disease .
Oxfam have estimated that up to two thirds of a million people may be threatened in the current circumstances .
We have to urge everyone - the Chinese , the European Union , other neighbours - to put as much pressure as possible on the regime to moderate its position and open its doors to aid and aid workers currently parked in Bangkok and Thailand .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I obviously comprehend and fully share the general sentiments expressed in the House - sentiments of criticism and frustration , of course .
Almost all the speakers mentioned resorting to the Security Council , the concept of the responsibility to protect , the right to interfere to a certain extent , the boundaries of national sovereignty , and sanctions in general .
This is , in fact , what we are dealing with .
However , I wish to speak on the means available to the international community to take all the courses of action you mention and to ensure respect for all these principles .
This issue is slightly more difficult for it basically raises the serious matter of respect for international humanitarian law , a subject the European Commission and Parliament have already decided to discuss in relation to specific cases in September .
Thus there is broad consensus as to the analysis : we all agree it is unacceptable , we all agree it is inhumane , and we all agree there must be better access and so on .
What I do wish to suggest - this is obviously a personal opinion - is that we make a bid in the short term to capitalise on or at least to extract maximum advantage from whatever emerges from the donor conference arranged on the initiative of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon , with the donors being the European Union and ASEAN , and , within the framework of this initiative or proposal , to appoint a joint EU / ASEAN coordinator .
This is in the very short term .
It will obviously be a difficult task .
If the international community wishes to ensure a certain degree of coherence , if no results emerge from the two initiatives , it will be difficult to act as if there were nothing else to be done , and at that point the international community , whether this be the UN or other institutions , ought to focus on slightly different means .
I say this because - and I am finishing up now - what is evidently the most frustrating thing of all to some extent , which discredits or at any rate weakens the moral duty to intervene and the very concept or application of the concept of the responsibility to protect , is that , beyond the declarations of principle we are all led to make , because this is the way we feel , this is our culture , this is our view of democracy and human rights and so on , there are means available to us , or means we are politically capable of implementing .
This is the truth of the matter . This is the political courage that must be sought .
For it is all too easy to say : ' we must do something , we must send this , we must force them , we must do this and that ' .
Yes , fine , but where are the means ?
Are our countries able and willing politically to accept the ultimate consequences - of using force , if necessary - and do we have the ability to act in this way ?
That is the real question .
I agree with everything that has been said here , but conclusions must be drawn from our generous positions .
I wish to explain why I feel that there are two parts to this debate .
There is the general debate on which we all agree , and there is the immediate issue .
I think the latter consists of providing full support and placing a Secretary-General at the best location for dialogue to make sense , and allowing him to extract the best possible advantage from his two initiatives .
This is more or less what I would suggest .
I doubt that any statements , threats or tough talk , here and now - even if it is necessary - can change the situation .
Unfortunately , I do not think so .
I therefore feel that we ought to go along with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon 's two initiatives , and back them to the hilt .
I have received six motions for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
, in writing . - ( SK ) I am shocked by the terrible tragedy that has befallen the Burmese people .
It is despicable that the generals who have a firm grip on the country will not be swayed by the vast number of victims of the destructive Cyclone Nargis , the number of whom may still increase due to the lack of drinking water , food and medical help .
I do not understand the kind of people who ignore their nation 's misfortune and keep Burma completely isolated , although it is clear that the country cannot cope on its own .
The arrogance of power probably has no limits .
In such an extraordinary crisis situation , the question of state sovereignty is an absolutely inhuman concept .
The humanitarian organisation Oxfam has warned that , unless help gets quickly to those affected , the number of victims may reach as many as 1.5 million .
According to the UN , the disaster has affected up to 2 million people who need help .
These are alarming voices and we have to adopt a clear standpoint quickly .
We cannot keep waiting , watching helplessly as hunger kills more victims .
I will vote for the European Parliament resolution on the tragic situation in Burma .
I am convinced that the EU must not be indifferent .
It must make use of all available means to help the Burmese people .
Considering the huge scale of this disaster , the EU must also use enforcement measures as ' national authorities are manifestly failing to protect their population from genocide , war crime , ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity ' .
Natural disaster in China ( debate )
The next item is the statements of the Council and the Commission on the natural disaster in China .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I also wish to thank you for placing a debate on the agenda on the humanitarian situation in the Chinese province of Sichuan following the earthquake on 12 May .
President Barroso , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner and I have expressed our condolences and stressed the desire of the European people to help the Chinese people .
Mobilisation by the Chinese authorities and the army in particular was swift and large-scale .
It must be said that the crisis management was efficient , and the authorities deserve our congratulations .
In view of the extent of the damage and its needs , the Chinese Government appealed for international assistance on 13 May and the EU was quick to respond to the call .
The Commission sent an ECHO humanitarian aid expert on a one-week mission to the area affected .
Following a report by the expert on 16 May , the Commission adopted an emergency relief decision to disburse two million euros .
This will allow the Red Cross to supply tents , blankets , drinking water and basic essentials .
The coordination and assessment team of the Commission 's civil protection mechanism is also at Chengdu .
It is in contact with the local authorities to bring in European aid more rapidly for those in need .
The Member States also responded swiftly to the emergency call from the Red Cross Federation by sending emergency equipment and providing search and rescue teams .
The total EU contribution is already over ten million euros .
The European Commission , the Monitoring Information Centre and the Crisis Platform are working together and are keeping the Member States and China up to date with EU assistance .
It should be noted that the Chinese authorities exercise strict control over local access permits for international teams .
On the basis of our evaluations , the main needs are water and sanitation , temporary shelters , essential products , medicines and medical equipment .
Many major after-shocks are hampering rescue operations , unfortunately .
The main concern is that vital infrastructure such as dams , dykes or electrical power stations will break down or collapse , thereby creating a second humanitarian disaster .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my Group endorses the expressions of sorrow and sympathy made to the Chinese people by the Council and the Commission following the horrific earthquake of 12 May .
We offer our sincere condolences to all those who have been left bereaved or injured as a result of the earthquake .
We also welcome the fact that the Chinese authorities have initiated rapid rescue measures , and we welcome the Chinese Government 's willingness to accept foreign aid .
Let me also voice our hope that it will continue to do so in future , enabling aid to be dispensed effectively at the point of need .
In addition , we are pleased that in this case the Chinese Government has also allowed the foreign media to report in detail on the earthquake , and we hope that it will permit foreign reporting on the reconstruction effort in the affected areas too .
We particularly regret that so many pupils died when buildings in state schools collapsed , and we support the declared intention of the Chinese authorities to investigate the reasons why schools might not have been built to withstand earthquakes and to hold those responsible to account .
Above all , we are willing to give the Chinese people the assistance they need .
They do not need large sums of money , for they possess the world 's largest currency reserves .
What they need is practical help , and we Europeans and our Member States can provide that help , and we thank the Commissioner for the aid measures he has already initiated .
We shall support every action designed to help the people in the disaster areas and to assist them in the reconstruction of their villages .
Some may have to be resettled in other areas .
We shall provide the aid that is required for that purpose .
It is truly a great human tragedy , and we empathise with the population of the stricken areas and with the entire Chinese nation .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Lenarčič , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I want to join with all those who have expressed their deepest sympathies with the bereaved families of the tens of thousands of victims of the terrible earthquake that hit Sichuan province .
I also want to express my full solidarity with the hundreds of thousands of people who lost the roof over their head or were forced to leave their homes as a result of this disaster .
A short while ago we debated the situation in Burma and criticised the completely unacceptable behaviour of the Burmese junta .
China , in complete contrast with Burma , must be praised .
China immediately asked the international community for help and opened its borders to foreign aid .
I also approve , just like my fellow Member , the openness of the Chinese authorities , both at national level and in Sichuan province .
I welcome the way they dealt with organising the rescue work and informing the public , both at home and abroad , on the events of the disaster .
For example , this up-front information provided also included the confession that , apart from tens of thousands of victims , thirty-two sources of radioactive emissions were also buried in the rubble .
Both the Commissioner and Mr Lenarčič informed us of the extent of the humanitarian aid that the European Union has offered and provided to China .
I am thanking them both for the speed with which the Commission and the Council have acted , and I am also calling on them to ensure that the European Union is prepared to respond quickly to potential requests for further help by our Chinese partners , not only in regard to humanitarian aid but also with rebuilding affected areas , if help is asked for .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) First of all , I should like to express my sympathy with all the victims on behalf of our Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
I also endorse the period of mourning that the Chinese Government has announced .
On Monday , before coming to Strasbourg , I went to sign the book of condolence at the Representation to the EU in Brussels , on behalf of the Delegation for Relations with China and I assume also on behalf of Parliament as a whole .
Last week the bureau of the Delegation met the Chinese ambassador and he told me how much he appreciated the European Parliament support .
We are facing an enormous and serious disaster .
Tens of thousands of people are dead or still missing , millions homeless , property damage on a scale that is barely calculable at the moment .
We have not seen in China what we saw in Burma , as discussed in the previous debate .
Here we see a country where everyone , from the highest to the lowest level , is doing everything possible to help and to see that anything that can still be saved is saved .
I also see a country that has very openly communicated , and continues to communicate , the pain and despair of the people in Sichuan and the problems the rescue teams are facing , rescue teams that have even lost a couple of lives .
I see a country that is even open to the criticism the victims of the disaster had of the aid effort , a picture that we are also very familiar with whenever something similar happens here .
Madam President , we have to look to the future .
I think China has asked us for very specific types of aid .
I see that we are showing solidarity and I am grateful to the Commission and the Council for what they have done . I urge them to provide further help when the Chinese ask for it .
When the rescue effort is over , rebuilding will have to begin , and there again we have to be able to help as much as possible .
In the longer term , I would ask that we look into how we can provide technical assistance , with building regulations and techniques that make buildings more resistant to this kind of occurrence .
It might also be a task for the international community to look at what we can do to set up a sort of early warning system , a system that warns people before these disasters .
We have to at least try to develop that .
I think there are quite a number of regions in the world that might benefit from that .
At any rate , I think it is important that we in the European Parliament have shown our solidarity with the Chinese in this debate .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , following this terrible earthquake that has plunged China and the entire world into mourning , the authorities have played the game of transparency for the first time and responded to the drama with large-scale emergency deployment , which the EU and the entire international community are doing their best to sustain .
However , we have all heard sharp criticism in China of the poor quality of buildings , especially the most recent structures and public locations such as schools , which have led to the disappearance of thousands of schoolchildren , with very few rescued .
This disaster is showing up the poor quality of building work in the country , a sensitive issue in China where millions of people have been expropriated in the larger cities in the run-up to decisive events such as the Olympic Games .
Other worrying matters , already mentioned , loom over this drama : the strength of hydroelectric facilities such as the concrete dam at Zipingpu makes us fear the worst for the 600 000 people living downstream .
The earthquake also caused damage to 391 reservoirs .
As yet there is little information available on the plutonium-enrichment facilities in the north-east of Sichuan province , despite their close proximity to the epicentre , and this is likewise extremely disturbing .
Would it not be a good idea to carry out an independent international assessment on such vital issues , since the Chinese are still showing a certain amount of opacity and any official statements are all reassurance ?
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Europe should offer China as much support as possible , for both humanitarian and political reasons .
I am one of the very many Members of this House who are strongly opposed to China 's barbaric policy towards Tibet and towards Christians .
I believe we should react very forcefully indeed to any instance of aggression towards Taiwan .
On the other hand , however , we must take advantage of every opportunity to show the Chinese people that the demands we are making of their leaders are not motivated by any feeling of enmity towards their country and its traditions .
We must prove that friendly partnership is possible , and an excellent opportunity to do so has now arisen .
We should offer extensive assistance to the victims and commit ourselves wholeheartedly to reconstruction work following the recent disaster .
It would be a great mistake to miss this opportunity of building trust between Europe and China .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , natural disasters sadden us all the more because they create so many victims , as recently in China or Burma .
They remind us of the value of any human life , and also the fact that we cannot control nature .
We wish to send a message of compassion to those suffering natural and political disasters .
One of the aims of politicians is to prevent public misfortune from befalling their people .
Thus , if they cannot prevent natural disasters , they can attempt to anticipate them and alert the people , and above all they must minimise risk through responsible prevention policies .
By way of example , China 's Promethean infrastructure , such as its huge power dams and nuclear power plants , has held out .
Yet how long can it hold out ?
Is it not better to use a larger number of smaller structures to spread the risk , and increase public information on the risks involved ?
The most tragic situation for the Chinese people , however , is in relation to political disasters .
Although we acknowledge the admirable character of this hard-working skilful people and its sensitive culture , we can judge political acts without delving too far into domestic policies .
Its calamitous single-child policy is a major disaster .
It affects children , the large numbers of peasant families obliged to dispose of daughters , a poor source of revenue that does nothing to ensure the continuity of farms and retirement , or the second child who has no right to exist on the orders of Creon .
Such is the disdain for human rights when a political order does not allow parents to have as many children as they want .
Here again , life is not considered at its true value , but as a mere utilitarian function .
Natural disaster and political disaster merge , however , when a school 's roof falls in , crushing the only child and leaving the parents distraught .
When the 30 000 journalists expected in Beijing for the Olympic Games arrive there , they should take time out to investigate , beyond mere appearances , the reality of this country which , through overriding power and efficiency , risks losing all respect for human beings , the real basis of the political order .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , during the public minutes of silence ordered by the Chinese authorities , people stood still - people in the streets , on buses and in shops - and their facial expressions left no doubt of the sincerity of their feelings .
It was quite different from the normal compulsory collective demonstrations of solidarity .
Why was that ? Because state television was able to report round the clock , evoking a profound sense of shock at the unimaginable suffering of the people in the stricken areas .
That inspired a new sense of solidarity in China .
Respect for the individual has become apparent again , even among political leaders .
The only great national focal points had hitherto been China 's economic growth and , more recently , the Olympic Games , but in the light of the present disaster , these things almost fail to register any more with many people .
What should the international community do ?
This question has already been answered to some extent : besides sending aid materials , disaster plans and , of course , technical equipment , there is a need to pool the experience gathered in the aftermath of the major earthquakes in Armenia , where more than 100 000 lives were lost and a nuclear power plant was damaged , in Turkey , where tens of thousands lost their lives , and in China in 1976 , where several hundred thousand people died , and to use that collective experience to develop principles of good practice for the international community and apply them for the benefit of China .
I know it has been mentioned that what could happen to dams in particular should make us examine the earthquake resistance of public buildings , hospitals and schools .
There is much that can be done in this respect , and appropriate indications can be given as to which rules should apply to the building of earthquake-proof structures .
As a member of the Delegation for Relations with China , I naturally subscribe to the messages of condolence conveyed by the previous speakers .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , we all regret the disaster that has devastated southern China .
Over 50 000 people have died and 4.8 million have been left homeless .
We all stand as one with the affected families .
The European Union has acted as it should : it has activated the civil protection mechanism and it has supported the Chinese authorities .
The international community as a whole has also lent its support .
Never before has China received so many expressions of solidarity and offers of tangible support because , this time , the Chinese authorities have not tried to hide the scale of the tragedy .
On the contrary , they have provided the necessary information , allowed access to the international media and , overall , acted transparently and efficiently , unlike what has happened in Burma .
Climate change is at the root of the rise in natural disasters .
Preventing the planet from overheating is all our responsibility .
China must therefore also contribute to reducing CO2 emissions by supporting the European Union 's efforts to reach an international agreement by the time of the Copenhagen Conference in December 2009 .
( NL ) With unprecedented openness , the Chinese mass media have reported on the terrible consequences of the serious earthquake that struck Sichuan province over a week ago .
Within the country , this openness on the part of the authorities led to an unprecedented solidarity with the victims .
The harmonious society came to the fore .
Tens of thousands of volunteers presented themselves .
Rescue teams flocked to the disaster areas from every province .
Practical help has reached a record high in China .
In short , openness by the authorities pays off .
The European institutions therefore need to hold the Chinese authorities to this unprecedented openness in the future .
This is certainly the case with the critical question already raised in China as to why so many school buildings collapsed .
China has been equally open with the rest of the world .
For instance , the Chinese Government accepted the Japanese offer to send a rescue team .
In the meantime , Taiwan has pledged EUR 42 million of relief for the earthquake victims .
I sincerely hope that this sympathy will lead to the normalisation that is needed in relations between China and Taiwan .
I can wholeheartedly join those Members who have expressed their deep sympathy for the inexpressible suffering of the Chinese people and I particularly appreciate Mr Sterckx signing the book of condolence at the Chinese Representation in Brussels on behalf of us all .
I can fully endorse that .
( NL ) First of all , I should like to express my sympathy for the relatives of the many victims of the natural disaster in Sichuan province on 12 May .
The Chinese authorities fortunately acted promptly after the disaster .
I also welcome the European Union response .
I therefore wish to support the European institutions , the Commission and the Council , in the approach they have opted for so far .
After initially refusing foreign help , China has opened its borders .
The Chinese authorities themselves have said that they can use every possible assistance to deal with this widespread disaster .
Japanese , South Korean and Russian rescue teams are already in the stricken area .
I find that and the fact that the neighbouring countries of Singapore and Taiwan are providing aid very encouraging .
Political relations with neighbouring countries are not always good and this might improve them .
A great deal of attention has been devoted to the disaster in the national and international media .
I am pleased that the press is being allowed access to the affected area and being given the opportunity to write what it wants and inform the rest of the country and the world .
Transparency is important in obtaining a clear picture of the disaster and also in ensuring that the right aid is provided on the ground .
That allows greater involvement by the rest of the population .
A free press and good governance usually go hand in hand .
A free press can report policy failings in good time and policies can be adjusted .
Building and government supervision in that area also need to be discussed .
Conclusions can be drawn for future building projects and recommendations can be made for better management and better official organisation .
Natural disaster prevention and preparation are primary government responsibilities .
It is only in recent years that these have been properly organised in many European countries too .
Finally , I should like to ask the European Commission and the Council to offer China help if necessary to train the authorities and the civil service in drawing up plans for dealing with crises and disasters .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Madam President .
Every decent person was shocked by last week 's natural disaster in the Far East .
It is natural that the attention of the world should be centred on these countries .
China is very much in the focus of public attention at present : the Olympic Games this summer , the Chinese Premier 's visit to Taiwan , events in Tibet , the Dalai Lama 's tour of Europe and how it was received , the visit to China by the European Commission ; all these things have contributed to focusing attention on China .
Now is not the time , however , to speak about boycotts or about Tibet .
The earthquake , which had a magnitude of 8.0 and left the Sichuan plateau in ruins , caused the deaths of 50 000 people and rendered millions of survivors homeless , not to mention the economic damage caused .
This is why I am asking every European Union institution to make sure that we give all the human assistance we can and make humanitarian aid available to those affected by the disaster for as long as it is needed .
Let us thank the rescue teams and aid organisations for their help ; they worked around the clock to improve the situation of the people living in the region , and let us assure the Chinese people of our unconditional solidarity and sympathy .
Thank you very much .
Madam President , an earthquake with a magnitude of 7.8 and an epicentre near Chengdu in Sichuan killed over 100 000 people on 12 May .
We can only offer our condolences to all those who have lost family members , and in particular parents who have lost children .
However , unlike the parallel tragedy in Burma , where some have suggested responsibility to protect should lead to direct international intervention , the Chinese have employed exceptional emergency resources , along with soldiers and medical staff .
China has welcomed foreign assistance , including Japanese rescue workers who are currently working in the area , as well as allowing the Chinese and foreign media to follow the disaster in its aftermath .
The European Union has already contributed EUR 10 million in aid , as Commissioner Michel has said .
We urge the Council and Commission to provide further emergency aid , technical assistance and reconstruction aid to the region concerned in the coming months and years .
Madam President , this is the time when we show solidarity and sympathy to China .
In these tragic days we have seen victims ; we have seen a great tragedy of society in China .
I have been impressed by the way in which the Chinese authorities have behaved - state leaders , administrative , provincial and party leaders - the behaviour of the Chinese state has been rational , something good at this time .
But at the same time , as a human rights politician , I have to report to Parliament that , according to the Tibetan Centre for Human Rights and Democracy , 55 nuns were arrested on 14 May .
That is a reality too in these days in China .
The earthquake cannot become a pretext for human rights abuses .
( HU ) Madam President , the terrible tragedies of the Chinese earthquake and the cyclone that preceded it in Burma shocked the public around the world .
The response by countries around the globe was exemplary , with countries from Japan to the United States , from Russia to Jordan providing aid to the tune of more than two billion dollars .
The European Union and its Member States reacted at once , and the Commission too took decisive action , sending EUR 2 million in emergency aid to China and assisting relief efforts by dispatching mobile hospital units , drugs , rescue equipment , and rubble-clearing gear .
It was particularly laudable on the part of the Tibetan government-in-exile in India to ask its followers to halt their demonstrations against China temporarily and make donations to help the earthquake victims .
Aid funds from Hungary originally intended for Burma were redirected to China due to the isolationist attitude of the Burmese military dictatorship .
The Chinese leadership , unlike the Myanmar regime , was wise to accept foreign aid .
The responsible manner in which China handled the publicity was also very positive , and it shows that there has been significant progress in terms of developing democracy . Thank you for your attention .
( PL ) Nature has once again proved how defenceless humankind is against major natural disasters and calamities .
China is the most populated country on earth , its economy is booming , and it is enthusiastically preparing for the forthcoming Olympic Games . It was , however , devastated by the recent tragic earthquake .
The people of China liken this disaster to earlier cataclysms accompanying major historical changes in that country .
I am not sure if that is the way to interpret this dreadful event . Nonetheless , I am certain that at such a time we must express our solidarity with the tens of thousands of ordinary men , women and children who are heroically enduring this personal and national tragedy .
That is why the European Parliament is right to send a clear signal to the Chinese people today , indicating that the Members of this House stand shoulder to shoulder with them , that we understand their suffering and want to help . After all , the principle of solidarity is one of the Union 's most important fundamental values .
Madam President , China must be congratulated for the way in which it has reacted to this disaster .
I would also like to thank the European Commission and Council for the way they have acted in dealing with this tragedy .
It is a welcome development in China that they have opened up the area to all of those who can give assistance ; hopefully it is something they will do in the future in relation to other areas .
Allowing the necessary information out to the world media is the correct step forward .
I should also like to congratulate the media for highlighting the scale of the disaster and the assistance that is required .
May it also be a lesson to China in seeing how they can use their power to put pressure on other regimes , in particular in Burma , to try to get them to see that they also need assistance from the world community .
Saving lives is the priority in China ; let others like the junta in Burma learn from this experience .
( PL ) Madam President , I should like to express my very sincere condolences to all those who have suffered and lost loved ones in China .
I wish to express my heartfelt sympathy to all those who have lost their children , wives or husbands .
I was myself in China last week when this dreadful disaster occurred .
I was in Beijing and Shanghai , and I represented Parliament at the opening of the Shanghai Food Fair . The disaster happened on the Monday , just as I was arriving .
I sent letters of condolence to the Chinese ambassadors in Poland and Brussels straight away .
I was able to see reports on the tragedy for myself on television , and realised the extent of human suffering caused .
I also saw the immediate large-scale help provided to the victims by ordinary people , the government and the army . The scale of the effort was unprecedented .
I should like to take advantage of this opportunity to thank the Union and all the Member States for the aid provided . I should also like to thank the House for its gesture of solidarity in holding this debate today .
I am sure aid will continue to be needed .
( PL ) I believe there are two different approaches to China .
One is to provide assistance following the misfortune that has recently befallen it .
We cannot react otherwise . It is our moral duty to help .
The fact that we enjoy a better financial and economic situation is a further reason to offer aid .
We simply have to do so .
The second approach involves remaining constantly aware that in normal times we should help the Chinese . By this I mean that , when the country is not afflicted by disaster , we ought to help the people of China by reminding their leaders about their citizens ' rights .
We should do so most emphatically .
We need to respond appropriately to both situations .
This will make things very clear . I believe the people of China will recognise our effort and thank us for it .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I think that it is very important that the European Parliament has decided to dedicate today 's debate to the natural disaster in China .
Primarily in order to be able to give China a message , on the one hand expressing the European Union 's condolences , and , as Mrs Grabowska expressed it , to convey to China and its people the European Union 's solidarity with them .
The difference is also obvious in the tone of the debate held on this , and that on the immediately preceding item .
And of course , part of the reason for this is also the way the Chinese leaders have acted , and we can truly say that its response to this terrible disaster was quick and efficient , that it has used considerable national resources , that it has named or appointed the Prime Minister personally as the aid coordinator .
To successfully overcome such difficulties there must be good coordination , and this was obviously achieved .
The media also regularly kept the public informed , both nationally and internationally , as to the developments .
Foreign journalists were allowed access to the affected areas , and also some foreign experts , according to our information , amongst others from Japan .
Therefore I believe that we can be satisfied that in facing this huge disaster and in providing help to its population , the Chinese authorities have been well organised , and above all , that that they are willing to accept foreign aid , including ours .
And I can assure you that the Council will continue to be prepared to provide help .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Very briefly , Madam President , you may be sure that I take due note of your remarks , and I wish to reply by saying that we will naturally still be willing to add to the aid we have already committed , aid based on analysis of needs .
Moreover , I feel that everyone welcomes China 's reaction , and the way in which the authorities have been open in terms of access and transparency .
I mean this with particular reference to access to the press .
I should like to take up an idea mooted by Mrs Flautre - the suggestion of providing a team of international experts to assess collateral risk and damage , particularly in relation to nuclear facilities .
I feel it would be a good idea to pass on this message .
There is no obligation to do so , of course , but I still think it would be good to initiate discussions with the Chinese authorities to this end .
I have received six motions for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Global treaty to ban uranium weapons ( debate )
author . - Madam President , in December 2007 the UN General Assembly accepted by an overwhelming majority a resolution that urged investigations into the health effects of uranium weapons on civilians and military personnel .
We congratulate Germany , Ireland and Italy as the only NATO countries that supported the UN resolution .
The reason for that support may be the fact that many of their soldiers returned with fatal diseases and / or later had children with serious malformations .
Therefore we appeal to other EU countries to follow their example and submit health reports in line with the UN request .
DU ( depleted uranium ) was used in the Balkans , Iraq and Afghanistan .
DU is waste , and is an extremely cheap material for making arms .
The estimated global stocks are 1.3 million tonnes .
Far less than 1 microgram inside the body can be fatal .
Apart from the radiation , DU is a chemical toxic compound .
Nobody informs the troops , or the populations of the countries where DU weapons are used .
The latest findings of the World Health Organisation 's experts concerning the harmful effects of DU have been censored .
We urge the EU to inform its citizens and the populations of targeted countries .
We call on the Commission and Council to make sure that an international treaty will be established as soon as possible .
In order to gain a detailed insight into the matter , it is high time for the Commission and Council to provide access to all existing reports and initiate the further investigations which Parliament has been urging since 2001 .
Meanwhile we reiterate our call to ban DU on the basis of the precautionary principle .
author . - ( NL ) The fight for a worldwide ban on armed uranium in weapons and ammunition is part of our general fight for arms control and disarmament .
We are focusing particular attention on weapons and ammunition that are extremely dangerous and harmful to civilians and remain dangerous long after the conflict is over , such as landmines , cluster bombs and weapons containing armed uranium .
I know it is a little ironic to be talking about weapons that are more dangerous and more harmful than others , but that is the way it is .
That is why we are concentrating on those that can have the worst effects on innocent civilian populations .
In November 2006 , this Parliament called for a moratorium on that type of weapon , that is weapons containing armed uranium .
Last year my country , Belgium , passed a law not just on a moratorium but on an actual ban on any use of uranium weapons and I think I can be a little proud of that .
Now I should like to ask the Commission and the Council what action they will take to make that moratorium more general and support a general ban .
Furthermore , as the previous speaker has already explained at length , uranium weapons also appear to have harmful effects on soldiers that use them or are exposed to their use .
Even if this might not yet be absolutely certain , it is nonetheless advisable for the Council to ensure that soldiers and other personnel taking part in operations under the European Security and Defence Policy are not exposed to risks of that kind .
I should therefore like to ask the Council what concrete measures are being taken to ensure that soldiers and personnel taking part in such operations are not exposed to these risks and that the population in the areas where such operations take place are also not exposed .
I shall be grateful for your response .
author . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , in a recent letter to The Times in London , nine former British military commanders urged the Government of the United Kingdom to join those campaigning for a ban on cluster munitions .
Their argument was the same as that made in the context of anti-personnel mines : however useful a weapon may be in the short term , in military logic the fact of causing indiscriminate harm in the long term is sufficient to justify the suspension of its use by responsible armed forces .
The same logic applies in relation to depleted uranium munitions .
The European Organisation of Military Associations , EUROMIL , is closely monitoring this issue and its position , based on information received from military personnel throughout Europe , is categorical : depleted uranium munitions must be abandoned as soon as possible .
The European Parliament has already come out in favour of a total ban on these weapons and the UN General Assembly resolution passed last December , which included the issue of armaments and munitions containing depleted uranium on the agenda for the sixty-third session of the General Assembly , confirmed that the European Parliament is right to take the lead and to ask the Council to also take a lead in this debate on disarmament and humanitarian law .
The ' counter ' arguments of the sceptics among us do not wash .
The most basic precautionary principle demands the stigmatisation of these weapons even before the extensive circumstantial evidence pointing to their indiscriminate and carcinogenic effect is replaced by irrefutable scientific proof .
What will people , and even today 's sceptics , say about us politicians in ten years ' time when the harmful effects of these weapons have become clear and unquestionable if , in the meantime , we have done nothing to take them out of circulation ?
Will they say the same as they now say about anti-personnel mines : how could they have waited so long !
Ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to stress that I call upon my country - Latvia - to subscribe to the UN Resolution of December 2007 .
Secondly , I call upon the High Representative to submit a reasoned opinion on the initiative contained in that resolution .
Thirdly , I call upon the European Union to ensure that information is circulated between the Member States concerning the types of munitions that may be expected to be used in operations .
In the context of depleted uranium , I have particular personal experience .
I was the Latvian defence minister for five and a half years .
It was precisely during my period of responsibility that Latvia joined the US coalition in the Iraq war .
At that time , suspicions arose on several occasions concerning the use of depleted uranium in Iraq .
The international community reacted sharply on this issue .
Latvian troops did not use depleted uranium munitions .
In Latvia , however , for several months I was asked to take political responsibility for these events as a minister of the coalition .
Unfortunately , as a minister of the coalition , I was not informed about the use of depleted uranium .
That is unacceptable .
Not only must the EU Member States seriously evaluate the need for munitions of this type in their arsenal of weapons , but the European Union must also ensure that it is compulsory for Member States to exchange information on the possible use of depleted uranium in operations .
Thank you for your attention .
Mr Kristovskis , I did not cut you off because your account as a Minister of Latvia was extremely important , but I would point out that you exceeded your time-limit by a considerable margin .
author . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , much has been said on this topic in the past and unfortunately I am of the view that much will still have to be said before a definitive solution is found ; my colleagues said as much earlier and explained it very well .
Measures have been put in place by some Member States to prohibit the production and any use of this type of armament for commercial or bellicose purposes .
There have been several requests by this Parliament , there are documents in the form of photographs and testimonies , and there are reasonable grounds for considering that Italian military personnel died as a result of exposure to these kinds of weapons .
There is a UN resolution expressing widespread concern and there have been various requests for in-depth studies of the issue .
There is the precautionary principle which , in accordance with European Union law , should dictate a general moratorium at least until such time as definitive scientific data is produced .
However , none of this has so far resulted in the anticipated outcome .
Depleted uranium continues to be used in theatres of war , whether rural or urban .
There is no question that chemical matter penetrates the soil and gets into aquifers and crops and therefore there can be no question that particles of depleted uranium which are in contact with the soil disperse into the subsoil , contaminating underground waters and agricultural produce , obviously resulting in the spread of disease among exposed populations and , to a lesser extent , worldwide through the water cycle and the cycle of elements , especially in an ever-expanding global market system .
There are , admittedly , no definitive studies as yet to prove the danger , but there can be no denying that the parameters of which we are aware today do not rule out that a risk may exist .
That consideration alone must force advanced democracies to study the matter in more depth and take a decision .
The European Union in particular cannot , in my opinion , continue to do nothing .
The Union has clear duties towards its Member States , clear duties towards the rest of the world , clear duties towards its own citizens .
The Union has economic resources which it can use and no restrictions in terms of science and available laboratories .
Doing nothing is unquestionably the result of a choice , not of a lack of available resources and means .
In view of all this , it is clear that the Council and the Commission cannot avoid their citizens , whether civilians or military personnel , from being posted to areas of the world where these types of munitions are and have been used , but neither can they avoid taking every possible initiative at an early stage to make adjustments to their manufacture and use and , in the light of scientific data , prepare for an outright ban and definitive destruction .
This is what we are seeking in the hope that the Council and the Commission will demonstrate in practice their sense of responsibility , given that this is not a woolly political issue , but a matter of public health .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Madam President , thank you very much .
In the name of the Council , I would also like to thank the MEP for posing the question concerning the global ban , or the global treaty to ban uranium weapons .
Of course , Members are probably aware of the fact that such an agreement does not yet exist .
There is no agreement that would regulate depleted uranium weapons on a multilateral level .
It is also known that there is no unanimity within the Council .
A debate on the effects of the weaponry containing depleted uranium has recently been held in the United Nations , where , at the end of last year , the UN First Committee adopted a resolution entitled ' Effects of the use of armaments and ammunitions containing depleted uranium ' .
As has already been mentioned , the EU Member States all voted differently on this resolution .
I would say very differently : five voted in favour , four voted against it , and all others abstained .
I would say that this is a rather good illustration of the current situation in the world .
With your permission , I would now briefly like to try and answer the particular questions that have been asked .
As regards the first question in connection with the European Parliament 's resolution concerning biological weapons and some types of conventional weapons , I would like to point out that the European Union has been , still is , and will continue to be very active in its international endeavours to implement the convention on biological and toxic weaponry .
Amongst other things , the EU played an important role at the Second Survey Conference in 2006 and it will also be active for the duration of the expert programme until the next Survey Conference , scheduled for the year 2011 .
As regards the Convention on Conventional Weapons , the European Union and its member states both actively participate in the current negotiations , which include a debate on the humanitarian consequences of cluster bombs .
The Member States have committed themselves to achieve by the end of this year , through negotiations , a legally binding instrument which will take into consideration all the aspects of cluster bombs .
Regarding the second question , I would like to explain that so far weapons containing depleted uranium have not been included in the European Unions ' strategy for weapons of mass destruction .
A debate is currently still under way on whether it is possible at all to include such ammunition in weapons of mass destruction .
There are , in fact , some who think that depleted uranium is already covered by the Convention on Conventional Weapons ; others believe that Protocol No 3 , which is part of this Convention , should be expanded to include the issue of projectiles and warheads containing depleted uranium .
In short , the debates are still ongoing .
As regards the third question , I should make it clear that the choice of military equipment , including the ammunition used in the operations conducted by the European Union , is within the remit of the Member States , and given that we do not have a multilateral agreement regarding this issue , I cannot offer any additional information on the use of depleted uranium .
The fourth question , regarding safety provisions for the soldiers and civilians involved in operations of the European Union : I should point out that it is the operation commander , within the operative plan approved by the European Council , who bears the responsibility for safety provisions , and who must take any measures he deems necessary .
Of course , at the same time he must take into consideration operational limitations .
In any civilian missions of the European Union , this responsibility lies with the head of the mission under the civilian operation commander 's leadership .
As to the last question , regarding dialogue between the European Council and the USA , non-governmental organisations and individuals , I can only say that until now in the dialogue with the United States this issue has not been raised - nor has it yet been raised with the other parties mentioned in the question .
In any event , I shall follow the further debate on this matter with interest .
Thank you .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Parliament resolution adopted in November 2006 invites the European Union and the Member States to undertake to extend the scope of Protocol III of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons in a bid to curtail the use of depleted uranium weapons .
I wish to remind the House that Parliament is calling for action which , as you know , goes beyond the powers of the Commission , given that the Community is not a signatory to the Convention .
Moreover , under the Treaties , the Community institutions have no powers in military affairs .
I have no wish , nevertheless , to convey the impression that the Commission is indifferent to problems in connection with the production , storage and utilisation of weapons covered by the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons ( CCW ) or the issue of inhumane weapons in general . Its position is quite the contrary , in fact .
The Commission is fully engaged in implementing a common course of action , adopted by the Council last year , in favour of the universal nature of the CCW and its Protocols .
Three seminars have been held this year , one for Latin America and the Caribbean in Santo Domingo in March , and two more for the African countries in Lomé last month .
Following these seminars , the Dominican Republic has already announced that it is willing to ratify the Convention shortly , and Surinam has stated that it is ready to take the necessary steps towards ratification .
The Commission also supports implementation of the Biological Weapons Convention and is also following up initiatives to create a new instrument in response to humanitarian concerns aroused by cluster bombs , within the framework of the CCW and the Oslo Peace Process .
The Commission has also taken action in response to the problems caused by explosive ordnance .
In 2006 , for example , five million euros were disbursed to help clear explosive war debris in Lebanon .
In relation to the second question , the scientific results available to us cannot confirm that depleted uranium ( DU ) munitions entail a significant risk to the health of civilian populations in the areas of combat concerned , or to military personnel who are serving or have served in these areas .
This is the opinion stated in surveys by the UN , WHO and the IAEA ( International Atomic Energy Agency ) , and also a Group of Experts established by the European Commission according to Article 31 of the Euratom Treaty , which pronounces as follows , and I quote : ' On the basis of available information , it is concluded that exposure to DU could not produce any detectable health effects under realistic assumptions of the doses that would be received ' , unquote .
The Commission is willing to take another look at the issue .
It will also continue to guarantee the health of its personnel and be ruled by WHO directives in the event of deployment under conditions entailing potential exposure to DU .
Concerning dialogue with EUROMIL , the Commission is of course willing to talk to any representatives of civil society .
In relation to the last three questions , the Commission does not currently intend to make any financial commitments in these areas .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( CS ) Weapons containing depleted uranium represent an enormous burden on the environment .
The argument that their harmful effects have not been proven sounds totally absurd to anyone who has ever seen the consequences of their use .
Dirty bombs will shatter into pieces the several centimetre thick armour plates of the most modern tanks .
Their destructive power is enormous .
They have an impact on people 's health .
They kill without mercy .
There is no doubt about the need to cease trading in them , and to stop their production , use and storage .
Parliament and the Union are building European Armed Forces and European defence , step by step .
We will be the future partners of both NATO and the US .
We must therefore become a credible partner .
Standing up and shouting ' I am calling for a moratorium on depleted uranium ' is comical .
Equally comical is to call on the Council to prepare an impact study .
The first necessity is to reach a political consensus between the Member States , such as France , Britain and perhaps the Czech Republic .
Then we have to start cooperating with the UN , to lay the groundwork for the global treaty to ban depleted uranium .
This will include the preparation of a plan for a gradual ban on manufacturing , acceptable to all Member States , and on storing of and trading in uranium , and will set the date when the use is finally banned .
Then we have to have a conference that will adopt this plan and start the process leading up to the final ban on these weapons .
We need an accurate analytical study assessing the side effects .
What we need in the first place , though , is political cooperation that will start the gradual process of finding the political will and achieving international recognition , consensus and decision .
This process will take years .
It would be great if the European Union were a party to the new treaty on the ban on all military use of depleted uranium .
Therefore we must behave in a responsible manner .
Let us not allow silly shouting , professional ignorance and unfinished work to impair the EU 's credibility .
We need to continue to be partners in this important game .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - In the UK , hundreds of veterans believe that exposure to depleted uranium in the First Gulf War has left them with chronic illnesses and disabilities and in Iraq there is evidence that the use of depleted uranium has caused an increase in babies being born with only one eye or who are missing both eyes .
Seven of the eight babies missing both eyes had fathers who were exposed to depleted uranium during the war in Iraq in 1991 .
At least 17 countries still have depleted uranium weapons in their military arsenals , including three EU members : France , Greece and the UK .
We now urgently need an international treaty establishing an immediate moratorium on the use , development , production , stockpiling , transfer and testing of depleted uranium weapons as well as the recycling or destruction of the existing stocks .
I hope everyone will support this resolution .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , caution alone is quite sufficient reason to work towards the effective elimination of weapons using depleted uranium .
Work on expert studies on the effects of the use of such weapons on human beings and on the natural environment should most certainly be speeded up .
A moratorium on the use of weapons of this type could be brought in immediately , however , and the issue dealt with under the new European Security Strategy .
The challenge now before us is to start work on an international treaty based on the UN system . Such a treaty would regulate the use , production , storage and testing of this type of weapon .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , this debate was long overdue .
I am glad that we are holding it today .
Depleted uranium is used by many countries , and especially Western countries , as ammunition in their wars because of its high penetrative power , especially against armoured vehicles .
DU munitions , however , contain highly poisonous chemical substances - in other words they are toxic - and they are radioactive too .
Depleted uranium is a by-product of the nuclear industry , resulting from the enrichment of uranium or the production of nuclear weapons .
The use of nuclear energy , in short , is also part of the problem .
DU munitions have long-term effects .
When a hard target is hit , depleted uranium is released at high temperatures and burns into depleted-uranium oxides , which take the form of a fine alpha-radioactive toxic dust that is easily inhaled and can be spread by wind and water .
This dust is difficult to remove from the environment and is trapped in the lungs on inhalation .
We know of the Gulf War syndrome and the Balkans syndrome ; time and again the same phenomenon has been observable , with combatants evidently contracting cancers , such as lung cancer , because of their exposure to DU oxide .
There have also been increases in the incidence of such cancers among the population of areas where these munitions have been used .
The interesting thing is that the military effectiveness of DU munitions is actually very limited , while their use entails numerous incalculable risks .
NATO used DU munitions in its war of aggression against Yugoslavia .
In Iraq the US forces have used a total of 300 tonnes of DU munitions .
There is an increased percentage of deformed children in that country , especially in Baghdad .
The Government of Afghanistan has now called for an inquiry into the use of DU munitions in Afghanistan and says that the US military did not inform it that DU munitions were being used , particularly in the eastern part of the country .
DU munitions were used in the war in Lebanon , mainly by Israel , and they were also used very extensively in the first Gulf War .
The figure of contaminated combatants has been put at 66 000 .
The problem is plain to see .
The first war pensions for the effects of depleted uranium have been awarded to veterans such as Kenny Duncan from the UK .
If DU dust were a cosmetic product or a substance used in food production , for example , it would have been banned long ago .
Troops are instructed to wear protective clothing when dealing with DU munitions .
EUROMIL , the European Organisation of Military Associations , has been calling for a ban on weapons that fire these munitions .
Belgium has banned DU munitions , and for that we congratulate it .
The UN Disarmament and International Security Committee voted by 122 to 6 , with 35 abstentions , to call for a report on the harmful effects of the use of armaments and ammunitions containing depleted uranium . The six votes against included those of the Czech Republic , France , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom .
What we need is a ban on the production and use of DU munitions .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the use of depleted uranium for bellicose purposes is contrary to international law ; there is incontrovertible evidence of its genuine toxicity both to man and the environment .
I agree that , as part of European Security Strategy , full consideration must be given to the matter and I am of the view that the ban on these weapons in the Member States of the Union must be total and absolute .
Both questions put forward assessments and raise reasonable joint issues which have been very widely documented ; here I shall take the opportunity to note the example of the Italian soldiers posted to the Balkans who are still awaiting fair compensation which , I fear , they will never receive .
As it does not appear able to remedy damage caused in the past , the Union should give a decisive , strong signal at least for the future by banning the manufacture , storage and placing on the market of this type of arms within the Member States of the Union .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I consider Jana Hybášková 's call for real politik to be misplaced and altogether cynical .
Sloth or negligence , like State secrets , are not acceptable where people 's health is concerned .
The use of uranium weapons has devastating and irreparable consequences .
When they explode , uranium projectiles irradiate fine , contaminating dust ; they contaminate the air , land and water , penetrate the respiratory system , and increase the likelihood of tumours , leukaemias and malformations .
Anyone who uses them is evidently acting in violation of international humanitarian laws .
Since the Gulf War of 1991 , the association of relatives of military personnel victims has calculated that there have been 50 deaths in Italy alone .
Recently the Minister for Defence said there had been 77 deaths and that the number of people suffering illness was between several hundred and about two thousand .
Over 2 000 tonnes of depleted uranium were used between 1991 and 2003 .
Some 70 % of the territory of Iraq is contaminated and even today we are not certain of the extent of the terrible human cost of depleted uranium .
In Basra hospital in Iraq I have seen the bodies of deformed children ; I have seen the terrible damage wrought on their little bodies .
There are thousands of faceless civilians who still live and die in land contaminated by radiation : in Iraq , in Afghanistan , in Kosovo , in Bosnia , in Somalia , unaware of their fate .
Since 2001 we , as the European Parliament , have been seeking the introduction of a moratorium .
We confirmed this in 2006 with the adoption of a resolution on chemical weapons and inhumane conventional weapons .
The resolution adopted by an overwhelming majority at the UN in 2007 urges the Member States of the United Nations to examine the damage to health .
Six countries voted against : the US and Israel and , unfortunately , several Member States of the European Union , namely France , the United Kingdom , the Czech Republic and the Netherlands .
They should instead have followed the example given by Belgium which , in March 2007 , was the first country in the world to decide to ban depleted uranium completely because of its toxicity .
Along with other colleagues of , I am glad to say , all political persuasions , I argued strongly for this debate because it is crucial to act against violations of international , humanitarian and environmental law and to act to ensure that military hierarchies , states and the war industry assume their responsibilities in full .
Omissions and military secrets , failure to implement rules regarding protection and the precautionary principle could sweep the danger of uranium under the carpet along with the opportunity to prevent a large number of deaths .
On those grounds I reassert the calls made in our resolution , especially to ensure maximum transparency by signposting contaminated areas and above all pursuing the idea of an immediate moratorium to achieve a complete ban soon on depleted uranium weapons and cluster bombs , which are still claiming victims .
In Lebanon , for example , the Israeli army launched more than a million cluster bombs on villages and homes in the last few hours before it withdrew .
Take action .
Thank you to the Council and the Commission for their replies but also for what they will do , despite the limitations referred to by Commissioner Michel , to achieve freedom from uranium weapons and cluster bombs .
( PL ) Depleted uranium is 70 % heavier than lead .
Due to its kinetic energy , even a very small calibre missile can therefore penetrate a tank 's armour plating .
That is why depleted uranium has been used by the military .
There is approximately one and a half million tonnes of depleted uranium in the world .
One can readily understand the temptation to make use of it .
As it turns out , however , weapons of this type have not proved nearly as effective as was anticipated . Seventy per cent of damaged Iraqi tanks were damaged by weapons of other types .
Obviously , the question of the consequences of using such weapons remains outstanding .
It should be clearly stated that no definitive answer has yet emerged .
After all , thousands of individuals have been working in uranium mines for many years , with no obvious ill effects .
Nonetheless , there is still doubt surrounding the issue and a moratorium should therefore be declared , to allow the matter to be finally resolved .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the nature and extent of the damage resulting from the use of depleted uranium is such that it seems inappropriate to describe it as ' collateral ' .
The damage is wrought in successive waves on enemy personnel and on the personnel using these weapons : for example , Gulf War syndrome , Balkan syndrome .
The people who then bear the cost for decades afterwards are the civilian populations , resident in the theatres of war , who inhale and ingest the depleted uranium as it contaminates aquifers and the food chain , and who experience the effects of radiation .
The highest price in terms of the typical damage caused by exposure to heavy metal radiation , of which we are all aware , is paid by children , growing bodies , especially unborn children .
The exponential growth of genetic malformations and infantile tumours in areas where uranium has been used is proof of this .
A recent study by the BBC in Britain showed that 24 hours after the massive bombardment of the Balkans , readings of atmospheric radioactivity in the north of England were the highest on record .
We therefore propose not only a ban on depleted uranium but also the prosecution for war crimes of those who use it in full knowledge of its consequences and of those who do so when a ban is in place .
Mr President , while we are on the subject of radioactive weapons , this Parliament has been remarkably quiet about a British citizen - unfortunately consequently an EU citizen - killed by a radioactive weapon in London in December 2006 .
I refer of course to Mr Alexander Litvinenko , who was murdered in an act of state-sponsored terrorism by means of polonium-210 .
The chief suspect for the crime is Mr Andrei Lugovoi , who is now a Member of the Russian Parliament and cannot be extradited under the Russian Constitution .
Meanwhile Mr Litvinenko 's widow is denied an inquest into her husband 's death in the British courts , which could scrutinise the evidence of his murder in the absence of a trial of those suspected of the crime .
This murder was an act of war by Russia on the UK .
The British Government does not want to confront that fact .
But if you want to discuss radioactive weapons , why not hold a debate on Mr Litvinenko 's murder and its far-reaching consequences ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Very briefly , I would like to express my thanks for this debate .
I would like to reiterate that the Council remains very active concerning external security issues in line with the EU strategy against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
Within these strategies the priority objectives of the Council are constantly being updated , and new developments in this area are constantly being taken into consideration , and are then also included in the updated documents .
An example of this is , for instance , the measure adopted by the Council , in support of the global adoption of the convention on banning and limitation of some types of conventional armaments .
It is interesting that the purpose of Protocol Five in this Convention is to reduce as much as possible the creation of explosive military waste , once the military conflicts are over .
It is also interesting that the largest producers and users of armaments containing depleted uranium are already signatories to the above-mentioned Convention .
It is too early to make any forecasts yet .
I have mentioned the situation in the Council , which is evident from the voting results on the General Assembly 's First Committee Resolution , which has been mentioned several times today .
It is to be hoped that the debates such as the present one in the European Parliament will contribute to achieving a consensus in the Council .
However , there will more on this in the near future .
Thank you .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Very briefly , Mr President , obviously I take due note of the splendid remarks and specific proposals made here , and have every intention of passing them on to my colleague Benita Ferrero-Waldner and the Commission .
I must , however , remind the House that the Commission 's scope for action is extremely limited .
It obviously has declamatory or incantatory powers ; it may submit proposals , but has no power beyond that .
I do wish to make this clear .
Having said that , I do take due note of the very clear message that there must be a guarantee of transparency , as Mrs Morgantini said . I am quite in favour of this point .
She suggests a moratorium , and I will pass on this suggestion .
I also seem to have perceived the need to re-update the surveys performed to date , or the possibility of this .
There is no reason why these surveys should not be updated again .
You should know in any case that I will report to the Commission on all the fine speeches and arguments I have heard here , and I have no doubt that in due course initiatives will be taken .
In any case , however , ideas will be passed on and the voluntarist spirit will form part of the process , believe me , because it is obvious we must hope that all the other European countries will be able to do what Belgium has done .
I am not saying this merely because it is Belgium , but of course I am pleased it was my country that did it .
This is perhaps what you were seeking .
There have certainly been some useful and interesting sources of inspiration , but I wish to let you know that I will pass on all the suggestions , comments and requests made here in all conviction and sincerity .
I have received six motions for a resolution pursuant to Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.35 p.m. and resumed at 6 p.m. )

Council Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0156 / 2008 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Passport discrimination in the EU
In some EU countries , passports and other documents used for crossing borders are issued not only to the nationals of those countries , but also to stateless persons residing permanently in the countries concerned .
Given that most of these persons belong to ethnic minorities , does the Council intend to adopt or propose formats for passports and other similar documents which no longer include negative details such as ' aliens ' , and thus put an end to discrimination based on ethnic origin ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I have a rather brief answer .
Namely , that the issuing of passports or travel documents to stateless persons permanently resident in a Member State does not fall under the competence of the Community .
Therefore , neither the European Commission nor the Council is competent to propose any changes in connection with this sort of passport , or any other travel documents .
( ES ) Mr President , the reply from the President-in-Office of the Council is very clear indeed : there may be no discussion of this kind of issue .
Perhaps I ought to ask the question in slightly different terms .
Can the Council envisage any kind of EU harmonisation in relation to passports and identification of passports , or does it feel this issue will be permanently beyond the Member States ' jurisdiction ?
( DE ) I would like to ask a question about a different type of discrimination .
In July , your country , Slovenia , is planning to introduce motorway toll stickers and intends to issue two variants : a yearly and a half-yearly sticker .
This amounts to discrimination against tens of millions of EU residents travelling to the Mediterranean for their summer holidays .
What proposal does the Presidency intend to make to the Slovenian Government to resolve this problem ?
My thanks to the Presidency .
I welcome the fact that 13 Member States to date have ratified the Lisbon Treaty .
You will be aware that Ireland is the only country that will be ratifying it through the referendum process .
We have major difficulty at home at the moment in trying to counteract the various different groups on the ' no ' side .
These groups spread fear and confusion in relation to the Lisbon Treaty , deliberately or not , often on issues that are very important but have nothing to do with the Treaty .
Can you then confirm for me , Mr President-in-Office , that Ireland 's right to veto future direct taxation proposals will in no way be compromised by the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , and that there is no connection between the WTO negotiations and the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty at all ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Mrs Doyle , thank you for the two additional questions .
I can confirm that , firstly , any decisions in the sphere of taxation will continue to be made consensually .
In other words , even once the Lisbon Treaty comes into effect , provided it is ratified by all the Member States , Ireland , or any other Member State , will continue to have the right to veto any matter concerning taxes .
As regards your second question , namely regarding the negotiations currently being held within the World Trade Organisation , I can also confirm that these negotiations have no direct connection with ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
Therefore , to both of your additional questions the answer is - yes .
Mr President , I too want to ask the Minister a question with regard to the Treaties and the ratification process in Ireland at the moment .
One of the arguments that is raging at the moment is that , after the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , countries may lose their veto in the ratification of international trade agreements - WTO agreements , for example .
As it stands , there is a veto , and the ' no ' side are maintaining that after Lisbon this will change .
I would like the confirmation of the Slovenian presidency as to whether this is the case or not .
ith the luck of the Irish , the electors of Ireland alone are to be allowed to decide on a Treaty which fundamentally affects the future of us all .
Will you , on behalf of the Council , pledge to accept their democratic verdict or , like the voters of France and Holland , will they be treated with contempt if they dare to vote ' no ' , very much in the disreputable tradition of ' Croppy , lie down ! ' and Nice II ?
Ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately I cannot give the floor to any more speakers as the Rules of Procedure do not permit this .
I believe everyone is aware that we are studying a change to this Question Time in order to make it more flexible and also more useful .
I myself am assisting the working group and we will definitely have positive news in due course .
At the moment , the Rules stand as they are and I cannot give the floor to Mr Higgins , despite this having been requested , because he was the third person to request this .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) As the scope of the question is quite wide my answer will be slightly longer .
The negotiations with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on their EU membership have not yet commenced .
Until such time as it joins the European Union , the Stabilisation and Association Agreement is currently the primary framework for the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 's European relations .
In line with the priority tasks defined in the Association Partnership , the country 's progress towards gaining European Union membership has been assessed in the Commission 's Progress Report .
As a rule , the report is published at the end of October or the beginning of November .
The Council is looking forward to the Commission producing its next assessment in autumn this year .
In its conclusions of 10 December 2007 , the European Council took note of the progress that the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had made , and expressed its regret that the implementation of its reforms had been delayed .
The delays were due to internal political tensions , as a result of which the attention of the country 's political institutions was turned away from the European integration priority tasks .
At this point we can mention some positive examples , indicating that the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is making efforts to avoid such delays .
Of the political criteria , the country has achieved progress in the sphere of decentralisation , anticorruption policy , cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , as well as in the interethnic relations , and the implementation of the Ohrid Agreement .
Following the publication of the EU Commission 's November Progress Report , the country adopted the Law on Public Prosecutors , the Law on the Public Prosecutors Council and legislation on the Board for Interethnic Issues , and the empty seat on the Judicial Council has also been filled .
Progress has also been made in the sphere of security of documents , border controls and migration .
The Council will continue to encourage all the political parties to intensify their dialogue and cooperation and that with different ethnic groups , so that the country can achieve progress with the integration process .
The Council will also continue to encourage both sides to renew their efforts constructively , so that in the negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations a mutually acceptable solution regarding the name issue could be achieved .
This would improve regional cooperation and contribute to good relations with their neighbours .
The main reforms that the country still needs to carry out in line with the recommendations from the Association Partnership areas are :
in accordance with the Ohrid Agreement they must continue with decentralisation : two thirds of the municipalities are already in the second stage of the fiscal decentralisation ;
they must improve equal representation of ethnic minorities in public administration , the sphere of internal affairs being a good example of this .
The next reforms are the police reform , the judicial reform , and the two major unresolved issues from the so-called May Agreement requiring a wider political consensus , namely the law on languages , and the agreement on regulating the status of victims from the conflicts of 2001 .
On 18 February 2008 the Council adopted a decision on the principles , principal tasks and conditions from the EU Association Partnership with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
The Council has updated the current partnership by defining the updated principal tasks for further work on the basis of the findings contained in the Commission 's Progress Report for the year 2007 .
Thank you very much for your response .
I am just wondering : are you satisfied that the tensions have now eased enough to allow progress to be made ?
And if they have eased sufficiently , what sort of timescale are you talking about for the necessary reforms to be implemented in full so that the full negotiation process can get back on track ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) As we know , in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia elections have been called for 1 June .
We hope that the campaign period will not cause a delay in carrying out the necessary reforms .
Also , hopefully , the reforms will be continued before and also after the election period .
In particular , the Presidency is making efforts to achieve progress in the integration of the West Balkan countries , including the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on its road towards European Union membership .
We hope that this progress will be achieved as soon as possible , and that the country will be given , among other things , a date when membership negotiations can commence .
Of course , this primarily depends on the country itself , on the rate and quality of their reforms which still need to be completed , and which I have mentioned in my answer .
As the author is not present , Question No 4 lapses .
Subject : Climate change and international security
Javier Solana 's recent paper on Climate Change and International Security draws the Council 's attention to some major issues relating to climate change and addresses in particular the implications of territorial claims , exclusive economic zones and access to new trade routes brought about by the consequences of climate change .
The emphasis on security and geopolitical power opportunities is a departure from the EU 's approach to climate change to date that looks to curbing emissions and increasing EU and global preparedness .
Is the Council working towards a position and strategy relating to these important issues ?
I thank the Minister for his reply , but I wonder if the institutions are to some extent at cross purposes here .
On the one side we are staring environmental catastrophe in the face , with Europe and the world continuing as normal , while on the other side we move to engage with the problem of climate change and take the hard decisions that our future generations are dependent upon .
As the Minister has said , in its Spring conclusions the Council did undertake to move towards tackling the serious problem of climate change and to take the serious decisions needed .
But is Mr Solana singing from the same hymn sheet ?
He has been saying different things : talking of the need for fossil fuel exploration rights in one of the last environmentally pristine places on earth , and calling this an opportunity .
Does that not fly in the face of what the European Council is saying ?
Could we please co-ordinate our messages ?
We do have the rapporteur on the climate here , Mrs Doyle , who will be listening to all of this .

President in Office . - ( SL ) I can assure you that the Secretary-General of the Council - the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy - has , without any doubt , the same viewpoint as the European Council .
He prepared his recommendation on behalf of the Council .
The Council has welcomed the report , and has not found any discrepancies or contradictions in relation to the Council 's other decisions , including decisions in the sphere of the integrated climate protection and energy policy .
So I do not share the opinion that there are any discrepancies between the High Representative 's activities , and the Council 's decisions or intentions .
( ES ) Mr President , I wish to pick up on the reply from the Council to our colleague 's pertinent question by suggesting , particularly in the Member States around the Mediterranean , that we should also discuss the problem of climate change .
One of the proposals in the Commission communication concerns enhancement of the Horizon 2020 Initiative for the depollution of the Mediterranean region , both a victim and a cause of climate change , and there can be no doubt that some very pragmatic action can be taken through this proposal .
Does the Council not feel that this is a regional priority in the fight against climate change within the framework of the EU 's global agenda ?
President in Office . - ( SL ) I believe that Mr Higgins is aware that the Council attributes great importance to the efficient management of external borders .
With the free movement of people within the European Union , the appropriate protection and management of external borders is of key importance so as to provide the Member States with internal security and to effectively combat terrorism , illegal immigration and people trafficking .
To this end the European Council has so far produced a number of important measures .
It has , among other things , adopted legal instruments such as the Schengen Borders Code , the External Borders Fund , the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States - FRONTEX for short .
It has also adopted measures in connection with the setting up of the Rapid Border Intervention Teams .
I would also like to draw your attention to three communications which the Commission made public on 13 February this year .
These communications contain proposals and recommendations on a possible means of border management at the EU level , on the future development of FRONTEX , on the possible formation of the European Border Surveillance System called EUROSUR , and on the external borders entry-exit system .
The debate on the Commission 's proposals and recommendations from these communications took place on 12 March , at the Ministerial Conference in Slovenia .
It is anticipated that in June the Justice and Home Affairs Council will adopt the Council 's conclusions on the management of the external borders of the EU Member States .
These conclusions should list the short-term and long-term priorities for FRONTEX 's future development , further recommendations regarding the European Commission 's work on using state-of-the art security technology , better management of external borders and guidelines on further work for establishing EUROSUR .
Apart from this , we have been carefully monitoring FRONTEX 's activities , particularly as regards the implementation of joint operations , the European Coastal Patrol Network , the further upgrading and utilisation of equipment which is recorded centrally , the so-called CRATE , and the possible deployment of the Rapid Border Intervention Teams .
The establishment of a Maritime Analysis and Operations Centre - Narcotics ( MAOC-N ) in September of last year was an important step forward for border protection .
This is a centre for criminal prosecution with military support , established by seven Member States : the United Kingdom , France , Spain , Ireland , the Netherlands , Italy and Portugal .
The centre is also available to any other Member State .
The centre 's objective is to eradicate the illegal trade in banned substances by sea or by air across the Atlantic to Europe and Western Africa .
This objective should be achieved with intensified collection , exchange and analysis of information , and with optimal utilisation of the Member States ' maritime and air facilities .
Among the Council 's priority tasks should also be strengthened border control , and the collection and exchange of classified information on the routes of drug trafficking .
Mr President , as drug usage increases and as more drugs become available , it is clear the security authorities are unable to stop the drug supply from entering especially from South America .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you made a reference to coastal patrol ; are you and the Council aware of the fact that there is only an occasional inspector on duty at the harbours and airports of the Atlantic coast in the west of Ireland ?
There is only one boat .
And it is only too clear that Ireland is being used as a gateway to export drugs to the other Member States - to your own country and to other countries in the European Union .
Are you and the Council worried about this situation ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I am thankful to Mr Higgins for his additional question .
I should like to emphasise that the European Council is really concerned about this , and will remain concerned while drug trafficking continues to exist .
As regards Ireland , I should like to emphasise , as I mentioned earlier , that Ireland is one of those countries that have , in September last year , established the Maritime Analysis and Operation Centre - Narcotics ( MAOC-N ) .
Its task is precisely the eradication of illegal trade in banned substances that is taking place via this route , that is , either by sea or by air , across the Atlantic , towards Europe or West Africa .
So given the recent establishment of this centre , I expect it to become more active in future , and the Presidency will support these developments , providing encouragement with the leverage that is at its disposal .
( DE ) Minister , the extension of the area covered by the Schengen Accords last December has raised concerns among many citizens of the EU that they no longer enjoy the level of security to which they had become accustomed .
Following the enlargement of the Schengen area , can it be said that cooperation between the police authorities of Member States in the enlarged area has achieved the desired results ?
( EL ) Mr President , I thank the Council representative for his answer to my question about safeguarding acceptable standards for decent working and living conditions .
Decent work is an aim of both the UN global community , under the auspices of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) , and the EU .
We have in any case passed a resolution on this .
How does the Council intend to implement these decent working and living conditions for citizens , particularly for children ?
( PT ) We agree with the aims behind alternative energies but it is clear that the food problem and hunger which seem to be increasing are making many people wonder whether biofuels are the right step .
My question is , while agreeing that we need to move forward with alternative energies , whether you are able to say publicly and assure our citizens that this route is not increasing the cost of foodstuffs and world hunger .
My thanks to the President-in-Office for the further call he has made tonight .
I wonder , given the changes in government in Cuba , whether he and the Council have detected any change and increase in the enthusiasm of Cubans to enter into the open political dialogue he mentioned ?
I wonder also if he could reflect on the current debate taking place in the United States and the debate that no doubt takes place between the Council and the United States in our transatlantic relations .
Does he detect any change of policy there which may incentivise further improvements in human rights in Cuba ?
( SK ) The release of the four Cuban prisoners of conscience is a very positive step , as is the Cuban Government 's signing of two legally binding covenants from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights at the United Nations on 28 February 2008 .
However , at least 58 people still remain incarcerated in Cuban prisons purely for insisting on their fundamental rights .
In the context of these two UN human rights covenants , what can the Council do for the 75 prisoners of conscience from the ' March group ' ?
I trust that the Council will call on high-ranking Cuban officials to review all cases concerning Cuban dissidents by impartial and non-partisan courts , and will try to get them released .
I was slightly disappointed by your reply because I think the Cubans are indicating a real willingness to move and that the change in government is a change in emphasis in terms of the Cuban approach to the outside world .
It would be a great pity if the EU did not use this opportunity and grasp the chance to have a serious dialogue with Cuba .
So let us not keep putting more pressure on Cuba to make concessions , let us start with the EU engaging with the Cubans .
( DE ) Mr President , it baffles me how the Council can simply leave without batting an eyelid .
I have been a Member of this House for a long time .
Question Time with the Council used to begin at 9 p.m. , and the Council was with us until half past ten .
Then the Council asked that Question Time be brought forward to 6 or 7 p.m. , and we deferred to its wishes .
That was our first mistake .
Since then , Question Time has always started late , and the representatives of the Council have had to leave on the stroke of seven , regular as clockwork .
It is not the fault of the Slovenian Presidency ; it is a general problem that we must discuss with the Council .
For half of the year , the representatives of the Council can surely stay until Thursday in this beautiful city of Strasbourg and be available to us on Wednesday evenings too .
Your comment is noted .
Today we actually started on time at 6 p.m.
The sitting therefore did not start late .
In any event , the Council has asked for the floor and may speak .
( DE ) Mr President , allow me to inform the Council that Question Time normally lasts for an hour and a half ; when we complain to the Bureau , we are invariably told that Question Times which last for only one hour are the exception .
The exceptional arrangement applies every time now .
Mr Posselt , that is a matter for the Conference of Presidents to decide .
It is not a question of whether or not I agree .
I should like us to have more time , but we must abide by the decision of the Conference of Presidents .
In any event , your criticism has been noted and will be forwarded to the Conference of Presidents .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Mid-term review of industrial policy ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Jordan Cizelj , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the mid-term review of industrial policy - A contribution to the EU 's Growth and Jobs Strategy .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , three years ago we modernised the industrial policy of the EU and established it as a cornerstone of our entire economic strategy .
We are able to say today that it was the right decision .
European industry is better placed as a major competitor when it comes to defending its share of the market .
The excellent export performance of European industry contributes to macroeconomic stability , even in times of crisis .
On the basis of a mid-term review , we have presented you with a timetable and work plan for the coming years .
I ask you to support this plan .
I should like to thank Mrs Jordan Cizelj for drafting this report , and you will understand why I am truly pleased and want to express my delight that this report is so favourable and gives us such strong backing .
Like me , the rapporteur sees the main functions of industrial policy in the creation of the right conditions for businesses , making the European Union a sustainably attractive location for industries and strengthening our industrial base so that we shall also have sufficient good and secure manufacturing jobs in future .
Industrial policy in the 21st century no longer bears any resemblance to what used to be called industrial policy .
Let me reiterate clearly that our industrial policy is based on the premise that our companies must face up to competition and that we cannot protect them from competition and indeed have no wish to do so .
Our task is not to protect industries .
Our job is to provide them with conditions in which they can fully develop their potential .
I am pleased that the parliamentary report endorses not only the aims of our industrial policy but also the method by which we are pursuing them .
This method is based on a combination of cross-sectoral and single-sector initiatives .
There is certainly a need to act in numerous areas that have a great impact on the whole of European industry .
Let me cite just three examples , namely cutting red tape for European businesses , strengthening their innovative capacity and fostering an enterprise culture .
On the other hand there are matters that only concern specific industries .
Let me remind you that we have introduced a system which guarantees the safe production and marketing of chemical substances in the Union .
We have just launched a comprehensive package of measures designed to strengthen the European defence industry , and there is an ambitious programme , adopted only this week , to simplify the legal provisions governing the automotive industry .
I could add many more examples to this list .
All of these things have been done in close partnership , not only with industry but also with all groups of stakeholders .
I attach great importance to the fact that we have done all this together with Parliament , with the trade unions and with the environmental and consumer organisations in open , transparent and verifiable processes .
I reject the idea of making industrial policy behind closed doors or in back rooms .
European industry is the vital driving force of innovation in Europe and an absolutely crucial factor in safeguarding our position in global trade , and its achievements therefore merit recognition and praise ; they merit measures to enhance the ability of European industry to maintain its performance in future as far as possible , and they merit efforts on our part to meet the challenges that lie immediately ahead .
These challenges stem , of course , from the gathering momentum of economic globalisation - we should have no illusions about that .
What we have seen so far is only the beginning .
The same surely applies to technological change and the pace at which it is happening , with all the implications for productivity , structures and jobs , and , of course , to the increasingly central question of the ways in which our climatic and environmental objectives impact on our industrial policy .
Adjustments are needed here , and they will occupy us in the immediate future .
For this reason , the Commission 's next major initiative , which is to be launched before the end of this month , is the initiative for sustainable industrial development , a sustainable industrial policy and sustainable industrial production .
The political aim is to pursue an integrated approach comprising environmental , employment and industrial policies .
We want a strong economy , safe jobs , less energy dependence and a clean environment .
The way to these goals lies in products and processes that are innovative and designed to meet future needs , less environmental pollution in Europe and more support for other regions in their essential efforts to cope with climate change with the aid of modern technology made in Europe .
That is the path we intend to pursue in our industrial policy .
In addition , we have also launched new initiatives on industry clusters and pilot markets .
I shall present you with an action plan on standardisation and examine ways in which industry can obtain higher-quality and more competitive services .
Two new sectoral initiatives have also been launched .
The first deals with problems specific to the food industry , and that has now acquired great significance , of course , in the light of rising food prices , while the other relates to the challenges facing another of Europe 's key industries , namely electrical engineering .
All in all , I believe we can say that our industrial policy is now well on the way to creating the right conditions for European businesses to flourish .
Let me say again that our aim is not to intervene or to favour particular economic players , nor do we seek to relieve the Member States of their responsibility ; what we are aiming for is partnership , optimum coordination and the common achievement of common goals .
We are in the process of dovetailing the industrial policy of the European Union more closely with those of the Member States , and I am delighted that Parliament has also given its firm backing to that effort .
on behalf of the PSE group . - ( RO ) I would like to congratulate Mrs. Cizelj and thank her for the openness she has shown in the process of making this report .
I submitted four amendments that we can find at items 18 and 27 of the report .
I begin by calling attention to the need to correlate industrial development with the improvement of social protection systems .
All employees in industry should have decent working conditions .
At Item 18 of Mrs. Cizelj 's report , the European Parliament considers that industrial development is closely related to the availability of an efficient transport infrastructure at European level .
A developed transport infrastructure will allow the development of industrial areas outside urban communities as well .
Member States can also use the regional development funds for the creation of industrial and technological parks in rural areas close to large urban agglomerations .
Through another amendment I submitted , I requested the Commission and Member States to support and accelerate the achievement of the projects that the European Council declared of European interest for energy safety and diversification of the European Union energy sources .
At item 27 of the report , the European Parliament calls attention to the need to further invest in education , professional training and research .
Industrial development and the competitiveness of European products depend on the quality of human resources and their level of training , as well as on the innovations contained in the new products .
Unfortunately , at the level of the European Union , in spite of the Community research programmes and the funds allocated to them , too little is invested in applied research and this is true especially in the case of small and medium-sized enterprises .
They are dealing with difficulties in providing the co-financing required for their participation in the research framework programme .
In this context , I consider the banking system could prepare financial instruments to facilitate the participation of SMEs in the research framework programmes .


on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , let me begin by expressing my thanks to Romana Jordan Cizelj whose report truly touched on all aspects of a modern industrial policy and stressed the particular importance of creating the right basic conditions .
I am very grateful to her .
We cooperated well on this report .
In your explanatory statement , Mrs Jordan Cizelj , you say that , in general , industry in the EU is healthy and dynamic .
Yes , we are even experiencing a renaissance of the so-called ' old economy ' .
I myself come from a highly industrialised state .
No one ever thought , for example , that the steel industry would suddenly boom again .
We are a vibrant global force .
The state of our industry is robust , and our flagship , the euro , has indeed steered us through the straits .
Nevertheless , in spite of the sound industrial base and the resumption of investment activity in Europe , we note that the tide is turning .
The speed of technological change is breathtaking .
The question is how we should deal with this .
Is this the right time to be conducting a mid-term review of our industrial policy ?
Without raw materials and cheap labour - neither of which we possess - we shall come under competitive pressure that we shall be unable to withstand unless we are creative .
For this reason , I wish to congratulate the Commission first of all for having designated 2009 as the Year of Creativity and Innovation .
Yet what does that mean ?
Innovation , as we know , must be far more effective in turning knowledge into wealth .
We have established the EIT , the European Institute of Innovation and Technology - or , to be more precise , it will soon be established - and that is a good basis .
Yet the creative people in the world are not only leaving Europe , they are now even quitting the United States .
You should read the book by Richard Florida in which he reflects on this situation .
What is happening with regard to the creative class in this world ?
Creative people will settle in places that fulfil three criteria , which Florida calls the three Ts - technology , talent and tolerance .
The question is whether these three Ts are present in sufficient abundance here in Europe .
I believe we have laid good foundations with the Seventh Framework Programme and the EIT , but that is not enough .
We must do a lot more .
The three Ts need more money .
The clusters are a sound initiative .
It is essential , however , to select the right specialisations ; the cluster initiative must be coherent , as must the whole industrial policy of the EU , and it must be appropriate and balanced .
In the case of the car industry , of course , we see some lack of consistency ; we see that , in certain respects , we are overtightening the screw .
That has to do with our policy on climate change , which is increasingly becoming a fanatical moral crusade , subjecting Europe to a form of lifestyle regulation that sometimes goes over the top .
How else can it happen that CO2 emissions from exhaust pipes are penalised 24 times more heavily than emissions from chimneys ?
We must ensure , Commissioner Verheugen , that the policy of the EU is coherent .
We cannot be the lead market and possess an 80 % share of global trade in premium cars and yet pull the rug from under our own feet in this very part of the market .
We must take care to act consistently .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the value of the rapporteur 's work deserves to be fully recognised .
The review undertaken presents an encouraging picture of the state of many sectors of the Union 's industry .
We must , however , recognise the challenges facing our Community .
These challenges mainly relate to the pace of technological change , notably regarding new materials , to the need to save energy and water , to environmental protection and also to demographic conditions affecting the labour market .
We need to improve our approach to the implementation of innovative solutions in all areas , including technical and organisational , legal and financial .
The current legal , administrative and bureaucratic barriers are detrimental to the competitiveness of our industrial products .
The question of the transition from idea to production should be raised in this context , as should the subject of patents and European discoveries .
Every effort must be made to devise solutions that will be acceptable to small and medium-sized enterprises as well as to large ones .
European products can and must succeed through their attractive design , finish , excellent quality , creativity and outstanding service .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the sole objective of this report and today 's discussions is simply to conceal a glaring reality in the European Union : industry is in crisis and the damage being caused is substantial .
The figures provided are certainly dream-like : 80 % , 73 % .
They could well have been replaced with billions of euros to show them off to everyone .
They fool no one , however .
They do nothing but hide the real state of affairs .
One of the major concerns of industry as a whole is that the only thing that counts is the profit margin .
The endangered species of captains of industry has now been replaced by sombre-talking slot machines .
No matter what decisions are taken and their consequences for the women and men of Europe , profit must be as high as possible and it must be immediate .
I am well aware that some people will tell me that never has so much been invested , produced , exchanged and earned by industry .
That is true , but what is the significance of huge financial reward benefiting a handful of people when most are suffering and seeing their little dreams of happiness going up in smoke ?
We cannot fail to see that the theme of employment is not a feature of this report , and nor are the concepts of land planning , population needs , taxation and social issues .
The fact of the matter is that the commercial success of major industrial groups in Europe is now making ever smaller contributions to EU development .
The large European groups are relocating and outsourcing to countries that operate dumping in terms of wages , welfare , health , taxes and the environment , and meanwhile the EU refuses to enact any industrial policy .
This policy is also strangling small and medium-sized enterprises and encouraging them to do the same .
It is obvious it is not the ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Henin , the time was not established by us , it was established by your group .
Unfortunately , you have got one minute and thirty seconds .
So , if you protest , just send this protest to your group .
( NL ) Europe is rightly staking a lot on maintaining and strengthening competitiveness and we know how to keep our market share in essential sectors but , as the Commissioner has just said , we are only in the first wave of globalisation .
We really need to keep on the edge of our seats .
Then there is the question of this new combination of research , development and making and selling innovative products in a way that is actually profitable .
This report by Mrs Jordan Cizelj does put the emphasis in the right place .
We have to eliminate the bureaucracy and we actually have to talk about more efficiency in laws and legislation .
The action programme gives the initial impetus for that , but I should like to make a heartfelt plea .
It is still difficult for industries to find their way through the typical European instruments .
The Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme and the Seventh Framework Programme are central top-down instruments to be decided in Brussels .
The structural funds are decentralised in nature .
All have their own front doors , their own criteria , you name it .
My message is that there should be more combination , more coordination , more choice of priorities and their definition , even within the European Commission .
Then I would see the effect in the regions .
I would see clustering develop in successful sectors .
Last month in my region we set up an office , a one-stop shop , for the various instruments and that provides clarity .
In conclusion , fragmentation and bureaucracy are unnecessary .
We need to know what we want and that also increases the visibility for businesses and the public that is so necessary .
They have to say that Europe has chosen well and implemented properly .
On that point there is still a great deal to be desired .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I was delighted to hear the statement by the Commissioner just now .
I should like to refer to three points he made in it . Firstly , Commissioner , you emphasised that we must individualise our approach to certain sectors of transport .
Secondly , you said that specific regions require greater assistance .
Thirdly , you referred to the issue of innovation .
Some parts of our industry operate at global level and others at local level .
I would like to mention the shipbuilding industry .
Typically , this industry is linked to coastal regions . It is , however , one of the industries experiencing difficulties at global level .
Not only is Poland affected , but also for example Malta , along with other Member States of the European Union .
Contracts span several years , Commissioner .
Three years ago nobody anticipated that the rate of the dollar in relation to the euro would fall . Nobody anticipated either that the rate of the dollar and of the euro would fall in relation to the Polish złoty , for example .
This has resulted in very serious economic problems . I appeal to you , Commissioner , to deal with protection of the European shipbuilding industry by way of the European Union 's policy , so that ways of protecting the former can be found , precisely within the framework of these global conditions , in the context of competition with Chinese and Indonesian shipyards .
I feel sure that this must be a matter close to your heart , Commissioner , as you are an honorary doctor of Szczeciń University .
( LT ) The implementation of EU industrial policy , which is within the competence of the Member States , is facing a number of obstacles that prevent better results and higher competitiveness from being achieved .
I will highlight some of these - regulation and sustainable development .
Industry in the EU is challenged by excessive regulation and bureaucracy .
Small and medium-sized enterprises suffer the most because of the unbearable burden of administration .
Small and medium-sized enterprises account for more than 90 % of all enterprises ; they are known for their innovation , dynamism and flexibility and their important role in withstanding competitive pressure as well as creating new jobs .
I therefore call on the European Commission and the Member States to make major changes and simplify the regulatory environment of SMEs .
Sustainable development is the horizontal dimension of all EU policy .
In the EU we must strive to achieve the transition to industry based on lower CO2 production and efficient use of resources , allowing a reduction in environmental pollution , the export of pollution to third countries and the effect on climate change .
Sustainable development should be based on new technologies , so funding for scientific research should be improved , since we lag behind the United States and Japan in this sphere .
However , the cost of patents should be reduced to facilitate the spread of innovation .
Although industrial policy falls within the national sphere of competence , I have previously urged the Commission to take on a more substantial role , especially in carrying out studies and delivering forecasts along with preparing recommendations to governments on which spheres would be competitive , which is very important in terms of moving production to third countries .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's new sectoral initiatives in electrical engineering and the food industry , the problems of which are most acute nowadays .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to draw attention to two issues in this debate .
Firstly , as a result of the financial crisis and subsequent economic crisis in the United States , the rates of economic growth and employment within the European Union in both 2008 and 2009 will be lower than previously forecast .
This may cause serious difficulties , particularly in relation to the operation of SMEs .
Secondly , the European Commission has set ambitious targets for limiting emissions of carbon dioxide by European industry , when the best that can be said about other countries in the world is that they are being careful regarding emissions . As a result of this approach , the cost of production in Europe will increase , just as economic growth is set to slow down .
A further negative consequence for the activities of European manufacturing relates to allocation of carbon dioxide emissions between individual Member States , without considering how far some of them lag behind in terms of development .
The impact on the new Member States has been disastrous , notably in the case of particularly sensitive economies based on coal , such as the economy of my country .
It seems that the report before us today does not consider these two issues , especially where their effects on economic development and employment in Europe are concerned .
( PT ) The central issue in this debate is the priority that must be given to the defence and promotion of existing industries in the various Member States , bearing in mind their specific natures , whether these are textile , clothing and footwear industries , or automobile , naval or chemical industries , or any other traditional sector or new sector involving new materials and innovative technologies .
This priority demands not only measures to stimulate innovation and effectively support micro- , small and medium-sized enterprises , but also an international trade strategy which takes account of the current situation and the industries existing in our countries , defence of employment with rights , promotion of development in our regions and social inclusion .
It is not enough to say that we want a forward-looking industry .
We urgently need to look at the present and place industries and their social impact at the centre of the decisions that must be made in terms of macroeconomic , financial and commercial policies at both Community and national level .
( PL ) Mr President , within the framework of the new Lisbon cycle , the emphasis should be on industrial policy , because a flourishing industry is very important in terms of making full use of the European Union 's economic potential .
It is true that industrial policy falls largely within national competence . Nonetheless , better coordination between action at national and European level is needed in order to guarantee the effectiveness of political strategies .
The new Action Plan on Sustainable Industrial Policy should take account of aspects such as better legal regulations to reduce the administrative burdens that are particularly onerous for SMEs .
It is the latter , however , that play one of the most important roles in generating economic growth and strengthening competitiveness in Europe through their potential for innovation , dynamism and flexibility .
Environmental objectives such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions and increasing energy efficiency should also be taken into account . After all , the advantage resulting from the implementation of innovative solutions could turn European industry into a world leader in the area of environmentally friendly and socially acceptable technology , products and services .

( PL ) Commissioner , Europe 's updated industrial policy , the new approach , the reduction in the number of regulations , increased competitiveness and innovation are all due to you , Commissioner Verheugen . I should like to make that very clear .
We are all agreed that the undue amount of regulations affecting enterprises should be reduced . This includes reducing administrative burdens , especially for SMEs .
We have made high demands of industry in terms of quality requirements , environmental standards , reducing greenhouse gas emissions , energy saving , and ensuring suitable working conditions .
All this increases costs . At the same time , we want the products manufactured to be competitive on the market .
How can this be achieved ?
Is it even possible ?
I should like to add that the Union and its industry need appropriately qualified workers suited to the needs of a knowledge-based economy .
It is therefore necessary to support measures to improve the quality of human capital through all types of training , and to fund investment in the development of individuals .
( RO ) I would like to call attention to the insufficiency of European funds to support the ambitious objectives of the European Union regarding climate change .
The Commission has come up with legislative initiatives that would have an important impact on the different industrial sectors , measures that have no correspondent in the Union 's budget either .
I also consider that an ambitious industrial policy has to go hand in hand with a European employment strategy .
The free movement of people , combating illegal immigration and , in particular , respect for the rights of all European citizens can ensure equitable work conditions .
Compliance with the rights of legal immigrants in a Member State will also ensure the protection of the rights of all workers in that Member State and avoiding social dumping .
( PL ) Mr President , I venture to take the floor again as I saved a few seconds of the time allocated to me earlier .
Commissioner , you referred to monopolies in negative terms .
I would prefer us to speak of monopolistic practices as something we could overcome .
I wonder , Commissioner , how you might react to what are known as natural monopolies in economic theory .
Within the framework of our industrial policy , will we allow natural monopolies to remain in certain areas ? After all , on the one hand we are in a position to control them , and on the other to ensure economies of scale .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in these last two minutes , I should like to try and outline how I expect things to develop in the period that lies ahead .
We shall continue to have a strong European industrial base .
There is no danger that industry will disappear from Europe .
I am also quite certain that European industry will continue to generate growth and create jobs , though not necessarily in Europe .
That is the problem .
We are already seeing more and more large European companies achieve their growth and their profits outside Europe , and they are also creating their new jobs outside Europe .
That is resulting in a jobs problem here , and the only way to redress the balance and truly resolve this principal social issue of our time , namely how to create enough good jobs , is actually - as several speakers have said , and I fully support them - to focus initiatives more sharply on enterprise by placing greater emphasis on small and medium-sized businesses .
The key to the long-term success of our economic strategy does not lie with the large industrial undertakings , which are well able to look after themselves .
No , the key to success lies with the numerous small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe , whose potential is far from exhausted , and they are the focus of our policy .
The other point is that the conditions in which European industries compete will change very rapidly .
It is wrong to imagine that we can go on regarding competitors such as China as suppliers of cheap products for the masses and ourselves as the manufacturers of finer and more expensive goods .
The Chinese are already producing and exporting high-quality and technologically complex goods .
We shall very shortly be challenged in those areas in which we are still particularly strong today .
This means that we must strive to become even better .
For this reason , everything that has been said here about research , development , innovation , education and training is correct .
The European economy , and European industry in particular , will be successful if it forges ahead resolutely with the transition to a knowledge-based economy .
It will also be successful if it realises that the major environmental challenges of our time , especially those relating to energy and climate change , can actually create economic opportunities too , and that these opportunities must be grasped .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
, in writing . - ( FI ) There is an especially problematic point in the report , where it reads : ' Welcomes the Commission 's proposals on consolidating the European market in defence equipment and improving the global competitiveness of the EU defence industry ' .
This means we are building a military-industrial complex on the US model for the Union , an organisation which is marketed in the name of peace .
It is obvious that that will also include the Galileo satellite positioning system , which has come to be financed entirely by the Union .
It is just as obvious , moreover , that the legal basis for the militarisation of the whole EU is the new constitution , i.e. the Lisbon Treaty .
The people are not being told about the way military matters are being fiddled about with ; instead , the Union is marketed as a peace project for civilians , which it no longer is .
The Union will have functional and quasi-judicial powers to launch offensive operations , far beyond its borders , which are illegal under international law .
, in writing . - The European Union is the most important global actor and leading exporter of technology in the world today .
Sustaining its leading position entails a series of challenges .
Among these , attention should be given to the need to sustain European exporting industries in the global market by ensuring that unfair competition is challenged , while resisting the temptation of protectionism , and also the need to support small and medium-sized enterprises in the EU through the reduction of administrative and market access obstacles .
Special attention needs to be directed by the EU institutions towards supporting the SME sectors of the economies of new Member States , so they can close the developmental gap with their peer SMEs in the EU .
With regard to the opportunities presented by sustainable industrial policies , the EU has to take into account the potential presented by the industries of the new Member States .
The urgent adoption of a comprehensive Small Business Act will contribute greatly to the development of the SME sectors in all Member States , thus also contributing to the reinforcement of the leading role of Europe in sustainable and technology-oriented industrial production .
REACH ( Draft Test Methods Regulation ) ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question by Mr Sacconi , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , to the Commission : Draft REACH Test Methods Regulation ( B6-0158 / 2008 ) .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , you are well aware that , within a few days , ten to be precise , the first implementation phase of REACH will begin .
This is the phase for the pre-registration of substances .
In view of , shall we say , this solemn moment , we , as you know , were annoyed about the definition of testing in the REACH implementing regulation .
This was because one of the objectives of REACH which we secured with no small difficulty in the course of the legislative process and inter-institutional negotiations was precisely the promotion of alternative methods to animal tests .
When we saw that the draft implementing regulation did not include a series of tests scientifically validated by the ECVAM ( European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods ) because , firstly , they have not yet been approved for regulatory purposes , and secondly , some of them , three of the five , were referred back for validation to the OECD , we were , I repeat , very cross .
It is only right that REACH should proceed as scheduled , but it is also right for it to set off on the right foot in terms of compliance with the spirit and purpose of this most important regulation .
In the meantime , as you know , there have been talks between us and on 5 May Parliament received a letter , signed by Commissioner Dimas on your behalf and on behalf of the Commissioner for Research as well , which gave interesting and binding responses to our questions and to our notional opposition to this regulation .
We must acknowledge that a solid way of accelerating , rationalising and where necessary , making these processes for validating alternative methods more transparent is envisaged
Our debate this evening will now become a touch more formal .
I am sure that you will confirm these undertakings and thus make it possible for us to adopt our resolution tomorrow , as amended in the meantime .
Upon so doing , in light of the commitment which I am asking you to confirm , there will cease to be any opposition to the regulation .
Instead , note will be taken of those undertakings , but we will continue the call both for confirmation of those commitments as a matter of urgency and for the regulation to be amended as soon as possible so that it can , at the earliest opportunity , include the alternative tests , which will have been fully validated in the meantime .
Thank you , I think I have even finished before time , allowing us to proceed more quickly with our work .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Sacconi has certainly put me in a slightly awkward situation .
As you know , Mr Sacconi , what you criticised was not part of my own portfolio , since I share overall responsibility for the REACH project with Mr Dimas .
That is why I thought it appropriate to be here this evening and to confirm the precise points you have raised .
The Commission will provide the necessary procedural clarifications - and I stress the word ' necessary ' - and I am extremely grateful to you for bringing these problems and issues to our attention and for your very personal and important contribution that has helped us to resolve these problems .
So what are we going to do ?
The Commission 's internal procedures for the validation and regulatory acceptance of new alternative test methods will be significantly streamlined and speeded up .
To this end , the Commission will begin by introducing a preliminary analysis of regulatory relevance , which will help us to focus the process of scientific validation on those test methods that are best suited as a basis for subsequent regulatory acceptance .
Secondly , we shall reduce the number of procedural steps and introduce clear time-limits to simplify and accelerate the current process .
This applies especially to the work of the advisory committees and to consultation with the Member States .
Thirdly , all important procedural decisions to be taken by the Commission will be taken by the Directors-General themselves .
Fourthly , we shall ensure that the new sequence of procedures is more transparent .
A website that will be set up by the Joint Research Centre will constantly provide information on the current status of proposed alternative methods .
Rejection decisions , in other words decisions to discontinue the analysis of a particular test method , will also be explained on the website .
This will enable anyone to follow the progress of each method in detail .
The Commission will also adopt measures to optimise the institutions involved in the process of validation and regulatory acceptance .
First of all , this means improving the participation and interaction of agencies such as the European Chemicals Agency and the European Medicines Evaluation Agency , which we are currently trying to link into a network .
Moreover , cooperation with the OECD can also be improved in many respects , and that is what we shall do .
This includes not only the secondment of staff to work on the OECD Test Guidelines Programme but also the provision of funds for the TGP secretariat .
The firm priority is , and will remain , regulatory acceptance of alternative test methods .
At the same time , we shall monitor progress within the OECD framework with a view to conducting the process of regulatory acceptance within the Community in the event of undue delays at the international level .
Mr Sacconi , you will know from our joint work on REACH how much importance I personally attach to very rapid progress on the alternative methods .
Indeed , we were both in agreement that the world 's most advanced legislation on chemicals which we adopted in the REACH regulation must not lead to such a sharp increase in the number of animals used for experimental purposes .
You may therefore count on my continued personal commitment in this matter .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Sacconi , ladies and gentlemen , my Group supports the motion for a resolution .
At the same time , I would like to thank Mr Sacconi for his work .
REACH , as you have just said , is intended to be the world 's best , most dynamic and most advanced chemicals legislation ; that is precisely how we envisage it in our Lisbon Process .
That is why it is also important now that implementation should proceed with the same dynamism and at the same pace .
We can also help to eliminate a great deal of red tape by streamlining structures and speeding up procedures .
It is the wish of all parties that animal experiments remain a last resort and that the number of animal experiments be sharply reduced .
Vertebrates and primates enjoy special protection .
It is imperative that the validation of alternative and non-animal tests be speeded up and simplified .
In order to save time , there must be scope for decisions on individual cases , for example .
Accordingly , implementation must involve the pre-selection of test methods , ranked by quality ; in other words , the method that seems to have the greatest likelihood of success would be validated first . It is important that phase-in periods be shortened and that the number of stages in the phase-in process be reduced , that Directors-General be involved in the decision-making process , that our agencies be more closely interlinked , that procedures be transparent and that information , including information to Parliament , be imparted without delay .


I am very hopeful at the present time , partly because of the content of the letter you wrote to us , Mr Verheugen , along with Commissioners Dimas and Potočnik , that we can make rapid progress in this matter and that REACH really will prove in practice to be the world 's most dynamic chemicals legislation .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , a big thank you goes to Mr Sacconi for having achieved a good result from negotiations on this subject as rapporteur appointed by the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
When the EU 's new legislation on chemicals , REACH , was being discussed , one of the greatest public concerns was that it would lead to more tests on animals .
There was complete consensus among the political groups in the European Parliament on the legislation being established in such a way that everything would be done to minimise the number of animal tests , including the introduction of other , alternative test methods , as much as that was possible .
We were delighted when there was news from the European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods ( ECVAM ) that a number of methods proposed as an alternative to animal experiments had been scientifically validated .
We were therefore bewildered when the Commission was a long time giving its administrative approval to these same alternative test methods .
In talks between the Committee on the Environment and the Commission it emerged that the Commission was going to wait for these tests to be approved by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development as a whole , where just one country could torpedo the decision .
The Committee on the Environment made it very clear to the Commission that such a delay was not acceptable and that we were prepared to exercise our right of veto under the new comitology procedure .
I am very pleased that the talks that followed between the Committee 's appointed rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , and the Commission led to a happy outcome and that the Commission is now committed to speeding up introduction of the alternative methods so as to reduce the number of tests on animals and the suffering that goes with them .
This letter by the Commission , signed by Commissioners Dimas , Verheugen and Potočnik , has now also been incorporated into the decision proposal which Parliament is to adopt tomorrow .
It is very important that the EU is prepared to take decisions itself if the OECD delays the processes .
Although we might encounter difficulties the end result will be a happy one .

Mr President , I should just like to add that Mr Sacconi has earned a reputation of trust , efficiency and respect in everything to do with REACH .
He therefore deserves , and will have , our full support in the present draft REACH test method regulation as well .
I wish to thank him for all the hard work he has been doing in this field .
I have received one motion for a resolution pursuant to Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Animal health strategy 2007-2013 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Wojciechowski , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on a new Animal Health Strategy for the European Union ( 2007-2013 ) .
rapporteur . ?
( PL ) The main idea on which the Animal Health Strategy is based is that prevention is better than cure , which is obviously the case .
I am sure we all recall the problems related to BSE and avian influenza , when it proved necessary to cull millions of animals .
That was a most unpleasant experience , and I am sure none of us ever wish to see it repeated .
It did , however , indicate to us that we should improve cooperation at European level in order to improve protection of animal health . The latter is very closely linked to human health , owing to the possibility of direct or indirect transmission of certain diseases from animals to human beings .
I should like to single out several points in my report for particular attention .
Firstly , the promotion of better standards for animal health care .
The report strongly emphasises the close link between the two . It is to be hoped that both will be prominent in future policy .
The second issue I wish to highlight is fair competition .
European producers are required to comply with a great many veterinary standards , and with provisions relating to animal health and welfare . The same requirements are not imposed on importers , however .
This is emphasised very strongly in the report .
Our producers and those exporting animal products to the European market should all be subject to the same requirements .
This represents a major challenge to our negotiators in the framework of negotiations at the World Trade Organization .
My third point relates to strong support for the vaccination programme .
We believe it is an important instrument with which to reduce the number of cases of disease .
A new approach is required too . Products originating from vaccinated animals should not be discriminated against on the market .
A number of paragraphs in the report have been devoted to this matter .
My fourth point concerns the damages and compensation system .
Firstly , this should encourage efforts to reduce the risk of disease .
Secondly , it should cover not only losses directly related to eliminating the sources of disease but also indirect losses related to market crises .
The fifth point is better control on the Union 's external borders . This should not be limited to controlling documents .
It should involve thorough checks to effectively prevent the illegal entry of animals of unknown origin onto Union territory .
The sixth point relates to the time of implementation of the strategy .
I believe we cannot expect to have all these legislative arrangements in place as early as 2013 .
A longer time period is needed .
The seventh point concerns financing the strategy 's aims .
The draft report criticises the fact that the funding for these ambitious plans is inadequate .
The plans should be properly financed from the Union 's budget .
In conclusion , Mr President , I should like to say a few words in English , so that I can be faithful to the quotation I shall now refer to .
( The speaker continued in English )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I very much welcome the positive and supportive reaction of Parliament to the new Animal Health Strategy .
We all recognise that animal disease outbreaks can have devastating consequences : they can pose a serious risk to public health ; they can damage public confidence in farming in general and in animal products in particular ; they can trigger heavy economic costs - just remember that in 2001 the foot-and-mouth crisis cost over EUR 13 billion in the UK alone - and animal disease outbreaks can also lead to animal welfare and environmental problems .
The strategy responds to a range of challenges taking into account feedback from our extensive stakeholder consultations .
The European Union of today - with its 27 Member States - looks very different to the embryonic Community of many years ago , when our current animal health framework was taking shape .
New challenges have arisen , such as avian influenza and the spread of vector-borne diseases like bluetongue , and more are likely to emerge in the years to come .
Trading conditions have changed greatly , with a massive increase in the volume of trade in and imports of animals and animal products .
The new strategy recognises and reflects the broad social and economic impacts that animal-related threats can cause - in other words , it is not just about the control of certain communicable animal diseases .
It features a strong focus on animal-health-related aspects of public health , food safety , animal welfare , agriculture , trade , sustainable development and research .
The key principle of the strategy is prevention is better than cure .
Recent experiences have shown the value and effectiveness of a pre-emptive or preventative approach .
We need to invest more in effective measures to prevent outbreaks , thus minimising the subsequent spread of diseases and hence eliminating or at least reducing their impacts .
Biosecurity on farms needs to be improved and financially supported ; disease eradication and surveillance need to be stepped up ; disease awareness and emergency preparedness need to be reinforced .
There should be a stronger emphasis on vaccination and discriminatory testing .
The strategy envisages a new legislative framework in the form of a general animal health law to be supplemented by implementing acts of a primarily technical nature .
Taking a broad holistic view , our legislation needs to be upgraded or developed in a more strategic and coherent manner : clarifying roles and responsibilities ; aligning as far as possible with international standards ; drawing strongly on scientific advice and the precautionary principle where appropriate .
The Commission is currently reflecting on the best methodology to define EU priority animal diseases in terms of their impact on human health , society and the economy .
A study will be launched this year on the development of an EU harmonised responsibility and cost-sharing scheme to be considered in the context of a review of the currently available financial instruments .
We must also work to stimulate innovation through research and development , through sufficiently funded public-private partnerships .
Finally , I should mention the Seventh Research Framework Programme , which runs parallel to new strategy .
This will be important in supporting research into animal health and welfare issues .
The Commission will in the next few weeks finalise an action plan which will take into account the recommendations and opinions of Parliament as well as those of the Council and the Economic and Social Committee .
The Commission would be happy to receive further input from Parliament in this regard , notably in the context of the mid-term budget review of 2009 .
Thank you once again for the interest and enthusiasm you have shown for this initiative .
I look forward to meeting many of the Members of Parliament at the Veterinary Week , an event the Commission is organising with your support as an early step to turn the strategy from words into action .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , perhaps we can be a bit more generous with these two minutes since my predecessor is dropping out .
I want to thank the Commission for its statement and the rapporteur for his report .
The big challenge now will be to translate the ambitions in the statement and the report into concrete measures .
I should like to mention in particular a couple of points that should be considered as far as we are concerned .
Of course we agree with the Commission that prevention is better than cure when combating animal diseases .
However , if an animal disease does nevertheless break out , as you have already said , vaccination needs to be a central element of the fight against it .
We want to prevent situations such as the one in my Member State where there were 26 cases of MCD ( Mad Cow Disease ) in 2001 and 285 000 animals had to be slaughtered .
Since there is no difference between products from vaccinated and non-vaccinated animals , the sale of such products needs to be guaranteed , both inside and outside the European Union .
I would urge the European Commission to keep an eye on this , because it has sometimes gone wrong in the past .
Obviously supermarkets , processors and consumers need to fulfil their responsibilities in this respect .
We are also calling on the Commission to make it clear what role the European Union , the Member States and the sector itself need to play in financing the prevention of animal disease , certainly now that this subject is actually part of the debate on the common agricultural policy health check .
The Member States still have very different arrangements for financing and that might also have an impact on competitive positions .
We are therefore asking for clarification of those points .
Obviously exporting countries have to comply with the same requirements as our European producers , for instance on the identification and prevention of animal diseases .
Finally , I should like to ask the European Commission when it expects to present its analysis of the current transport regulations and how we can restrict the potential spread of animal diseases as much as possible in that area .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the truth of the matter , Commissioner , is that all of us on the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development gave a hearty welcome to the new Animal Health Strategy that you submitted to us , as demonstrated by the many contributions to this report .
It must be said that this is the largest and most ambitious programme ever submitted in relation to this issue , and I must congratulate you here .
However , to tell the truth , I must voice my surprise that the mighty ambition of the arguments has not been accompanied by the required budget planning , for it is obvious that the current veterinary funds will not be sufficient to deal with the new and extremely necessary prevention policies .
Commissioner , we have just received Mrs Fischer Boel 's proposal in relation to the CAP health check , and neither health nor animal welfare are recipients of the funds to be allocated to rural development to deal with the new challenges , contrary to what the services were apparently expecting , or so I was told .
In other words , the policy we are discussing will not have extra funds , or at least not agriculture funds - as I think you said - until the new financial perspective .
Commissioner : a budget with no policy is of no use , but a policy with no budget can prove totally sterile .
If we wish to meet our current objectives , the budget debate must include future application of this strategy .
Moreover , it is obviously going to be extremely difficult to meet the communication 's 2007-2013 schedule .
Thus I want to ask you whether you can state when the action plan will be ready , and when you think the initial regulations will be adopted .
As regards amendments , my Group has slightly amended paragraph 29 .
When the right measures are not applied , problems arise regardless of the livestock production system operating in each Member State .
What is important is that things are done properly .
We agree with the development of legislative measures to control pets , but we feel finance ought to be earmarked for farm animals .
Nor do we intend to support the PPE-DE Group 's Amendment 29 , the objective of which is to rehash a debate that has no place here .
It was , in fact , the Council that postponed a decision four years ago on animal transportation until 2011 , in favour of an agreement on some extremely important matters .
This is also a controversial issue that requires impact surveys and a solid scientific basis , and I thus wish to reiterate that the amendment is totally at odds with this issue , and my Group will certainly vote against it .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) I should also like to thank the rapporteur for the enthusiasm he has put into his work .
I think that , with increasing globalisation , we shall need to take more account of outbreaks of infectious animal diseases .
People travel more and carry products that they are not supposed to and that can cause outbreaks .
Everyone has already said that better border controls are needed , because prevention is better than cure .
It always strikes me , when I arrive in the United States or Australia for example , that the border controls there are much stricter than in Europe .
I wonder why the European Union does not have a similar system to the United States , with everyone being asked to state whether or not they are carrying animal products .
Only then can we check properly .
What should happen when infectious animal diseases break out ?
I think everyone at the moment is already convinced that mass slaughter , as has happened in the past , is no longer acceptable .
We are going to have to vaccinate and then it has to be possible for the products from vaccinated animals to be sold on the European market and also outside it .
That is where the problem lies .
I am not impressed by the attempts the Commission is making to convince supermarkets , consumer organisations and so on that products from vaccinated animals are just as good as those from non-vaccinated animals .
Products from animals vaccinated against foot-and-mouth disease still have to be marked so that consumers know .
That seems to be completely unnecessary .
Therefore an active stand by the Commission is needed .
Every year up to now , and again this year , we have been used to having a large surplus in the agriculture budget .
So far we have been able to meet the cost of all outbreaks of infectious animal diseases from the agriculture budget .
In future the situation could very well be different .
The new countries are being phased in and the margin in the agriculture budget is steadily becoming smaller .
Even so , an outbreak will have to be paid for .
Under European law , that has to be done .
I therefore think that as soon as possible there must be a scheme for European animal insurance , animal health funds for each country or at European level , and so on .
I got a pilot project on that in the budget in 2004 .
All the plans are ready and the Commission must set to work and do something about it as quickly as possible .
My final point is the transport of animals .
I am not one of those people who say ' if you transport the animal for so many hours , that is by definition good ' .
Being transported for two hours might be worse than for nine .
What matters is the conditions in which animals are transported and the Commission must take account of the conditions and not just of the length of time .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I too wish to congratulate our rapporteur .
I was pleased to support this report in committee and I am pleased to support it now , along with my group .
I also welcome what the Commissioner has said , and am pleased she is in the Chamber this evening as there is a great deal of common ground between the Commission and Parliament on animal health issues .
I look forward to working with her and her services in the months ahead , as this dossier moves forward .
I am pleased the Commissioner highlighted why it is we need a common EU animal health strategy .
It is quite clear that , in a globalised world , bluetongue does not respect borders or our policies or the differences between countries within the European Union , or indeed the EU 's external borders .
Avian flu and many other diseases can travel around the planet very , very quickly in a globalised world .
We need to act together in order to deal with them and work out a strategy for remedying them .
We are exporting our animals - and perhaps their health problems too - and it is clear that we are all in this together .
I look forward to the rolling-out of the health action plan , which the Commissioner said will be coming in the next few weeks .
I would refer the House in particular to paragraph 46 of Parliament 's report , which acknowledges that the EU is already a beacon of best practice for the world as regards animal welfare and refers in particular to the WTO negotiations .
I would urge the Commissioner to talk with Commissioner Mandelson to ensure that the WTO negotiations do not water down or compromise the EU 's standards , particularly in relation to what are , frankly , substandard imports into the European Union .
We had many misadventures in the committee over the issue of Brazilian beef imports , for which I am not sure that the system worked as well as it could have done .
I hope we will not be replicating that situation with the US poultry issue .
One other animal welfare issue I wish to raise is that of sheep tagging .
We are supportive of the broad thrust of this measure , but frankly believe that the Commission is going in the wrong direction and is not acting in a proportionate manner to what is actually needed on the ground in order to ensure everything that it requires .
This is particularly true in the case of the British Isles , where Scotland , England , Northern Ireland and Wales already have a system that works pretty well and effectively protects Europe 's animals and their welfare .
I would be grateful for the Commissioner 's thoughts on that , but otherwise broadly support this report and her efforts .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , as I take the floor on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group in the debate on the European Union 's Animal Health Strategy , I should like to highlight two issues that I consider to be important .
Firstly , all the proposals on animal health protection contained in the report by Mr Wojciechowski deserve our support .
It should be borne in mind , however , that they will result in higher production costs , thus causing European producers to become less competitive .
Consequently , it is essential for the European Union to require producers from outside the Union wishing to place their products on the Union 's market to comply with similar requirements . The European Union should insist on this in talks within the WTO framework and when negotiating bilaterally with third countries .
Secondly , where animal health is concerned , the common agricultural policy is one of the most integrated areas of European Union policy . That is why I believe it should be a priority when allocating funding from the Community 's budget .
Unfortunately , although the European Commission agrees with most of the provisions contained in the report , it does not want to fund them from the Union 's budget .
In our view , it is essential to guarantee additional financial resources to ensure that the proposals contained in the report can be funded from the European Union 's budget .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) I would almost say : how unusual , an animal health strategy from the Commission with the emphasis on prevention .
That is really terrific , but what a disappointment that animal welfare is only a by-product of the Commission strategy .
A well-known song in the Netherlands starts with the words , ' An animal is more than a piece of meat and a person is more than a consumer ' .
Unfortunately the Commission is not really singing along with that .
It is still far too inclined to see animals chiefly as producers of meat , hide , hair , eggs , milk and manure .
The economic view is still much too dominant and so in my opinion the strategy is too one-sided .
Fortunately , and I am grateful to the rapporteur for this , his report is already rather better , simply because , unlike the Commission proposal , it does actually contain some real welfare points .
I shall mention two that I think are very important .
The recognition that intensive livestock breeding seriously increases the risk of outbreaks and epidemics .
With the enormous size of the European bioindustry , it is not a question of whether another animal disease will break out , but when .
It is rightly mentioned briefly that animal transport presents a considerable risk for the spread of animal diseases .
We therefore have to avoid transporting animals as much as possible , shortening and improving the transport , also because of the enormous distress it causes to the animals .
This report is not geared as much to animal welfare as I would have wished , but any improvement is something and I shall therefore wholeheartedly support it .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I am very grateful that there is a growing recognition of the need to handle and care for animals properly .
Good animal husbandry is something that Irish farm families have as a rule practised and I commend them for this .
However , I would like to stress the necessity for animals and animal products coming into the EU to abide by similar welfare standards to those that the EU requires .
It is not fair that animal products which may have been produced in the most cheap and cruel ways come into the EU and compete with our own animal products produced in accordance with standards which are strictly regulated ; this kind of competition is not only economically unfair , it puts our animals and even our people at danger of the spread of disease .
A measure discussed in this House which is unrealistic for Irish farmers is the set limit for animal transport .
While a nine-hour limit between breaks may be reasonable for land transport , it is virtually impossible to abide by this limit for sea transport from Ireland - remember Ireland is an island .
We depend on sea transport of animals and such a limit would ultimately prevent Irish horse breeders and farmers from shipping animals .
Thus I would like to propose that we focus more on the quality of travel accommodation of these animals , instead of on the time on board , so that we do not hinder the transportation of animals to and from Ireland .
Finally , while I was glad to see the new animal health strategy open to all animals within the EU , I would have liked to see more specific mention of the procurement and handling of pet animals .
I think that many of them suffer in our countries .
Pet owners are amateurs in many cases and are less likely to know how to handle and maintain their pets , which often leads to an increase in animal cruelty , often unintentional .
So while we have paid very close attention to the regulation of animals coming into the EU , animal transport etc . , we have neglected to look at the plight of pets and strays , an issue often mentioned by my constituents who point out the common occurrence of abuse .
( BG ) Mr. President , I think the rapporteur has produced a very objective and interesting report .
I would like to draw your attention to several important aspects .
The first one is this .
Madam Commissioner , you yourself noted that this policy has been evolving in the EU for quite some time .
This generates particular problems in the new Member States .
In Bulgaria , for example , production is fragmented , with many small agricultural producers , small farms operating in difficult conditions .
People are not well informed , they do not get a clear understanding of their rights and obligations , nor of the existing opportunities .
In this case , again , there is a kind of discrimination against new Member States which have the obligation , the opportunity to catch up in areas that have been developing for years through constructive efforts within the European Union .
These specific cases should be treated with special tolerance , so that the things we are discussing , the legislation being made , can take effect in tangible terms , and to ensure that the things written down in statutory provisions can indeed happen .
People should not be left in the dark about these issues .
In this context , the issue the rapporteur raises concerning the codification of the legal basis is very important since ordinary people find it hard to delve into complicated statutory acts .
Codified , consolidated versions of directives and regulations should enable them to gain a good understanding of what they are expected to do with respect to animals .
Another issue raised was that of financing .
In the difficult economic situation Bulgaria is in , I have my doubts as to whether many of the farmers will be able to implement the directives successfully unless they receive massive support from the Commission .
I do not want to repeat what has been said many times in this House , so the Commission should take a close look at these matters because there is the impression that by posing high standards we discriminate against our own farmers .
The Commission should seriously consider standards to be applied as regards imports .

Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Wojciechowski very much for his report , and to welcome the Commissioner .
I also wish to congratulate Mrs De Lange for the hard work that she has put in as shadow rapporteur .
We are all very conscious that we need a very strong animal health strategy and animal welfare strategy , which is what consumers in Europe are actually demanding .
However , we must also be careful that imported meat and meat products from outside the European Union also meet our high standards .
For instance , we would like to see a much higher welfare standard in the poultry industry .
We want there to be more space for our poultry , especially broilers , and can help to produce broilers in a much more welfare-friendly manner , but at the same time we must be careful that we are not importing products of an inferior nature .
Also in the case of the poultry industry , there is the banning of crates for poultry and of battery cages , and of course we also import a lot of egg products in powdered and liquid form - nearly 70 % of egg products are imported in that form .
Those products too can be from animals that were not kept in accordance with good animal welfare standards , so we must also be careful on that point .
I also agree with my Scottish colleague that if we are to bring in traceability and look towards an electronic system , then we must ensure that system is up and running , is cost effective and can actually be properly implemented by farmers without huge costs .
So while I broadly accept what is a good report , I think we must be careful , as we make progress on standards in Europe , that we also have the same standards for imports .
( HU ) Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Wojciechowski , on his outstanding report .
It really is a very big problem that the animal health system is not functioning properly with regard to third countries .
In the WTO we should be endeavouring to ensure that third countries too comply with our high standards of animal health and welfare .
This is in the interests of Europe 's consumers and producers .
We must protect the health of European Union consumers from imported goods produced according to lower standards .
EU producers meanwhile face higher costs , putting them at an unfair competitive disadvantage .
It is therefore especially important that the European Commission 's Food and Veterinary Office , the FVO , should conduct an increasing proportion of its on-site inspections in third countries .
In 2008 the figure was only 30 % .
Food safety is a priority issue .
The food safety regime within the European Union too faces serious problems at present , while the challenges and the risk of epidemics are greater than before .
In many places there are not enough suitably qualified veterinarians to monitor compliance with the regulations effectively and regularly enough .
The tools at their disposal are outdated , often still based on 19th century systems .
In many Member States , professional training and education are inadequate and recent scandals , such as the ' M.E.G.A. Trade ' scandal in my country , Hungary , also demonstrate that multinationals are not being properly monitored with regard to food safety .
The aforementioned deficits must be remedied .
I agree with the Commission 's strategic ideas and fully support the report . Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , congratulations to the rapporteur for an excellent report .
Animal health is important , not just because it is closely linked to human health and environmental biodiversity balance but also because it has a huge farming trade and economic significance , not to mention the social and sports importance of animals , so it would not be an exaggeration to say that animal health is almost synonymous with human health and well-being .
With this in mind , it is not surprising that a new Animal Health Strategy for the European Union for 2007-2013 is very much needed .
The report before us tonight is well thought out and balanced in my view and will form a good but rather synoptic basis on which to build our future legislative and non-legislative directives relating to this important matter .
Let me just take this opportunity to point to a couple of important areas where the Commission needs to clear things up somewhat .
The report strongly supports vaccination as a fundamental means of preventing disease .
This is , as far as I know , contrary to current practice with respect to at least one major animal illness , foot-and-mouth disease .
In the case of foot-and-mouth disease , vaccination in the EU Member States is prohibited as a preventive measure because of the consequent difficulty in identifying infected animals from vaccinated animals when using screening tests for the presence of disease antibodies .
Is the Commission intending to change its vaccination policy for foot-and-mouth disease in the near future ?
Furthermore , what is the position of the Commission with respect to the fact that in most third countries animal vaccination against foot-and-mouth disease is not only allowed but encouraged ?
Will importation of animals from such countries be prohibited if the vaccination policy for foot-and-mouth disease in the EU is not changed ?
The second area is the lack of necessary implementation of adequate health checks in the increasing international trade of live birds , especially parrots from third countries .
This is an area which needs tidying up .
( PT ) Any new animal health strategy must pay particular attention to disease prevention , animal feedstuffs , border controls and animal transport .
All prevention , testing , vaccination and other measures which may allow new outbreaks of animal diseases to be avoided are important in terms of preventing serious damage such as that already suffered due to BSE , foot-and-mouth disease , bluetongue virus and other diseases , because it is food safety and also public health that are at stake .
It is therefore also important that these principles are taken into account in relation to imported animals , as has already been mentioned today .
We are hoping that the new action plan just announced by the Commissioner will be implemented as soon as possible in order to improve existing mechanisms by extending technical and human support , guaranteeing financial support and increasing planned budgetary resources .
This issue must in fact be clarified today .
( NL ) ' Prevention is better than cure ' is the motto of the European Commission .
I fully agree with that .
Its strategy therefore deserves my support .
The ' cooperation ' and ' communication ' principles appeal to me .
I also think it is a good idea to work on simplifying and clarifying the legislation .
In particular I want to mention vaccination . I am entirely behind that .
The mass preventive deaths of healthy animals have to be avoided as far as possible .
Dutch farmers have had experience of the impact of such measures in the past .
I emphasise the call in the Wojciechowski report to adopt measures to prevent the erection of trade barriers in that connection .
Uncertainty about sales outlets for products from vaccinated animals really has to be avoided .
It is therefore very important for governments to communicate clearly the message that the products are harmless .
After all , a good vaccination policy stands or falls on the willingness of livestock farmers to take part in these vaccination programmes .
Animal health and animal welfare are important issues for European citizens , and rightly so .
I should therefore like to urge that that also be put on the WTO agenda .
A good strategy cannot be allowed to be undermined by imports from countries that do not have the same animal health and welfare requirements as in the European Union .
That damages consumer confidence and is bad for support amongst livestock farmers and others directly involved .
With those comments , I can agree with the proposed strategy and I thank the rapporteur sincerely for his report .
Mr President , my thanks to the Commissioner and to the rapporteur for the work done .
Can I just say , on the issue of food imports from third countries which has been mentioned in practically every contribution , that there is a real belief among EU producers that a blind eye is turned to the standards of food produced outside our borders .
I really believe that unless we have the confidence of our farmers and producers that we are looking after their interests , we will not get their full commitment for measures that we take within the European Union .
This is a most fundamental point .
It has already been addressed .
Take the issue of caged egg production : we will shift it outside of Europe unless we can incorporate standards in the WTO negotiations and at this point we have not achieved our objectives in that regard .
Moving onto the issues in this report , we know that human health is affected by animal health : 60 % of human infections originate from animals and a vast number of the emerging diseases originate in animals .
It is hard to predict but we do need to address and have a coherent animal health strategy across the European Union .
The issue of biosecurity is very important and farmers must be involved in preventing disease .
But can I give you an example : badgers are a protected species under the Berne Convention , so how does a farmer protect himself and his herd against a badger with TB , and who should carry the cost when there is a problem ?
I worry about moving from cost-sharing to cost-shifting if our concern is the budget we have to spend .
So we do need to look at these particular issues : in bluetongue , in avian influenza , in foot-and-mouth diseases , we do need stringent border controls and appropriate vaccination programmes .
And we need to really look at those measures very seriously because the problems are increasing .
On animal transport , let us base all our measures on science - good science - so that we do not cause problems .
Let us not react to the emotional part of this debate , but use science as our barometer .
I do not accept that large is worse than small or small is better than large ; I think all animals , whether they are groups of 10 or 100 , must be looked after .
( ES ) Mr President , the Commission 's new Animal Health Strategy seeks to simplify legislation by implementing a general law to cover all diseases .
Simplification is always a good thing , provided it does not hinder effectiveness .
However , since the Commission is suggesting that all sectors involved share the veterinary costs and that the Community cofinancing system for veterinary measures be reviewed , with a hierarchy of diseases in order of gravity , it appears to be more concerned with saving money on the Community budget than with introducing genuine improvements in terms of the eradication of animal diseases .
The Commission ought to concern itself with implementing proper border controls and making adequate provision for the veterinary fund because animal health , as recent events have shown , is a genuine problem wreaking economic havoc on countries and stockbreeders .
As regards the welfare of animals in transit , I feel the really important issue is how vehicles are equipped , rather than journey times .
Here Community regulations already impose a number of requirements concerning ventilation , temperature , maximum density and rest times , among others , to ensure proper conditions of transportation , thereby reducing animal stress to a minimum .
In any case , however , on the subject of transit times and conditions , we must take account of all the animals , not only those due to be slaughtered at the end of the journey , and apply the same regulations to all of them .
Finally , I wish to state that I disagree with cloning animals to obtain meat .
Cloning is a practice which at the present time ought to be restricted to research and experimentation .
Mr President , the Commission communication states and I quote , ' The concept of animal health covers not only the absence of disease in animals , but also the critical relationship between the health of animals and their welfare . '
As rapporteur for the legislation on the maximum residue level of veterinary medicines in food I would like to emphasise that the key to this critical relationship is the adequate availability of authorised veterinary medicines , particularly for what in Europe we call Minor Use and Minor Species ( MUMS ) .
And the Commission needs to address this issue urgently .
The availability of an adequate range of veterinary medicines to treat the wide variety of animal species in the European Community has been a growing challenge over the last two decades .
During this period considerable efforts have been made by various stakeholders to address the problems of medicines availability .
Despite these efforts , the situation has continued to deteriorate .
The lack of authorised medicines poses a real threat to animal health and welfare and the safety of consumers .
It also poses significant problems for animal owners , farmers , veterinarians and governments .
These effects include animal health and welfare problems if animals are untreated or treated with unauthorised or an unsuitable product , and zoonotic disease implications from untreated or inappropriately treated animals for animal owners and consumers .
There are also financial , legal and trade implications for the various stakeholders involved , whilst the lack of medicines may have negative effects on rural communities and agriculture generally .
Moreover , the current availability problem in the EU not only has implications for the health and welfare of our animals , the security of the Community 's food supply , and public health , it also undermines the ability of the EU to meet the Lisbon Agenda and to reap the enormous benefits for European agriculture and aquaculture .
I therefore call on the Commissioner to commit to incorporating an urgent review of the Veterinary Medicines Directive and address the issue of medicines ' availability in the strategy on animal health .
We should not wait until emerging diseases reach a crisis state ; we must amend our veterinary medicine legislation swiftly as the consequences and cost of a major outbreak of a high-impact disease in the EU would far exceed the cost of action now to develop appropriate and adequately available ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Vassiliou , ladies and gentlemen , besides implementing the Lisbon Agenda , one of our objectives is , of course , to live long and healthy lives , which means having a healthy diet .
To this end we need healthy animals so that we all have the necessary basis for a long and healthy life .
For this reason , I believe it is very important that we reflect on how we can establish new principles for the food industry which quite simply guarantee food safety , prioritise sustainable production and ensure consumer-friendly prices .
Europe , as we know , has benefited greatly from international trade .
The average family in Europe saves EUR 5 000 a year because of international trade .
We should certainly take that benefit into account .
( PL ) Mr President , the proposed European Union Animal Health Strategy contains well-devised plans .
This is a sound document , and the reference to the principle that prevention is better than cure is very apt indeed .
The strategy identifies a number of important issues . These include ensuring a high level of public health and food safety , promoting animal health by preventing the outbreak of animal diseases , and reducing their incidence .
Other issues dealt with are the promotion of animal husbandry and welfare practices that reduce the risks related to animal health and minimise harmful effects on the environment . In addition , there are references to increasing economic growth , cohesion and competitiveness by ensuring free movement of goods and appropriate animal movements .
The transport of animals is also covered , as is the increasing risk of disease and the role of vaccines as one of the fundamental methods of preventing disease , which has rightly been emphasised .
Mr President , I have three quick points to make .
Firstly , I must express some concern about the creation of a legal framework for a cost-sharing scheme with regard to major disease .
It would have been far better and more equitable to use some of our traditional under-spend in the budget for a good cause like that .
I also confess that part of my concern is that a legal framework would be likely to give considerable discretion to Member States as to how much cost-sharing they require of local farmers .
My fear is that , on the basis of past practice , this would mean it being punitive for farmers within the United Kingdom .
My second point is that I agree with the call for assistance for farmers to purchase new electronic ID equipment , and I look forward to that being possible under the rural development programme .
Thirdly , I welcome the focus in the report on EU standards being undermined by imports from third countries .
That concern , Commissioner , has never been greater than when witnessing Commissioner Mandelson 's reckless push for a WTO deal at any price , with scant regard for the future of our indigenous agrifood industry .
( PL ) Mr President , within the European Union we attach great importance to ensuring that food is of an appropriate quality .
Our quality standards are very high , and rightly so , as the health of human beings is at stake .
Europe has a highly developed quality control system that mainly relates to the state of animal health .
Animal breeders from outside the Union frequently fail to meet the animal welfare standards we impose on European farmers .
A large proportion of imported food is produced in conditions where these standards are not complied with .
This affects competitiveness and European farmers often lose out .
I share the rapporteur 's view that the animal health protection strategy should be more long term , and that appropriate funding should be ensured .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me thank you all for your very interesting recommendations and your input .
With the very limited time I have available I will not be able reply to all of them , but let me comment on some of the issues .
First of all , the time constraints .
A Member noted that we have time constraints , but let me point out that the first proposal - the general animal health law - that will come into force is scheduled for 2010 , not 2013 as was mentioned .
Another point that was made by several speakers was welfare during transport .
As I have committed myself already , we are conducting an impact assessment which hopefully will be ready in a couple of months and then , depending on the outcome of the impact assessment , we shall decide how to proceed regarding welfare of animals during transport .
Now let me turn to budgets .
Following the recommendation of the European Parliament , the Commission is expected to prepare a detailed budget on the expenditure involved in different programmes of actions .
This cannot be done in the frame of this action plan as it must follow the relevant budgetary procures .
The intention is to reflect on proposals during the 2009 budget mid-term review and the Commission will explore the possibility of widening the current veterinary fund and making use of other related funds to finance actions that will have a positive impact on animal health .
Vaccination is extensively carried out and financed by the Union in many Member States at present , both for bluetongue and for rabies , but I must make it clear regarding foot-and-mouth disease , Mr Matsakis , that we are not in favour of preventive vaccination , though in emergency cases we will of course vaccinate .
Finally , in answer to Mrs Doyle I would say that the problem of minor use for minor species is taken into account in the Animal Health Action Plan through the Technology Platform project , which comes under the Seventh Research Framework Programme .
I really heard a lot of interesting comments from all of you and we will have the opportunity to discuss these points more extensively in the near future . Thank you very much for your support .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to thank all those who have taken the floor for their comments and for welcoming this report .
I now wish to refer to two particular issues .
The first of these was raised in most of the speeches made . It concerns requiring those exporting animal products to the European market to comply with the same standards and introduce the same requirements as are imposed on European producers .
This stands to reason .
As many as nine of the 80 paragraphs in the report are devoted to this matter .
It certainly represents a major challenge and every possible effort should be brought to bear upon it .
Today 's debate makes that quite clear .
The Union should give priority to resolving the matter within the framework of the WTO .
I support everything said in the House today . We cannot condone double standards .
That is simply unacceptable .
The second issue I wish to refer to was also raised in some of the speeches made . It relates to transport and is particularly relevant as we are due to vote on Mrs De Lange 's amendment tomorrow .
I should like to say that , as rapporteur , I fully support Mrs De Lange 's amendment which proposes limiting the transport of live animals to abattoirs for slaughter to nine hours . This issue has long been the subject of debate in the House .
I support the limit for humanitarian reasons .
There are many dramatic reports of what goes on during transport of this nature . There are also financial considerations to take into account .
After all , someone has to pay for those long journeys .
If animals are being transported over long distances , from Poland to Italy or from Lithuania to Italy , for example , of course the consumer pays .
The farmer usually pays too , because for it to be profitable to transport the animals so far , they have to be bought cheaply from the farmer .
Farmers should not therefore fear this limit , because it will oblige the processing industry to locate itself nearer the places where the animals have been reared .
I believe it would be in their interest to do so .
We are debating the increase in food prices .
These very expensive journeys are one of the factors contributing to the rise in food prices .
All this merits very careful consideration .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should again like to offer my sincere thanks to you and to all those who took the floor during the debate on this report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( DE ) I very warmly welcome the initiative of the European Parliament to deliver a detailed opinion on the Commission 's Animal Health Strategy for the period from 2007 to 2013 .
Clear expectations are important in the context of both human and animal health .
The motto of the Animal Health Strategy is ' Prevention is better than cure ' , and preventive inoculation is the best contribution to animal welfare .
For this reason we strongly urge that sufficient provision be made in future for protective vaccination and for adequate inspections when outbreaks of disease occur .
In order to guarantee the prevention of animal diseases , care must be taken to ensure that research , science and innovation receive support and that new findings are disseminated .
The Animal Health Strategy must extend to all animals in the EU .
For this reason , we need a common legal framework that is less complex , clearer and more transparent than the existing legislation .
Lastly , biosecurity is an important subject in the context of the Animal Health Strategy ; the need for biosecurity begins at the external borders of the EU and concerns all stakeholders .
The risk of spreading pathogens by importing or bringing animals from other countries into the European Union must be minimised .
Importers , holidaymakers and consumers must all be aware of their responsibility in this respect .
The EU has the important task of conducting the requisite inspections so as to ensure that the risk to animal health , and hence to human health as well , is kept as low as possible .
in writing . - ( PL ) There is a close link between animal and human health owing to the possibility of transmission of certain diseases .
Animals are living sentient beings and their protection and proper treatment is one of the most serious challenges facing European countries .
Animal health is an important issue because an epidemic of animal diseases can cause problems , particularly in rural areas .
Coordinated action at European and global level is required if the various problems affecting this sector are to be resolved .
Global warming , increased demand for food , mobility of human beings , trade and the opening of borders all contribute to increasing the threat to animal health .
Veterinarians have a very important role to play .
They should become experts in the provision of specialist services such as animal health planning .
Ensuring biological security on farms , vaccination and scientific research are further steps along the road to tightening up animal welfare standards .
Another important issue worth emphasising is the impact of undertakings concerned with the slaughter of animals , their transport and also with feed production , because such undertakings have a direct impact on the health and dignified treatment of animals .
A new strategy and policy should be devised , based on the European Union 's single legal framework on animal health and incorporating the standards and guidelines laid down by the World Organisation for Animal Health .
A key role in the monitoring and promotion of animal health is , however , played by farmers , breeders and animal owners .
Thank you , Mr President .
Today 's debate is very important because it concerns not only animal health but also , and most importantly , human health .
The problem has become increasingly serious of late , due to the ongoing rise in imports of meat from third countries .
It is no secret that the general standards of animal care and feeding in those countries differ significantly from those in Europe .
The contemporary consumer is entitled to know whether the animals he or she consumes were fed genetically modified plants or not .
Meat should be clearly labelled accordingly .
The best way to protect against the spread of dangerous diseases amongst animals is to ensure self-sufficiency in animal breeding within the European Union and to limit farm size .
Breeding should essentially be an agricultural activity , not an industrial one .
I congratulate Mr Wojciechowski on his report .
Strategy for the third meeting of the Parties to the Convention on Access to Information , Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters ( debate )
The next item is the oral question by Mr Ouzký , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , to the Commission : Commission 's strategy for the third meeting of the Parties to the Convention on Access to Information , Public Participation in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters ( B6-0157 / 2008 ) .
I would ask all of you present here whether there is any sense in having this debate .
I think that without the rapporteur present we cannot continue the debate , so I am asking you to give me permission to close the debate today .
Are there any objections ?
Mr President , I just want some clarification .
Do we have a reason why these people are not here , why the rapporteur is not here ?
Do you have an excuse or some information ?
The reason is that they are not here with us , and this is the only reason I can recognise .
We have no idea ; we have no secret agents .

( FI ) Mr President , we all know that Mr Wojciechowski , as Chairman of the Committee , is only the formal author of the question .
I myself have been rapporteur for the Aarhus Convention for many years .
I have come here from a fantastic asparagus reception specifically to speak on this subject , and I would like to have my say .
( The President cut off the speaker )
With respect for your fantastic asparagus reception , without the author of the question we cannot proceed .
I do not know what secret relations you have with the author of the question , but unfortunately we cannot continue .
I am very sorry , Madam Commissioner .
( ES ) Mr President , I fail to see which Rule of Procedure prevents us from discussing the issue .
The Commissioner is here , and she certainly deserves our respect .
I think that all the Members present are ready and willing to debate this matter .
I fully understand Mr Ouzký 's preferences and priorities , and have the utmost respect for them , but at the present time , unless the Rules of Procedure explicitly prevent us from debating the issue , I feel that out of respect for the Commissioner and our fellow Members , we ought to be able to do so .
I think we are taking this very seriously .
How can we have a debate without the question , and without the author of the question ?
With respect for Mr Ouzký 's other obligations , he is not with us and he is not presenting the question .
Although I have a very good imagination , I cannot imagine the answer to the question without the substance of the question , despite the presence of the Commissioner and two main speakers , two distinguished Members of the European Parliament from the PPE-DE and the PSE Groups .
So if we want to behave in a serious manner , I think we should stop this debate .
If you want to continue answering the question without the question , that is fine with me .
So I suggest we close the sitting .
We will have the opportunity to continue .
I should like to inform the House that the sitting will now be closed as the author of the question is absent .
A written reply to the question will be provided .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.15 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Lebanon ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Rising food prices in the European Union and developing countries ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Negotiations between the EU and the United States with regard to visa exemptions ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
European Training Foundation ( recast ) ( debate )
The next item is the report ( Α6-0131 / 2008 ) by Mr Lehideux , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a European Training Foundation ( recast ) - C6-0243 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I want to salute Parliament 's work on the proposal to recast the regulation establishing the European Training Foundation and , in particular , thank the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and its rapporteur , Mr Lehideux .

As you know , the European Training Foundation was created in 1990 to support implementation of the PHARE external assistance programme in the field of vocational training .
Currently its scope covers the countries of the previous TACIS , CARDS and MEDA programmes .
The European Union 's policies in the education & training and external relations fields have developed and the ETF regulation therefore needs to be updated to take account of those developments .
The result is the Commission proposal on which you have been working .
Our proposal does not provide for any new ETF activities .
Rather , its aim is to define its tasks more clearly on the basis of a broader thematic remit that includes the concept of human resources development , particularly education and training with a view to lifelong learning .
The proposal also expands the Foundation 's geographical scope in line with the EU 's new external relations instruments .
In that new context , the ETF 's tasks therefore need to be adjusted , while remaining guided by the clearly established priorities .
I am grateful to the European Parliament for addressing the Commission proposal in a positive manner .
Thanks to good cooperation between the three institutions , we have managed to find solutions that satisfy all three of them , including on such sensitive issues as the composition of the Governing Board and the way in which the European Parliament can contribute its specific expertise .
The Commission therefore accepts without hesitation the consolidated text resulting from last week 's constructive trilogue .
Let me conclude , on behalf of my colleague Jan Figel , by stressing how important it is for our cooperation to be successful , since that will allow the European Training Foundation to benefit from its new legal basis in due time and therefore provide more effective assistance to the beneficiary countries , which is , after all , obviously the purpose of this exercise .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when I was in Turin I was able to appreciate the excellent work done by the Foundation , which is a vital and highly effective instrument to promote the development of vocational training systems in EU partner countries .
The Commission proposal updates the ETF 's tasks and governance to ensure that its activities are founded on a solid legal basis .
In my view , the compromise reached with the Council offers progress in two essential directions .
First , the new regulation will enable the Foundation to operate in all the EU 's partner countries , including those outside the framework of the Neighbourhood Policy and the pre-accession programmes .
That is a crucial point .
For example , the Union takes decisions that have a direct impact on its ACP partners ' economy .
I need not remind Commissioner Michel that this happened recently in the case of the reform of the COM in sugar , which forced those countries radically to diversify their industrial activities .
The ETF could have made a useful contribution to that development and can do so in future in similar cases .
The second benefit of the compromise , to which I attach special importance , is that it genuinely involves MEPs in reviewing the Foundation 's activities .
That question , however , goes beyond the framework of this agency .
Parliament has only one opportunity , often very brief , to look at the way the agencies operate , during the budget and budget discharge votes .
In my view , it is no longer possible , especially with the forthcoming entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , for Parliament not to be more seriously involved in the matters with which the agencies deal .
That is why , in the specific case of this Foundation , Parliament will henceforth nominate three representatives , without the right to vote , true , but three representatives on the Governing Board , provided they are particularly skilled in the Foundation 's areas of activity .
Parliament is free to appoint either external figures or MEPs .
It will be up to it to take a responsible decision as to the choice of level of representation on the Governing Board .
The main point at this stage is that henceforth the choice is available and that the debate on Parliament 's involvement is launched .
Given the growing number of agencies , it is imperative for all the European institutions to take a close look at the means of monitoring their activities .
In that context , I am convinced that we must create a real link between Parliament and the agencies .
Similarly , the new regulation aims to formalise the hearings of the Director of the Foundation before the parliamentary committees .
For several years now , that Director has appeared before Parliament once a year at the invitation of the Committee on Employment , but that invitation was not formalised in the past .
Lastly , the Governing Board will appoint the Director for a period of five years , on the basis of a list of at least three candidates submitted by the Commission ; before being appointed the candidate selected by the Governing Board will have to make a statement before the European Parliament 's competent committees and answer questions put by members of those committees .
Let us be honest .
On the subject of Parliament 's involvement the compromise we have reached is rather less than what I would have hoped .
But we have to look things in the face .
As the debate stands now , people are not yet ready to go any further .
So it is reasonable to support the negotiated package so that the Foundation can function as soon as possible on solid bases .
I therefore ask Members to adopt Compromise Amendment No 11 , which is the result of the trilogue Commissioner Michel mentioned a moment ago , to adopt it in its entirety and not give in to the temptation of an amendment that would upset the balance we have achieved .
I thank the Slovenian Presidency and the Commission for the quality of our dialogue on these matters and , of course , I thank all the shadow rapporteurs for their support .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by expressing my thanks for the constructive negotiations with the Council and the Commission , with the greatest debt of gratitude , of course , being owed to our rapporteur , Mr Lehideux .

In committee and in the trialogue we reached a compromise for the Foundation in Turin , which is to be put on an entirely new footing by virtue of the new regulation .
Our main objective in refocusing the Turin-based agency is to strengthen relations between the Foundation and the European Parliament and to improve the overall operational efficiency of the Foundation .
This Parliament attaches high priority to the promotion of vocational training in Europe , and we believe that we should no longer merely assess the work of the Foundation on an ex post basis , as a kind of auditing body , but that we should have a specific upstream part to play in the process of determining the content and shape of its programmes and that we should be able to contribute our opinions .
For this reason , we attach great importance to two points .
The first of these is the composition of the Governing Board , and the second is the procedure for appointing the Director of the Foundation .
On the latter point we arrived at a sound solution in committee on the basis of a PPE-DE proposal .
As the rapporteur said , under Article 10 of the new regulation , the Director will be appointed from a shortlist of at least three candidates submitted by the Commission .
Before being appointed , the candidates are to appear before the competent committee or committees of the European Parliament to make a statement and answer questions .
A more difficult issue , and one which has not been resolved to the satisfaction of my group in the present compromise , concerns the composition of the Governing Board .
The arrangement set out in the proposed Article 7 , whereby Parliament can appoint three non-voting representatives , is inexpedient .
We want the chance to be efficient players in the Board 's decision-making processes and not mere embellishments .
We therefore consider it essential that Parliament should be able to send three specialised representatives to serve on the Board , and it goes without saying that they must have the same voting rights as all the other Board members .
In order to ensure that the Governing Board operates efficiently , we believe it is essential to limit the number of its members .
We do not see any compelling need for every Member State of the EU to send a representative .
Instead , we should make do with representatives from two thirds of the Member States , applying the rotation rules prescribed by the Treaty of Lisbon .
With three representatives each from the Commission , Parliament and the partner countries , the Member States would still be preponderant .
After all , a governing board is not a meeting of shareholders but is supposed to represent the body of shareholders in day-to-day decision-making and to take rapid decisions .
May I therefore appeal once again to the Council - whose representative , unfortunately , is not in attendance - to reconsider its position .
For the sake of operational efficiency , I ask the House to support our Amendment 10 .


Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Lehideux , for his cooperation and work on the report on the European Training Foundation in Torino .
I have been shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , and we have been through some tough negotiations with the Council , but I believe that we have arrived at a good compromise proposal .
Although the work of this foundation is aimed at countries that are not members of the EU and have therefore not adopted the Lisbon objectives , it is nonetheless meaningful to talk about the objectives in this context .
After all , the Lisbon objectives are in reality just a way of achieving progress and growth , and one does not need to be a member of the EU to wish for that .
Education is one of the factors underpinning growth and development within the EU .
Investing in better education can help to ensure that we in the EU achieve the Lisbon objectives and together make Europe a better place in which to live .
Another important tool for achieving the Lisbon objectives is flexicurity in the labour market , and education and flexicurity are very closely linked .
Through education a better and more competitive workforce is created , which in turn enables stronger growth to be achieved .
It is important that we consider the future of the EU from a long-term aspect .
Therefore , the European Training Foundation is an extremely important agency .
The EU must not be a closed club .
It is important that we help potential new Member States as much as we can .
We must of course require new Member States to meet certain requirements and standards , but we must also help them to do this .
I believe that the new structure that we have introduced for the Foundation in Torino is a major advantage for future challenges and I believe that the Foundation can help potential new Member States to join the EU .
I am also very pleased that the Foundation 's new structure reinforces the link between the European Parliament and the Foundation .
We are gaining the opportunity to appoint three experts to the board .
This shows that the Council has begun to accept that the European Parliament must also have more influence in this area .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Lehideux for his report .
I fully share his opinion concerning the extended geographical mandate of the European Training Foundation ( ETF ) .
That agency , which works as an instrument of EU external policy , has the potential to respond fully to challenges addressed by territories like Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific .
The rich experience that the ETF has acquired over the years could now be channelled towards areas that desperately need vocational training in order to improve access to learning and social inclusion .
Most of the countries in the ACP area are currently facing remarkable economic reforms , and in order to be successful need human resources .
The ETF should have the mandate and the resources to respond to such demands .
I would go even further and say that when enlarging the mandate of the ETF , we should plan to have temporary liaison offices in areas where the activities of the agencies are concentrated .
Such offices would allow the ETF to better organise its activities and would give more visibility to its actions in third countries .
I fully agree with the proposal of the rapporteur that more transparency is needed , and I fully share his suggestion to add MEPs to the governing board of the agency .
To conclude , I consider that when it comes to human resources , the European Union should take a broader approach .
We want to set up the ' blue card ' procedure that allows skilled workers from abroad to work legally in Europe , with the EU probably contributing to the training of those skilled workers .
However , as I have already said , skilled workers are also badly needed in their own countries if there is to be a genuine development of those regions .
The role of the European Training Foundation will therefore be essential .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by commending the European Training Foundation in Turin for the valuable work it has been performing since 1994 .
The work of the agencies and foundations is often regarded as nothing more than a cost factor .
I firmly believe that what our Foundation in Turin is doing constitutes very useful neighbourhood aid , whether it be in the Balkans , in Eastern Europe or in North Africa .
The practical assistance that the ETF gives our partner countries in the development and creation of high-quality training systems can scarcely be prized highly enough .
May I therefore express my thanks and appreciation to its senior management .
I must address some frank words of criticism to the Council , whose negotiating tactics , following the achievement of consensus in the first round , involved topping up the Council representation to 27 and then initially failing to understand why we in Parliament also wished to be represented on the Board and then , finally , agreeing to three specialised representatives , but as non-voting members .
The Council 's attitude was simply incomprehensible .
I can only repeat that the uptight , defensive attitude of the Council Presidency is beyond me .
It is further proof of the difficulties encountered by the governments of our Member States when it comes to gauging the importance they should attach to the European Parliament , the only democratically elected institution of the Union .
My thanks go the rapporteur .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , once again the Commission is getting ahead of legislation .
The EU has no competence over education , at least not until the Lisbon Treaty is ratified , and that depends on the Irish referendum .
Is the result of that a foregone conclusion , or will a ' no ' vote there be just swept aside like the French and Dutch referendums ?
In any case , what kind of structure will this training foundation have ?
I see that our proposal is for it to be run variously by six representatives from Member States , plus six from the Commission and only three from Parliament , or that plus representatives from partner countries appointed by the Commission .
In the latter case , responsibility will partly be in the hands of countries which are not Member States , giving the unelected Commission a major say .
Hardly democratic .
Amendment 7 suggests that the Commission would submit candidates for the directorship of the ETF , and this causes concern in many quarters .
It has resulted in further suggestions as to the make-up of the ETF board , right up to an unworkable one representative for each Member State .
To have so many counter-suggestions for the composition of the board of the ETF is not exactly the best of starts , but that begs the question : Why does anyone think we need such a foundation ?
I would argue that a training foundation is not only unnecessary , it will be counterproductive .
If you care to look round the countries of Europe as opposed to the EU , you will find training programmes of all sorts scattered around .
There are different standards but , between them , they develop many skills , which is why Europe has such a rich heritage .
You see , each country has always produced its artists , composers , authors and so on .
Even the small countries come up with , for example , composers of world renown .
Each country produces its leaders and experts , its technicians , bankers , sportsmen and women and all the rest of the range of skills that are enhanced by training .
So there is a multiplicity of skills , with each country contributing in its own way .
If we try to put all that together in a European Training Foundation it would drain the life out of the training schemes in many countries .
A single ETF will not have the intrinsic qualities of national flavour .
We need variety , not a harmonised one-track theme .
In short , we will lose more than we gain with such a scheme .
Please forget it and let the countries of Europe make their contributions to the whole .
That might even generate enthusiasm for the EU project , for that is sadly lacking , judging by the ' no ' votes of two founding states and the continuous efforts being made to sell the EU to its peoples .
( SV ) Thank you , Madam President .
Let me begin by thanking Bernard Lehideux for his excellent work , for excellent contacts with the President and coordinators during the process and for enabling us to achieve a settlement on first reading .
I also want to thank the representatives of the European Training Foundation for their input , an important contribution providing many further links .
Education , vocational training and lifelong learning are increasingly important .
They are important in the EU , but also in the partnership countries .
There is a need for cooperation between Cedefop and the European Training Foundation .
This proposal for a new Regulation contains some elements which make for improvements .
To begin with , the remit is broadened to include lifelong learning instead of focusing solely on vocational training .
This is a concept which we increasingly draw upon and which is important in our policy .
Secondly , the number of countries is increasing , as Mr Lehideux said .
They include all the partnership countries , not just those included in the neighbourhood and pre-accession programmes , but all partnership countries .
Thirdly , relations with Parliament are strengthened .
We have enjoyed good cooperation which can now be developed through the new Regulation .
I think that we have arrived at a good settlement , both as regards the way we appoint the Director of the Foundation but also as regards the fact that we can appoint three experts without voting rights on the Governing Board .
We did not get all we wanted , but it is still a good compromise which bodes well for the future .
It is a good basic position .
We can develop lifelong learning as a cooperative process between Parliament and the foundations working on these matters .
That is important .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , first I want to say thank you and to welcome the various statements made here , all of which are in support of Mr Lehideux 's report .
Obviously I also support it because I believe it really is a big step forward .
I can already see and envisage new prospects that - whatever some may say - are opening here and I am therefore delighted that we will no doubt achieve a broad consensus on this proposal .
Let me reply to two objections that were put forward .
First , Amendment 10 to Article 7 : I would just remind Mrs Stauner that there is a risk of conflict of interest , since Parliament is the authority that gives the budget discharge .
Legally , at least , there would clearly be a conflict of interests .
Secondly , I think it is sensible to separate the powers .
I was a parliamentarian for many years and I never claimed any responsibilities beyond those due to parliamentarians .
The fundamental role of a parliamentarian is not to govern , I am sorry to say .
The fundamental role of a parliamentarian is to scrutinise and to make laws , and of course to monitor governments or executives .
I do not , therefore , understand that shift in emphasis that some people seem to find normal .
I am speaking for myself , but we are holding a parliamentary debate and I believe for Parliament to confuse its monitoring task with a governing task , which is incompatible with its role , would detract from its fundamental task .
That is how a parliament can be destroyed .
For a parliament to want to become a kind of governing assembly would not be compatible with the high principle of democracy .
I am saying that because I do believe the separation of powers is important .
I am convinced that the compromise reached is the most effective one , primarily because it ensures Parliament 's independence in carrying out its monitoring function .
I admit I am often taken aback by some of the views expressed , but then that is what we are here for .
I believe it was Mr Clark who said the Commission was exceeding its competences and that the European Training Foundation could be counterproductive .
That is quite contrary to reality , experience and totally independent evaluations of the remarkable work done by the Foundation .
As Commissioner responsible for development , I can already foresee - thanks to the main amendment , which will no doubt be adopted - the prospects of effectiveness , the positive prospects that will be offered , especially , as some speakers suggested , in countries within my remit where vocational training is a crucial factor .
I am thinking , for example , of the centre for migration management and information in Mali , a pilot project we will soon be starting up .
I can imagine what a useful role the Foundation could play there .
So I can only welcome the outcome , and I totally reject the criticism that it is counterproductive .
Clearly , people cannot change their nature : those who do not like Europe say exaggerated things and that - let me say with all due respect to the Member concerned - is exaggerated ; it is therefore totally meaningless .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I believe all or nearly all of us take the same view on the substance of the matter and I thank the Commissioner for what he has just said about the future prospects of the Foundation .
One point obviously remains to be settled and I want to make an observation about it : it is the EPP 's Amendment 10 .
Dialogue between the European institutions is absolutely vital .
That dialogue took place .
My colleague Mr Kusstatscher says that the Council 's attitude during that dialogue was not exactly what we might have expected .
He is right , but in the end we had the trilogue , we had several meetings , and at the end of those meetings we signalled our agreement .
I do not believe dialogue between our institutions is possible if , after giving our agreement , we take it back a few days later by tabling an amendment .
So , we debated , we were not entirely in agreement about everything , everyone took a step towards rapprochement with others and we ended up by achieving a compromise text .
I am asking the groups , all the groups , to accept the idea that we show solidarity in the decision we have taken , in the agreement we gave to the Council and the Commission at the end of the trilogue and I ask them to reflect that solidarity in their votes .
When one asks for change one must also know how far one can go .
I said a while ago that I would have preferred to go a bit further , but that I did not believe everybody was ready for that yet in their minds .
As rapporteur for this document , having obtained a great deal and been supported in my work by my colleagues , I would ask them to continue to show solidarity regarding our compromise agreement until it is time to vote .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Statement by the President
In response to a proposal from the Working Group on the Middle East , the Conference of Presidents has asked me to make a statement on Lebanon .
The European Parliament has been following with deep concern the latest political developments in Lebanon , where progress seemed to have stalled and violence and bloodshed had become increasingly rife .
It is therefore with a great sense of relief and optimism that we welcome the comprehensive and fundamental agreement which has been concluded in Doha by the Lebanese political leaders at a time when the European Parliament is in the process of adopting a resolution on Lebanon .
There is a compromise text , which will shortly be put to the vote , with Mr Onesta presiding .
This significant political breakthrough , which was achieved through the skilful and effective mediation of the Arab League , and especially of the Government of Qatar , paves the way for the election of General Michel Suleiman as President of the Republic of Lebanon in the coming days , the creation of a government of national unity and the adoption of an improved electoral law .
In view of the favourable reaction of neighbouring states and other interested countries , the European Parliament calls on all parties to implement the agreement in full .
We re-emphasise our unfailing support for the legitimate constitutionally established political institutions in Lebanon and the Lebanese armed forces and for their efforts to guarantee the stability , sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon .
We look forward to resuming normal interparliamentary relations with our Lebanese counterparts , with a Lebanese Parliament that meets regularly , exercises its democratic rights and discharges its democratic obligations .
( Applause )
1 .
Draft amending budget No 2 / 2008 (
2 .
Mid-term review of industrial policy (
3 .
European Training Foundation ( recast ) (
- Before the vote on the Commission proposal
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , we have had a great many conversations with the Commission and the Council with a view to reaching an agreement at first reading .
The vote on this amendment calls that agreement into question .
We will be forced to go to a second reading as it is evident , and the Council has so informed us , that it will not accept this position .
I regret this situation and in face of this problem , which is not to disown a considerable part of the text we adopted with the first amendment but to keep our word to the Council , I recommend abstention .
We duly note what you have said but will nonetheless continue with the vote .
4 .
Lebanon ( vote )
- Before the vote
Mr President , I ask for linguistic correction because the resolution was negotiated in the French language .
In French where it reads ' notamment du Hezbollah ' in the first sentence of paragraph 5 , it should read in English ' especially Hizbollah ' and in Czech ' a zejména Hizballáhu ' .
I cannot be responsible for other language versions .
- After the vote on paragraph 1 :
on behalf of the PSE Group - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the amendment replaces paragraph 1 of the original text , as follows :
' Welcomes the Doha Agreement reached by the parties on the election of General Suleiman as President of the Republic in the coming days , the creation of a new national unity government and the adoption of the election law ; calls on the parties to fully implement this agreement ; stresses the importance of the positive reaction given by the international community ; congratulates the Lebanese parties on the agreement and Qatar and the Arab League on their successful mediation . '
( The oral amendment was adopted )
5 .
Rising food prices in the European Union and developing countries ( vote )
- After the vote on paragraph 6 :
, on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I will read verbatim the oral amendment proposed by my group , the PSE Group :
' Recalls that the primary goal of the CAP is to guarantee market stabilisation , supply security and reasonable prices for consumers and underlines the need for a CAP post-2013 , in order to ensure the sustainable food policy of the EU , while respecting the sustainability , the security and the quality of agricultural products ;
I would like to say that we withdraw the final part of the amendment , as requested by the PPE Group , in exchange for their support for this amendment .
( The oral amendment was adopted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 31 :
, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I wish to delete the words ' free and ' from this amendment .
The rest stands .
( The oral amendment was adopted )
6 .
Negotiations between the EU and the United States with regard to visa exemptions ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 1 :
, on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I would like to propose a change to paragraph 1 , adding the word ' including ' , to read as follows : ' Considers that any form of direct or indirect discrimination between European citizens including on the grounds of their nationality should be prohibited ' .
- Before the vote on Amendment 8 :
, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , the full oral amendment is given in the voting list .
It basically corrects a factual error that was pointed out by Greek colleagues .
It refers to the threshold of visa rejections , which forms the basis for continuing to keep countries outside visa waiver .
In the case of Greece the rejection rate is , in fact , only 1 % , so we are correcting a factual error and I would ask you to support this amendment .
( The oral amendment was adopted )
7 .
Burma ( vote )
- Before the vote :
Mr President , I am not responsible for this report but I would like the colleagues who have been dealing with this issue to note that we are voting today on two reports , one on China and one on Burma , dealing with a disaster and the different reactions to it .
The report on China starts with a sentence that says that Parliament ' expresses its sincere condolences and solidarity to the people of China and to the numerous victims ; expresses sorrow to all those who are suffering the consequences of the earthquake ' , but , in the report on Burma , there are only political considerations .
( The President cut the speaker off . )
Mr Guardans Cambó , you know how much I like and respect you , but I have to follow the procedure here .
I am sorry but I cannot reopen the debate on a comparative analysis of two resolutions .
You will understand that .
( FR ) I am tabling an oral amendment , which should be accepted or not by the Assembly , expressing sympathy for the people in the same terms , in exactly the same wording , as for China .
That is the oral amendment : sympathy for the people .
( Applause )
Here is what I propose , since you spoke before we had reached the item concerned : if I understand you rightly , you wish to insert that remark before paragraph 4 .
Can you specify the exact point ?
( FR ) The oral amendment would be a first point , worded as follows :
' Expresses its sincere condolences and solidarity to the people of Burma and to the numerous victims ; expresses sorrow to all those who are suffering the consequences of the catastrophe ; ' .
( Applause )
( The oral amendment was adopted )
Before the vote on paragraph 10 :
( DE ) Mr President , in our voting lists there are no amendments at all to the resolution on Burma .
The only vote is on the resolution in its entirety .
This is not on an amendment but on a split vote , requested by the ALDE Group .
8 .
China ( vote )
9 .
Global treaty to ban uranium weapons ( vote )
- Before the vote :
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group of the European People 's Party , I would like to add my personal endorsement of the proposal for a resolution presented today by the other groups , thus the PPE approves the wording in its entirety .
That is good news .
It means the joint motion for a resolution tabled by six political groups , including the EPP , replaces all the motions for resolution on this subject , except for .
10 .
REACH ( Draft Test Methods Regulation ) ( vote )
11 .
Animal health strategy 2007-2013 (
- Before the vote on Amendment 12 :
, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , allow me to read out the wording : ' points to the potentially heightened risks involved in long-distance transport of live animals and , in this context , takes the view that more frequent thorough inspections should be conducted in order to ensure that only completely healthy animals are transported and believes that consideration should be given to the question whether the transport of animals for slaughter or fattening ' - and this is the difference - ' can be limited to a maximum journey time of nine hours ' .
( The oral amendment was not adopted )


( FR ) Mr President , you cannot take sides ; you cannot encourage people to rise ; they know themselves whether or not to do so .
( Applause from the EPP Group )
I simply pointed out - and you have noted my group 's position , so I have in no way taken sides here - that Members must rise and remain standing because if they stand for a split second and then sit down again it is impossible for us to do a count .
So I was not proposing that they should rise but only that they should remain standing once they had risen .
I proceeded in exactly the same way with the other count a moment ago , for the other side of the Chamber .
12 .
EU strategy for third Aarhus Convention meeting ( vote )
- Before the vote :
President . - I believe Mr Ouzký wished to speak , because yesterday 's debate was very brief .
Perhaps you could explain to us why .
( CS ) I just want to make use of having the floor to stress the importance of this resolution .
Yesterday there was no debate on it , or rather on the oral question .
My committee has already received the Commissioner 's response and I therefore welcome the fact that this issue has remained on the agenda and will be put to the vote .
I simply pointed out that this debate was on yesterday 's agenda but since nobody asked to speak , there was no debate .
That it why it is important to give the floor to the chairman of the committee concerned .
( ES ) Mr President , I wanted to say that yes , there were speakers , and that we were present in the Plenary .
It was Mr Ouzký who was not present , and the Table and the President decided to annul it .
The speakers were ready and a Comission representative was also present .
You are quite right to point that out .
Speakers were present but the committee concerned had withdrawn this item .
13 .
Follow-up of the Paris Declaration of 2005 on Aid Effectiveness (
Voting time
The next item is Voting Time .
( Results of votes and voting details : see Minutes )
Calendar of part-sessions
Before proceeding to the explanations of vote , let me inform you that the Conference of Presidents has decided , pursuant to Rule 127 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure , to amend this year 's calendar of part-sessions .

It is convening an extraordinary plenary sitting on Tuesday , 24 June 2008 , from 9 a.m. to 11 a.m. , for a joint debate on the outcome of the European Council of 19 and 20 June 2008 and the report on the Slovenian Presidency 's six-month term .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( PL ) Mr President , the cost of food is increasing and will continue to increase and there will be increasing problems with food supply .
There are a number of reasons for the fact that there will be food shortages and that there will be more people needing food , and even starving .
The first reason is , primarily , the increased population growth in third countries .
The second is insufficient production of food and poor distribution .
The third is that various interest groups are playing the markets .
The fourth is the Common Agricultural Policy , which has resulted in significant reductions in food production in new Member States .
Until this policy is changed , until we free food production and our reserves , then this , too , will contribute to food shortages and higher prices .
The fifth reason relates to the various natural disasters over which we have no control , but which , unfortunately , result in great losses and complications .
There is a single conclusion : the problem of food is the most important problem , as , after all , it affects biological survival .
It requires full solidarity , not just in the European Union , but also in the entire world .
For this reason it has my support .
Mr President , I supported the new paragraph to be added after paragraph 12 , which calls on the Commission and Member States ' to acknowledge the EU 's dependence on imports of vegetable proteins from third countries ' , with the very important result of establishing , first , ' workable import rules based on GM thresholds ' and , secondly , of reducing ' unnecessary delays in the EU GM approval system ' .
( PL ) Recently we have seen a worrying increase in food prices in world markets .
When food prices rise and , in addition , there is a significant increase in energy prices , this causes increased inflation .
Politicians and economists are trying to analyse this situation and identify the causes .
The following seem to be the main factors : changes in the global economy , including higher energy prices , reduced harvests and the production of biofuels .
Increased demand for food and increased affluence of the inhabitants in fast-growing countries such as India or China have also had an impact on rising food prices .
Higher food prices affect both producers and consumers .
Changes in global food markets force us to think seriously about our food security strategy , or perhaps even rethink it entirely .
What is most important , however , is to undertake steps aimed at improving the situation on food markets , not just by ad hoc activities , but actions that will lead to long-term stability .
Too little attention has been given to stability in production levels and to maintaining appropriate quantities of reserves , which would limit the effects of fluctuations in production levels caused by climate change or other factors .
( PL ) Mr President , as regards the report on the increase in food prices in the European Union , I voted in favour of amendment 21 and against amendment 28 .
Unfortunately , the voting machine did not react at that point .
I would , however , like to draw attention to the fact that , in a Europe where children are going hungry , it is unacceptable to have production limits and quotas on food production and I would ask the European Commission to consider this issue again .
During the parliamentary work there is a report prepared by Mrs Zimmer on poverty in Europe , particularly as regards child poverty , including malnutrition among European children .
We should not allow this to happen .
( SK ) In 2001 the Council exempted US citizens from the visa requirement .
Unfortunately , a comparable exemption does not apply to all EU citizens .
The US still maintains the visa requirement for nationals of some Member States ( currently Bulgaria , Cyprus , the Czech Republic , Estonia , Greece , Hungary , Latvia , Lithuania , Malta , Poland , Romania and Slovakia ) .
More than 10 % of visa applications are rejected .
According to the applicants , the process is often based on non-transparent criteria .
On the one hand , there is the rule that since the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty in 1999 the Council has been responsible for establishing the rules on EU visa policy .
On the other hand , there is the rule that the US conducts only bilateral negotiations for including countries in the visa waiver programme , since this is in accordance with its national legislation and only individual countries - not international communities - may enter this programme .
I welcome the European Parliament 's resolution on negotiations between the European Union and the United States , which is the result of intense debates in the European Parliament .
I trust that the resolution will banish all doubts about the legitimate efforts of the new Member States to eliminate the differences between the old and new Member States of the European Union .
( PL ) Mr President , the principles of solidarity , cooperation and non-discrimination as regards nationality are fundamental to the European Union .
The visa policy of the USA and the accompanying requirements have , however , somewhat shaken these principles .
Member States are forced into separate negotiations concerning issues that , in large part , fall within the competence of the Community .
The issue of visa restrictions particularly affects the new Member States which , although they themselves do not apply restrictions or other requirements as regards the United States , cannot , as can be seen , count on reciprocity from that country .
This issue is not one that can be resolved individually by each country acting for itself .
What is needed here are detailed regulations covering all EU countries .
I should point out that if the visa policy of the United States does not change , this will certainly affect transatlantic relations .
( PL ) Mr President , the problem of animal disease is growing and there are several reasons for this .
The first of these is the increase in the size of farms and the associated concentrations of animals .
The second is a lack of measures to combat animal diseases effectively .
We could resolve the first problem by restricting breeding in large farms and herds using legal and administrative means and by introducing a support system for smaller farms , especially family-run farms .
The second undoubtedly depends on the necessary funds being made available from the European Union budget for combating animal diseases .
Obviously there are also other very important causes that should not be underestimated , such as : animal transport , unsatisfactory early warning systems , insufficient preventative measures being taken , which includes inoculation .
Mr Wojciechowski 's report speaks of these problems and , for this reason , I voted in favour .

( PL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Wojciechowski both on his report and on the outcome of today 's vote .
The Commission 's initiative regarding a change in the approach to animal health and the previous strategy have shown unequivocally that it is vital to work on improving regulations in this area , to improve coherence with other policies and to increase legislative effectiveness .
The new approach proposed in the strategy will make it possible to minimise the risk of infectious diseases breaking out in animals .
I know this problem very well , also in my capacity as a veterinarian .
It will also promote growth in the economy , make European farmers and companies more competitive and provide new access to export markets .
What is more , appropriate standards of animal health and safety are a guarantee of proper trade policy within the Community .
This policy , which has changed under the influence of a series of severe crises and disease outbreaks that took place over the last few years , has shown that a careful analysis needs to be made of the measures taken to date .
I believe that , thanks to this proposal , the European Union will promote science , innovation and research to ensure the provision of better measures for combating animal diseases .

( PL ) Mr President , I am sorry to note that , as regards the report of Mr Wojciechowski , the amendment concerning conditions for animal transport did not get through by just ten votes .
This shows a lack of sensitivity on our part .
I hope that , in the future , this type of document will be corrected .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( PT ) Due to the delay in implementing the new structural programmes and subsequently the operational programmes presented by Member States , appropriations totalling EUR 3 525 million from the 2007 EU budget for the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) , the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) and the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) have not been used .
Part of this amount has already been carried forward to the 2008 budget , but EUR 2 034 million have yet to be used .
This draft amending budget proposes inter alia to carry part of that unused amount forward to the budget currently in force ( EUR 772 million ) , and to carry the remainder forward to subsequent years .
Such delays have serious repercussions in implementing programmes , and it is obviously micro , small and medium-sized enterprises and small-scale and family farms , among other examples , that suffer the consequences most , taking into account furthermore the deterioration in the financial and socioeconomic crisis resulting from neoliberal policies .
What is more , in view of rising food and fuel prices and the downward revision of economic growth in various EU countries , these sums should be used to promote public investment in order to stimulate the economy and bring about an urgent improvement in workers ' incomes .
in writing . - ( PL ) The second amendment that was introduced into the budget for 2008 contains , as usual , several elements that have no logical connection with each other .
This is often a characteristic of amending budgets and it makes it more difficult to assess the proposal .
The basic issue , however , is the quality of the justification provided as well as the proposal 's procedural compliance with the Financial Regulations .
It is completely justifiable to include in the 2008 budget unused ERDF , EAFRD and EFF structural funds ( totalling EUR 771.6 million ) , which corresponds with both the wording and the spirit of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 2006 , when we anticipated delays in the implementation of the new Financial Perspective .
When voting for this budget amendment we can note with some satisfaction that over 500 out of 580 operational programmes for 2007-2013 have already been approved , which means we are passing into the realisation phase in this current seven-year period .
The Parliament rapporteur also agrees with the modifications to the framework plans of two agencies , namely the European Medicines Agency and the European Maritime Safety Agency , in accordance with the submission from the European Commission , which constitutes a supplementary part of the initial budget amendment proposal no 2 / 2008 .
This kind of supplement is accepted more readily than the tendency to multiply the EU 's executive and regulatory agencies .
in writing . - ( IT ) The strategic attempt to revive European competitiveness , proposed in the Lisbon strategy and reiterated recently at the Competitiveness Council of November 2007 , has led the EU to intensify its efforts to enhance European potential for innovation and growth in the face of world competition .
SMEs are the key to a genuine revival of research and development activity because by their very nature they are spurred on towards innovation in their struggle to survive in the marketplace .
However , access to R & D activities can sometimes be particularly burdensome in economic and bureaucratic terms .
I therefore endorse this report , which emphasises the need for the EU to apply the ' think small first ' principle and to boost the potential for innovation and originality of SMEs , which are still one of the main drivers of the European economy .
I think that a policy to promote small enterprise should incorporate subsidies and essential aid for research : examples of this are the ' Best ' programme , which has facilitated an exchange of best practices between SMEs , the CIP and the 7-initiative policy framework .
However , I also think it is essential to adopt a series of measures aimed at promoting entrepreneurship , such as reduction of barriers to the internal market , elimination of bureaucratic obstacles and facilitation of bank loans to SMEs .
in writing . - The Fine Gael Delegation in the EPP-ED welcomes Ms Jordan-Cizeli 's report on a mid-term review of industrial policy .
With regard to paragraph 7 of the report , we acknowledge the right of those Member States who wish to consolidate the European market in defence equipment and improve the global competitiveness of the EU defence industry , on the strict understanding that Ireland 's military neutrality ( as outlined explicitly in a declaration to the Treaties ) is fully respected .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Parliament report , following the communication from the European Commission , moreover , overlooks the enormous social impact of existing industries and perpetuates a neoliberal approach that may guarantee high profits for large enterprises but does not ensure employment with rights and improvements in people 's quality of life .
While it is true that industry in the EU is responsible for over 80 % of private sector R & D expenditure and that its innovative products represent some 73 % of EU exports , the report in fact advocates the creation of an open and competitive internal market in services and industry .
This is in the interests only of the large economic groups , since it may jeopardise micro , small and medium-sized enterprises and a high percentage of jobs .
This in turn may affect the income of workers and many small-scale business people , and therefore their activity as consumers .
Finally , we also disagree with the strengthening of the role of the EU defence sector , even if this may have an impact on expanding the arms industry .
Our proposal for progress and social development is consistent with peace rather than war .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report because of the importance it attaches to issues that I consider to be fundamental , i.e. the promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in the European Union .
Since they represent over 90 % of European business , SMEs not only have an economic role within the Union but also a social role because of their significant contribution to jobs and growth .
Initiatives such as the European Commission 's effort to cut the unnecessary bureaucracy faced by these companies by 25 % and the promotion of investment in the quality of human resources and in research are therefore to be welcomed .
The industrial sector in the EU still has great potential for improvement , both in the delivery of research and innovation in business opportunities and in anticipating such opportunities to ensure more rapid adaptation to changes in the market .
Improving the regulatory framework , particularly as regards patents , so as to facilitate access to the internal market and to foster European entrepreneurship are key factors for increasing our industrial competitiveness .
In this context it seems to me that the promotion of regional clusters is also very positive .
A prosperous European industry is obviously crucial for achieving the Lisbon goals .
in writing . - ( PL ) Industrial policy is of considerable importance for the realisation of the objectives of the Lisbon strategy .
It should create the framework for the growth of companies , industrial investment , innovation and the creation of new jobs .
I am happy that , in this context , special attention has been paid to the needs of small and medium-sized enterprises , which , after all , constitute 99.8 % of the companies in Europe .
It is just these companies that most feel the effects of excessive bureaucracy .
Calculated on a per capita basis , small companies incur , on average , costs that are ten times higher than those of large companies as regards the responsibilities imposed by legal regulations .
In addition , SMEs can experience greater difficulties than large companies in accessing markets .
Let us not forget that it is SMEs , through their innovation and flexibility , that provide a significant boost to economic growth and improvements in the competitiveness of European business .
For this reason it is extremely important to develop solutions that will help to reduce administrative burdens , increase SME access to the internal market and public tenders and help them respond to new challenges .
The Small Business Charter that has been announced by the Commission is to include these kinds of proposals .
I agree with the rapporteur 's view that an improvement in regulatory conditions at European level must be combined with commitment from Member States .
Without national steps to reduce the administrative burden it will not be possible to achieve measurable economic benefits .
in writing . - ( PL ) I have decided to vote against report .
This is yet another document that has signed up to the tendency to create institutions that have no sense to them and which take money from the Community 's budget .
Despite the existence of four structural funds , seven coherence funds , a framework programme and dozens of EU agencies whose only job is to milk the EU 's funds , here is another organisation that would most certainly cost the European taxpayer money but , as regards real measures against unemployment or making the lives of employers easier ( or at least not making them more difficult ) , nothing like that is mentioned here .
in writing . - ( PT ) What happened today in the vote in plenary session was regrettable .
The PPE-DE proposed an amendment that questioned and sought to improve the operation of the agreement already reached with the Council and promote knowledge and analysis of national and local labour markets .
In terms of the Council 's interaction with the European Parliament , the amendment sought to ensure that Parliament would be more closely involved in the operation and control of the agreement .
The approval of the PPE-DE proposal , albeit by a narrow margin , undermined the whole basis of the consensus obtained .
Contrary to expectations , therefore , a second reading will be required , which means that the report will be discussed again in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , since this is a legislative area subject to the codecision procedure .
Hence our final vote to abstain .
in writing . - The European Training Foundation plays a valuable role in the development of vocational training systems in third countries .
I believe that this Parliament should play a full part in the ETF 's functioning and have accordingly been able to support the rapporteur 's position .
in writing . - ( SV ) Junilistan sympathises with many parts of the report .
We welcome the development of a peaceful and democratic Lebanon and are keen to see the EU Member States contributing actively to the peace process .
However , we think that this action should take place within the framework of the independent foreign policies of each Member State , particularly as the political situation in the Lebanon concerns sensitive matters on which the Member State governments extensively disagree .
The EU should leave it to the United Nations to deal with matters such as these , instead of trying to compete and develop its own foreign policy .
The United Nations is the international organisation which is best equipped to bring about a lasting settlement of the conflict in the Middle East and to deal with the political situation .
in writing . - ( PT ) Recent developments in the situation in Lebanon cannot be analysed in isolation from the deterioration of the situation in the Middle East , where interference , intervention and military occupation by the United States and its allies are escalating with the aim of establishing control over this strategic region .
Besides whitewashing the Lebanese Government 's role in the recent deterioration in the situation in Lebanon , this resolution - whose original proposal was superseded by events - also whitewashes the interference , attempted blockade and pressure exerted by Israel and the USA in this country 's internal affairs , examples of which include Israeli military manoeuvres , the stationing of the US Sixth Fleet in the region and the proposed boycott of the Damascus Summit .
It should also be noted that at the same time as it glosses over the role of the USA and its allies in the region , the EP majority once again points its finger at Syria and Iran .
The resolution also focuses on political positions whose objective is to meddle in Lebanon 's internal affairs , disregarding the fact that the deterioration in the situation in the Middle East is due primarily to Israel 's military occupation of Palestinian , Syrian and even Lebanese territory .
in writing . - The situation in Lebanon is preoccupying .
The agreement in Doha between the government and opposition leaders has provided the country with an opportunity to hopefully move towards relative peace and stability .
While the vote is yet to be made on the nomination of General Michel Sleiman as president , signs that all sides are prepared to negotiate are encouraging .
I believe that the EU should continue to support measures to ensure that we no longer witness the violence and political upheaval suffered by the Lebanese people .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote for the resolution , since rising food prices are a problem for the supply of food around the world .
However , we regret that Parliament turns a blind eye to the fact that the EU 's protectionist agricultural policy is contributing to a situation in which large parts of the world do not have a viable food production system .
in writing . - ( FR ) The world food crisis ( 83 % price rise ) , which is currently reflected in hunger riots in the developing countries , and the fall in the most modest European consumers ' purchasing power are , in my view , connected with the following :
the unprecedented stock market speculation on basic food prices , which is exploiting the tensions and the highly volatile agricultural markets in an unacceptable fashion ;
the growth in the cultivation of crops for energy purposes , at the expense of essential food crops ;
the weaknesses of European development policy ;
the fact that export crops have been supported in the developing countries at the expense of food crops and food self-sufficiency , and
the current world trade rules that generate conditions that are particularly unfair to small and medium farmers , especially in the developing countries .
Over and above emergency measures , when we report on the health of the CAP we must redefine the way we intervene on the world markets ( infrastructure , intervention stocks , risk management , prospects and economic modelling of price changes , etc . ) , reconsider the decoupling of aid and globally rethink our agricultural production models to ensure that they are productive and enduring .
in writing . - ( PT ) I must point out a contradiction between this European Parliament resolution and the proposed revision of the common agricultural policy that the Commissioner responsible for agriculture presented here this week .
It was particularly shocking that the Commissioner should totally disregard the social drama and strong impact of the soaring food prices recorded in recent months - exacerbated by abandonment of the land and the disappearance of many thousands of farms - and push for a cut in the meagre support received by around 70 000 Portuguese smallholders by proposing a minimum threshold while forgetting to indicate a maximum one .
The negative effect of the last CAP reform is well known , particularly the untying of aid from production .
It is therefore particularly serious that in the prevailing circumstances the total withdrawal of payments associated with production that still exists has been announced ( with the sole exception of suckler cows , goats and sheep ) .
These payments have been transferred to the single payment scheme , at the same time as progress is being made in the gradual dismantling of significant common market organisations and in dismantling the milk quota system , and in withdrawing intervention in areas such as durum wheat , rice and pigmeat , further promoting the abandonment of the land and farming .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution to support particularly paragraphs 16 and 35 that call for the developed world to clamp down on agricultural subsidies .
The call by French agriculture minister , Michel Barnier , for Europe to establish a food security plan and resist further cuts in Europe 's agriculture budget is ill-thought out .
After serving on the Parliament 's Budget Committee for eight years , where I became well-versed in the anomalies of the CAP , I believe such a move would be counterproductive .
It would raise world food prices at a time of crisis and do nothing for the long-term health of European agriculture .
France will soon take over the EU Presidency , and a review of the EU budget is overdue .
President Sarkozy must grasp the opportunity to begin real reform of the agricultural subsidies within the CAP and allow the EU to fulfil its responsibilities to the developing world .
The UK Government , on the other hand , was right to call for a trade deal to allow poorer countries greater access to developed world markets .
This could help the world 's 100 million people in poor countries who would otherwise be pushed deeper into poverty .
However , more must still be done at EU level .
in writing . - ( PT ) World economic growth and biofuels policy have created a paradox .
Given the level of affluence attained worldwide , it is obscene that many families struggle to get enough to eat .
The market is conditioned by unprecedented concentrations of people in urban areas , abandonment of agriculture for the tertiary sector and the use of basic food products in other complex elements of the food chain , such as livestock .
Biofuels have introduced a thief into the countryside and an unexpected guest at the table .
Competition between sources of energy and food is orchestrating their prices .
We are facing scarcity , sustainability , safety and ecological problems .
Self-sufficiency policies are adopted in response to the disappearance of strategic reserves and wars are feared .
Given the restrictions announced on the sale of grain , the size of harvests this year will be crucial .
Speculation is such that central banks are drawing attention to the underlying risk of inflation , while in India the negotiation of futures contracts on foodstuffs has been banned .
It is urgent to reverse the situation in favour of farmers , who still do not know what they will harvest , especially the smallest , who are victims of perverse and inconsistent agricultural policies .
The technology and the science that previously diverged thus have a new opportunity that we will all benefit from .
in writing . - ( PT ) Due to pressure from the intensifying worldwide capitalist crisis , the resolution adopted , albeit with limitations , nevertheless represents a condemnation of the consequences of EU agricultural policies , revealing the real and unacceptable objectives of the CAP and of WTO agreements .
The resolution , however , does not attribute responsibility for the extremely serious current situation , and does not draw the proper conclusions from its diagnosis since it does not call into question the policies underlying it , the following being some examples :
It does not make food sovereignty a central issue for ensuring the right to food ;
It does not see raising small-scale and family farming incomes as an essential prerequisite for the preservation of agriculture , the rural world and food safety ;
It does not seek to ensure that agriculture is withdrawn from the WTO and that agricultural food products cease to be treated as a simple commodity , and does not seek to have the Blair House agreement reviewed ;
It does not demand termination of the CAP , no further untying of aid from production , the application of a true ceiling and differentiation in favour of small-scale and family farming , and a fair redistribution between countries and products , promoting the full development of each country 's arable and livestock farming .
in writing . - We have entered into a period characterised by food insecurity .
Prices have risen dramatically and the demand for food is rising faster than supply .
A combination of climatic factors ( such as prolonged droughts ) and the use of grain in the production of biofuels has further aggravated the situation .
This current state of affairs is particularly worrying in the context of the developing world .
In poorer countries such as Haiti , food shortages have already led to incidents of riots and civil unrest .
As this resolution points out , the priority of the international community should be to ensure food autonomy and self sufficiency for developing countries .
However , rising food prices do not only affect poorer nations .
The EU must now take action in order to stabilise this situation .
First and foremost , we should be encouraging our farmers to produce more .
Moreover , a more sensible balance regarding the use of grain for food supply and energy production needs to be achieved .
A review of the CAP Health Check would be an ideal forum in which to address these issues .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the resolution on rising food prices in the European Union and in developing countries .
This is a problem that affects the whole world .
There are many causes for this situation .
They include increased demand for food , rising fuel prices , natural disasters ( especially droughts ) , reduced acreage devoted to plants for human or animal consumption ( the price of increasing the area of land designated for so-called energy agriculture ) and so on .
For this reason I would support the UN 's proposal for a moratorium on biofuels .
What can also be seen is financial speculation on food markets .
Another contributing factor is the issue of the erroneous and unnecessary quotas that restrict agricultural production , for example the milk quotas that place limits on the production of milk and milk products in Poland .
Tragic consequences in the poorest countries result in food from our surpluses being given away for free or sold at token prices .
This kind of aid is only helpful in times of catastrophes and disasters .
Otherwise it completely destroys their farmers , since it is not worth their while either to grow crops or to keep animals .
Fast-rising food prices combined with unemployment could also lead to social instability in these countries .
We recently heard of a dramatic event in Afghanistan , where someone sold their daughter in order to be able to keep the rest of their family with the money .
We should remember the inflationary effects of rising food prices .
Let us hope that they do not set in motion a spiralling and sudden increase in all prices .
in writing . - 850 million people across the world go hungry everyday .
This crisis requires swift and effective action from the EU and its Member States .
I join the calls for an impact assessment of the role of retailers in the food chain and the Commission and Member States to analyse discrepancies in prices charged by farmers for their produce and those charged by major retailers .
Indeed , this crisis is of a global scale and much needs to be done in developing countries .
We should therefore be focusing on helping developing countries in areas such as agriculture , rural development and agribusiness .
I voted in favour of the resolution .
in writing . - ( FR ) At a time of extremely worrying food price surges it is more necessary than ever for the European Parliament to adopt a resolution .
Firstly , the food shortage that is rife in many countries in the world is quite rightly unacceptable .
We need to propose emergency measures to bring an end to the famine that is at this very moment afflicting the most vulnerable people in the developing countries .
In addition to those emergency measures , which cannot resolve the problem in the long term , the EU must formulate a strategy , in agreement with international organisations such as the World Bank , the IMF , the FAO and the WTO .
It must be a basic strategy that tackles all the causes of the crisis : changing food habits in Asia , the rapid rise in the cultivation of biofuels , etc .
Secondly , the worrying rise in the price of the consumer 's shopping basket suggests that we should think deeply about reforming the common agricultural policy .
At a time when we are taking stock of the health of the CAP , we must put forward concrete proposals on means of halting the inflation we are seeing even within the internal market , as also of ensuring that the EU is self-sufficient in food .
in writing . - When I participated in the election observation mission in Nigeria last April , I came across the shocking fact that Nigeria , once an exporter of agricultural products , had become an importer of food .
The demographic situation in the developing countries has increased the demand for food drastically , but ongoing military conflicts , the fight against deadly diseases , such as HIV / AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis as well as ineffective administration have distracted the governments of developing countries from responding to this need .
I supported the European Parliament resolution on rising food prices in the European Union and developing countries and hope that the European Union will continue improving its development policies and engage further in fair international trade .
in writing . - ( SV ) The resolution on rising food prices in the world could have been a valuable contribution to the current debate on the EU 's agricultural policy and its consequences .
Yet the result was a disappointment .
In the first part it is noted that the trend is towards increased regulation and renewed stockpiling - despite the fact that the high food prices have for the first time in years made agriculture a truly lucrative sector .
The second part talks about ' the right to food ' in the Third World and the importance of prioritising food over fuel production .
At the same time , the final result of the voting was scattered on all sides as regards the advantages and disadvantages of biofuels !
Politics consists of conflicts over objectives and the main task of a politician is to strike a balance and rank them in order of priority .
This resolution did not achieve that .
I therefore abstained .
in writing . - ( DE ) The rise in food prices absolutely must be halted , otherwise we are heading for serious difficulties .
We need multilayered strategies which reinvigorate food production on the one hand by means of measures such as the temporary suspension of set-aside premiums and permit better coordination and distribution of food supplies on the other .
The poor countries that are hardest hit by rising prices must be given help to overcome the crisis as quickly as possible in a well-organised and , above all , sustainable manner .
Major exporters of agricultural products , such as Argentina and the United States , must act globally in this respect and must not focus solely on their own well-being .
In the debate on biofuels , it must not be forgotten that their production in Europe , where fuel crops are grown on two per cent of all arable land , has an extremely minimal effect on food prices .
Biofuels must not be produced at the expense of food , which is why we must make strenuous efforts to promote the production of a second generation of biofuels , based on biomass , which is essentially organic waste that is virtually unusable for any other purpose .
in writing . - ( PT ) Following the implementation of the US legislative reform that reinforced security requirements under the visa waiver programme , the USA decided to propose separate memoranda of understanding to each Member State in an attempt to divide and rule .
These agreements are unacceptable , not only because they do not respect Community competence in this area , but also because they undermine the principle of fair competition and give rise to unequal treatment between nationals of various Member States where visas are concerned .
I applaud the granting of a mandate to the Commission ( under Community competence ) to negotiate an agreement between the EU and the USA ensuring uniform treatment and applying the same conditions regarding visa exemption to all EU nationals who wish to enter US territory ( as the Union in fact already applies in relation to all US citizens who wish to enter the EU ) .
These negotiations must be conducted rapidly and in a spirit of European unity , so that in 2009 all Member States will be able to participate in the USA 's reformed Visa Waiver Programme .
I believe that the conditions for this to happen , however , will only exist if the bilateral agreements meanwhile entered into are annulled .
I therefore await the opinion of the EP legal department , which I hope will confirm this position .
in writing . - The adoption of the ' Motion for a resolution on negotiations between the European Union and the United States with regard to visa exemptions ' is welcomed by the EPP-ED .
It marks an important step in coordinating activities of Member States and the European Commission in their negotiations with the United States .
It recognises that discrimination of a large group of EU citizens is unacceptable and shows solidarity on the part of those Member States already in the programme with those who still face inconvenient and sometimes demeaning visa application procedures .
It draws attention to the fact that reasons for visa refusal are non-transparent .
A rapid fall in the rate of refusal in some countries and not others creates suspicions that countries outside visa waiver are not treated on the same terms by the United States .
Representing Poland , a country outside the visa waiver regime , I trust that the resolution will lead to a speedy and satisfactory conclusion of an agreement allowing all EU citizens to travel to the US on the same terms .
The EU and Member States have made a concerted effort to resolve the problem .
We are hopeful that the United States will meet this initiative with an open and positive response .
in writing . - ( PT ) We understand from this resolution :
That although the EU has signed reciprocity agreements with several third countries but not with the US - which is why in 2006 the Commission proposed the temporary restoration of the visa requirement for holders of diplomatic and duty / official passports in order to expedite progress towards reciprocity with that country - the Council did not follow up that proposal , which the resolution describes as symbolic .
That the situation became legally complicated when the US reformed its visa waiver regime , based on the so-called war on terror , adding security enhancements ( including access to data and information on citizens from third countries ) to require other countries wishing to be part of the visa waiver programme to sign a bilateral Memorandum of Understanding and its binding implementing rules .
And that , in the light of the USA 's demands , the various EU Member States were divided , ultimately bearing witness to their priorities .
The resolution is part of a damage limitation effort , though in our opinion it does not safeguard principles that we consider to be fundamental , such as State sovereignty and citizens ' rights , freedoms and guarantees .
in writing . - ( PL ) I support the European Parliament resolution concerning visa negotiations with the USA .
These should be on behalf of all EU Members .
The US government and the governments of those countries that have already embarked on bilateral negotiations should take into account the position of the EU and its competence to sign treaties .
What is needed are clear guidelines for bilateral discussions about travel to the United States without visas , but there are issues that are in the EU 's power .
What is required here is mutuality .
Unfortunately , as regards Poland , which unilaterally removed visa requirements for US citizens as long ago as 15 April 1991 , the asymmetry is glaring .
I am not convinced by the argument that this is due to the rather high level of refusals to grant visas .
In my opinion these refusals are often the result of arbitrary decisions taken by officials in the American consular service who assume - often it is not clear on what basis - that someone would illegally extend their visit to the USA .
Such assumptions are hardly objective and sometimes simply insulting .
Also , the exchange rate of the dollar against the zloty no longer supports the argument about illegal work .
Today what is important to people are tourist visits , business trips and visits to friends and family .
I believe that the United States also lose out with this policy , closing their frontiers to their allies but letting in potential terrorists .
How can you develop transatlantic cooperation if there is no trust in your allies ?
This is not just a rhetorical question .
Many of my constituents have mentioned this issue .
in writing . - Europe 's citizens have come together to enjoy the benefits of a European Union which can express itself not only in Europe but without .
Nowhere is this more obvious than in the treatment of its citizens when travelling abroad .
Visas are already not asked for by the USA for many EU countries .
Whilst I understand the legitimate right of the USA to make up its own mind on the issue , I feel there is a rational argument in favour of extending this right to all of the EU 's citizens .
I feel that a properly negotiated agreement with the USA should reflect the non-discrimination approach required by the Parliament .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the European Parliament resolution on negotiations between the European Union and the United States with regard to the Visa Waiver Program .
I voted for the oral amendment proposed by the socialist Member of Parliament Lambrinidis , because he requests the exclusion of any form of direct or indirect discrimination among European citizens , including based on nationality .
Thus , attention is called on the consequences of the lack of coordination between the Community institutions and Member States , in international negotiations .
I also voted for amendment 8 , orally amended by our colleague Gacek .
The new text expresses the European Parliament 's dissatisfaction with the existent situation in which only the citizens of 12 Member States , such as Romania , are not exempted from visa for the United States of America .
I voted for amendment 1 submitted by the Group of European Socialists , which requests the Commission to guarantee , under the principle of loyal cooperation , equal treatment for all Member States citizens as regards the visa waiver .
I voted for amendment 2 submitted by the Group of European Socialists because it states that , at the meeting of 13 March 2008 of the Ministerial Troika on Justice and Home Affairs , the US admitted the Community 's competence to negotiate an international agreement on visa policy .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted for the joint motion for a resolution on Burma because the dramatic situation in the country makes it essential to restore democracy and ensure respect for human rights as a matter of urgency .
I regret the Burmese authorities ' conduct in response to the cyclone that devastated the country , causing thousands of deaths and displacements , and I strongly condemn the response to this tragedy by the Burmese regime , which has prevented humanitarian aid teams from getting in and has refused assistance for victims .
in writing . - ( SV ) The humanitarian disaster which has occurred in Burma is an enormous tragedy , and Junilistan agrees that the handling of the situation by the Burmese Government has been beneath all criticism .
Aid must reach the hundreds of thousands of stricken people .
That is priority number one .
We therefore strongly sympathise with the resolution in its criticism of the Burmese Government , which has put its own power above the survival of the country 's people .
On the other hand , it is not the job of the EU to condemn and exhort other countries to put pressure on Burma to open its borders .
It is also not up to the EU to call on the International Criminal Court to prosecute the Government of Burma .
It is the international community which should deal with these crucial questions of international law through the United Nations .
Unfortunately there is a tendency in the EU to exploit disasters in order to advance its own position in the foreign policy area .
in writing . - ( PT ) We would like to express our sincere condolences to the victims of the cyclone on 2 and 3 May that affected various regions of Myanmar ( Burma ) .
We firmly believe that every diplomatic effort must be made , particularly within the framework of the UN Agencies , to provide urgent help and support to the victims , to try to minimise the number of deaths , to respond to the problems faced by the people and to begin reconstruction work on the enormous amount of infrastructure that has been destroyed , in cooperation with the Burmese authorities , as the resolution in fact stresses .
However , we disagree with initiatives which , based on so-called humanitarian intervention , will continue to obstruct and call into question the effort currently being made by the UN Agencies , by ASEAN and by various countries in the region to find solutions to help to overcome the current obstacles and to minimise the suffering of the people affected .
These initiatives , which unacceptably exploit the dramatic situation of thousands and thousands of human beings , seek primarily to use the humanitarian catastrophe for political purposes and as an opportunity to achieve geostrategic objectives , ultimately compromising the pressing humanitarian aid which they claim is so urgent and necessary .
In essence , this fosters situations that may add the tragedy of war to the natural tragedy .
in writing . - I fully support the resolution dealing with the tragic situation in Burma .
The original natural disaster of the cyclone has now been overtaken by the man-made disaster created by the Burmese Government 's response .
The Burmese Government has a moral and legal duty towards its citizens and must allow international aid in to prevent the situation becoming even more serious .
in writing . - The tragic situation in Burma demands urgent attention .
In so far rejecting international aid , the Burmese regime has proven their disregard for the seriousness of the situation at hand .
For the victims of Cyclone Nargis , this is not an issue of politics , but of survival .
I join my colleagues in urging the military regime to accept offers of assistance from the international community .
Indeed , our Asian partners also have a role to play in putting pressure on the regime in Rangoon .
I reiterate my view that , in encouraging other ASEAN countries to reconsider Burma 's membership , Rangoon would encounter strong pressure to finally acknowledge the rights and freedoms that its population have been , and are still , crying out for .
I join my colleagues in voting in favour of this motion .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I would like to acknowledge the Commission 's swift response to the emergency following the earthquake on 12 May .
According to the newspapers , factories , schools and houses collapsed , in certain areas the earthquake destroyed 80 % of buildings , in some towns school buildings collapsed , burying the students inside , and , unfortunately , chemical factories have dispersed tonnes of pollutants into the ground .
This time we are managing to follow this devastation , in all its harsh reality , in the press and through the statements of the Chinese authorities - who appear to be holding nothing back .
It is noteworthy that on this occasion , in marked contrast to the madness of the nearby Burmese regime , China is showing an openness to assistance and international aid .
As the Commissioner has stated on several occasions , Europe must pursue its humanitarian action in the devastated province of Sichuan .
in writing . - ( SV ) Aid and money for the people in China who have been hit by this natural disaster are a must in dealing with this tragic situation .
But the Member States themselves can offer such aid directly to the stricken region .
Aid does not have to go via the EU .
Other international organisations are better equipped to coordinate humanitarian aid .
The United Nations , with its long experience and global reach , is an obvious example of such organisations .
We consider that this resolution is yet another attempt by the EU to pursue foreign policy and to make use of a disaster in order to take a further step towards a federal state which engages in foreign policy .
in writing . - ( PT ) We express our sincere condolences to the victims of the earthquake that struck various provinces and autonomous regions of the People 's Republic of China on 12 May , and our solidarity with the people of China , who have shown such courage and mutual support in this time of suffering .
As has been pointed out , the Chinese authorities have very quickly and efficiently begun the urgent task of providing relief and support to the victims , seeking to minimise the number of deaths , respond to the problems faced by the people and begin rebuilding the huge amount of infrastructure that has been destroyed .
Hence the need for the various Member States and the EU rapidly to provide resources and emergency aid that will contribute towards the Chinese authorities ' huge effort to help the people affected by the earthquake .
in writing . - I join my colleagues in saluting China 's efforts in helping its people following the earthquake in Sichuan province .
What we are seeing with China is an example to other states in the region faced with the massive destruction caused by such natural disasters .
I also agree that the EU should be actively helping China with reconstruction efforts .
I voted in support of the resolution .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament 's resolution on the natural disaster in China .
Earthquakes are catastrophic events that claim very many lives and cause huge damage to property .
The Chinese earthquake , which had a magnitude of 7.8 , has shocked people all over the world .
This devastating quake has claimed a large number of victims and has created extremely difficult conditions for those who have been affected by it , especially in Sichuan Province .
I would like to express my deepest sympathy and solidarity with the Chinese people and with the great many victims of this tragedy .
We welcome the fact that the Chinese authorities reacted swiftly to the disaster by providing emergency relief measures .
It should be noted that China was also willing to accept offers of aid from external sources .
Moreover , it is gratifying to see that the Chinese and foreign media were allowed to transmit detailed and accurate information on the disaster .
According to my estimates , the EU has already provided more than EUR 10 million in aid .
However , China needs the practical experience of Europeans in this field even more than it needs financial aid .
The emergency relief measures provided for the civilian population must therefore include tried and tested practices for reducing the impact of events of this kind .
The EU has to make available the knowledge it has acquired from seismology research so as to help identify the reasons for the inadequate structural stability of buildings .
The earthquake region of Sichuan must be converted into an open-air laboratory where potential solutions can be tested out and the findings used for the reconstruction of that province .
in writing . - ( SV ) A ban on this type of weapon must be implemented on a global basis , through the United Nations , and at the instigation of nation states , not by the European Parliament .
We are opposed to a common European security policy which will lead to a United States of Europe .
We have therefore voted against the resolution .
in writing . - ( PT ) Being fully aware of the retrospective nature of the resolution , we voted in favour , mainly because of the content of paragraphs 7 and 8 , which :
Reiterate the call for all EU Member States and NATO countries to impose a ban on the use of depleted uranium , to redouble efforts to achieve a complete ban and systematically to halt production and procurement of this type of weaponry ;
Call on the Member States and the Council to take the lead in working towards an international treaty to establish a ban on the development , production , stockpiling , transfer , testing and use of uranium weapons as well as the destruction or recycling of existing stocks ( even though the EP has unacceptably set conditions on that requirement ) .
However , we must stress that the majority in the EP has avoided attributing responsibility for the use of depleted uranium for military purposes .
In other words , it seeks to whitewash the crimes committed by NATO and the USA and its allies in Kosovo , Afghanistan and Iraq ( where furthermore , besides depleted uranium weapons , fragmentation or white phosphorus bombs have also been used ) .
in writing . - I fully support calls for the establishment of an international treaty to ban depleted uranium weapons .
The use of these weapons causes fatal diseases amongst both military personnel and the civilian population .
The EU has a moral duty to take a lead on this issue and work towards the total elimination of these weapons .
in writing . - EU Member States and the Council must take the lead in negotiating an international treaty aimed at introducing a ban on the development , production , stockpiling , transfer , testing and use of uranium weapons .
Indeed , I feel that the treaty must not stop there .
States must not be given the opportunity to continue using old stocks of these weapons whose impact on health and the environment remains , in my view , uncertain .
Existing stocks must be destroyed or recycled .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
in writing . - ( PT ) This resolution gives continuity to the REACH process , which we abstained from because we felt that it did not meet the legitimate rights and concerns of consumers and of small and medium-sized enterprises , and did not protect workers or the environment .
We believe that the necessary balance between protecting workers ' health , protecting the environment and developing industry was not completely struck because consumer rights were not properly guaranteed , since workers ' rights to information and health were restricted .
Neither did it take proper account of micro and SMEs - since it inevitably increased the cost of registering substances without providing appropriate support - or even of the large enterprises that have now expressed their wish to replace hazardous chemicals .
Reference is now made to the measures to streamline and speed up the Commission 's internal procedures for the validation and regulatory acceptance of new alternative test methods , in which the Commission will provide for a more transparent process involving consultation of all stakeholders in the run-up to any proposal for an Adaptation to Technical Progress of the Test Methods Regulation .
We maintained the same position , in the expectation that there would in effect be more transparency .
in writing . - ( FR ) I supported the Wojciechowski report on a new animal health strategy .
As an elected Member from the Massif central-Centre district , I am especially worried about the current spread of the epizootic disease of ovine catarrhal fever , which is very serious in terms of duration , propagation , the spread of the various serotypes of the disease in areas that had until then been disease-free and the serious socio-economic effects of restricting animal movements and trade .
I think the Commission should formulate an animal health action plan to improve its ability to react to such serious animal epizootic diseases by financing research , compensating for losses , giving advances on payments , etc .
I voted against Amendment 12 , concerning the fact that transporting live animals over long distances is likely to increase the risks and that animals intended for slaughter should not be transported for more than nine hours .
Conversely , I voted for Amendment 3 , to the effect that the quality of transport is more important to animal well-being than its duration .
There is a stringent , specific regulation on this matter and we would be well advised to monitor its implementation .
in writing . - ( PT ) We believe the report presents a range of positive measures that must be built upon and which the Commission should take forward , in particular :
the need for a substantial Community contribution in respect of major diseases in order to ensure equal treatment and opportunities where these are beyond the resources of the countries and producers concerned ;
acknowledgement that EU producers face higher costs due to the higher EU standards in place and that they must be protected from imported animal products produced subject to lower standards ;
the need for the Commission to help farmers cope with the high costs incurred through the procurement of the equipment required to register animals .
We still have some criticisms , particularly in the area of public funding , which must be stepped up to avoid the establishment of private insurance to remedy losses due to disease eradication .
We cannot agree with the possibility of farmers being given total responsibility for eradicating diseases by paying for private insurance .
in writing . - ( PT ) I support the animal health strategy for 2007-2013 , proposed by the European Commission , since I believe the debate among European institutions must be initiated rapidly with a view to drafting future legislative proposals .
Action at European level must be prioritised , a modern animal health framework must be created , and prevention , monitoring and scientific research must be enhanced .
I therefore approve the Wojciechowski report , though I must stress as regards restrictions on the transport of animals for slaughter that I am against any type of additional imposition , since existing legislation already contains sufficient provisions to minimise animal suffering .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report deals with a very important issue .
But , as usual , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development proposes increased appropriations from the EU for agriculture in various contexts .
We are therefore obliged to vote against the report as a whole , although in principle we are in favour of measures to promote better animal health in the Union .
in writing . - I voted against paragraph 52 of the Wojciechowski report which gives support for the principle of electronic tagging .
Proposals in this area have not been proportionate and the Commission must rethink its strategy .
Sheep farming plays a vital role in many parts of rural Scotland and the EU must act in such a way as to protect these rural economies , not impose additional burdens on sheep farmers .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report on a new Animal Health Strategy for the EU because I am strongly in favour of sustainable agriculture and I can only endorse any policy measure or practice that seeks to promote it .
The health and wellbeing of farm animals are essential in order to ensure public health through the production of healthy food .
Animal health is closely linked to human health , owing to the possibility of direct or indirect transmission of certain diseases .
Extremely high stocking densities in intensive farming systems may increase the risk of disease spread and hamper disease control .
Although I agree that we must promote measures to ensure biological security on farms , we must also ensure that we do not gold-plate the eco-conditionality criteria .
Nevertheless , I deplore the fact that the Commission Communication does not place greater value on veterinary experts , who , in my view , are the best placed to implement an effective strategy for the protection of animal health .
in writing . - I welcome Janus Wojciechowski 's report .
The report incorporates measures aimed at improving food safety as well as animal health .
There have been some calls from our SNP and Conservative colleagues to vote against the mandatory introduction of electronic and DNA-based genetic identification and registration of animals at EU-Level .
In a time when the threat of outbreaks of new and existing animal diseases is acute and expected to be more so due to climate change , it appears sensible to have a secure and robust animal movement system with such identification and registration methods .
These views are reflected in the way I voted .
in writing . - ( FR ) After heated debate and a large number of amendments tabled in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the Wojciechowski report , as adopted , proposes substantial changes to the Commission 's proposals .
These changes imbue the report with a strong sense of balance and provide an opportunity effectively to amend and improve the legal framework for animal health in the European Union .
Concerning the issue of high stocking densities in intensive farming systems , the Agriculture Committee 's vote has moderated the rapporteur 's initial position by recognising that these may prove problematic where inadequate disease control measures are practised .
In addition , the amendment tabled in plenary on behalf of the PPE-DE concerning long-distance animal transport should enable the EU to limit the unnecessary suffering of animals intended for slaughter , whilst maintaining excellent sanitary conditions .
The remaining measures proposed in the report , particularly to promote the use of emergency vaccination , to give farmers a greater sense of responsibility and to shed light on the role of all the players in the funding of the future strategy , are a step in the right direction and are an appropriate means of strengthening EU legislation on animal health .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which highlights the needs for high animal health status in the EU , which can only be achieved by an EU action plan .
In relation to animal transport , we must only make legislation in this area based on scientific findings .
Attempts to specify journey times are narrow and ill-focused .
Attention must be paid to ensuring compliance with existing transport regulations .
Quality of transportation , not duration is critical .
This is why I welcome the exclusion from this report of a specific journey time .
Lastly , the EU must insist that our animal health and welfare standards are accepted internationally and that these concerns are taken into account at the WTO .
in writing . - This issue is of vital concern for many millions of Europe 's citizens , particularly in the south-east of England .
The most controversial issue has been the transportation of animals which is a function of this report .
I welcome any impetus which can be given to improving animal welfare during the process of transportation .
Of course , an element of this is that veterinary surgeons are properly resourced in carrying out checks and can be certain of an enhanced Veterinary Fund to rely on for this activity .
Similarly , those farmers who deal with livestock transportation should benefit from insurance instruments which protect them for indirect losses .
in writing . - ( PT ) The implementation of the Aarhus Convention has been discussed since its entry into force on 30 October 2001 .
Since most of the 35 parties to the Convention are European Union Member States , they have special responsibilities in establishing the mechanisms necessary to implement it .
It is just as important to guarantee specific provisions - like rights already provided for in the Convention - that improve regional and global public participation in other conventions and treaties that address environment-related issues .
Parliament and the Council have now adopted three legislative instruments to implement the Aarhus Convention , but difficulties remain .
Thus although some aspects of the EP resolution are not very clear , in general we support it because we believe it is important to contribute to the creation of universal conditions for access to justice and to processes involving environmental issues .
We therefore hope that some positive steps will be made in the process in this third session of the Meeting of the Parties , to be held in Riga , Latvia , from 11 to 13 June 2008 .
in writing . - ( SV ) Junilistan supports the Aarhus Convention , but we think that the national parliaments should determine their various positions on their own account during the conference on the Aarhus Convention in Riga .
The Member States which have not ratified the Aarhus Convention must of course decide for themselves whether they want to ratify or not .
In our view it is not for the European Parliament to make recommendations on the matter .
in writing . - ( FI ) I have been actively involved in the Aarhus Convention since 2000 , when we discussed its first pillar , the right of citizens to information on the environment , and soon after that the second pillar , opportunities for public participation in decision-making .
When I met local environment activists in Kazakhstan , what seemed obvious in the West took on a new dimension from my standpoint .
The Aarhus Convention is a major achievement in the aim to improve public participation and access to information rights and is a component in any successful system of democracy , and that is why I well understand Parliament 's position in which also the missing element , the right of the public to appeal , should be restored .
I can sympathise , however , with the Council when it says it fears that citizens ' rights could be abused when it comes to lodging an appeal in order to slow down projects or establish a level playing field for fund-raising campaigns staged by organisations .
The Council is right to be worried about this exploitation of democracy .
It is important , however , that the issue should be raised once again : the world and our society are changing all the time , and political decisions must stand up to present-day scrutiny .
It is for this very reason that I like the paragraph in our resolution in preparation for the meeting which states that there is a desire to extend the Aarhus Convention to apply to all the principles of sustainable development .
This way the criteria for sustainable development are met thanks to the Convention 's principles regarding openness , the chance for participation , and accountability .
This is actually the idea behind the Aarhus Convention : it will generate a wide-ranging and proactive way of thinking about the environment , especially amongst the public , so creating new opportunities for improving existing practices .
The Riga meeting will be a splendid opportunity for an interim evaluation of the Convention , and I am convinced that this is the way to go .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , the Aarhus Convention recognises that every person has the right to live in an environment adequate to his or her health and wellbeing and has a duty to protect the environment , also that in pursuance of that right and in order to fulfil that duty citizens must have access to information , be able to participate in decision-making , and have access to justice in environmental matters .
Article l of the Convention states that each Party to the Convention shall guarantee the rights of access to information and public participation in decision-making .
Greater involvement in this process on the part of national and European institutions which represent citizens is of vital importance , both in order to obtain full access to information on environmental matters and , in particular , so as to be able to ensure that the information provided is above all correct .
Contradictory theories abound , with greater or lesser scientific foundation .
It is necessary to lay down rules to prevent alarmist and sometimes exaggerated pronouncements and to make environmental protection a duty for everyone , both citizens and institutions .
On behalf of the UEN Group , which will vote in favour of the resolution , I would like to underline the need for the European Union delegation attending the Meeting of the Parties to the Convention , scheduled for 11 to 13 June 2008 , to have as broad a representation as possible from this Parliament .
in writing . - ( PT ) Some aspects of the resolution are more important than others .
Due to their structural importance , some policies condition all the others .
The following is an example .
By not calling the Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPA ) into question , merely referring to the need not to make development aid available only to countries that accept greater liberalisation of their markets , every positive aspect that might arise out of such aid has been abandoned .
EPAs set conditions on the sovereignty of countries , impose a model that favours EU multinationals , and make the production of countries conditional not on the many particular needs of their people but , on the contrary , on the requirements of an increasingly liberalised market .
Therefore , considering it positive that military expenditure should be excluded from the scope of development aid , that effective resources should be devoted to developing and improving public services , that the diversion of aid towards objectives that have nothing at all to do with development should be ceased once and for all , these measures will only be effective if at the same time we reject the liberalisation of trade and the instruments of domination and interference set out in the EPAs .
Only by overcoming this contradiction will it be possible to establish aid that expresses true solidarity and that respects national sovereignty .
in writing . - I believe that much can still be done in order to enhance the effectiveness of aid from the EU and its member states , and the report by Johan van Hecke encompasses important insights .
However , I would like to underline that I do not support the phrasing in paragraph 1 stating that the EU should speak with one voice and more harmonisation is necessary .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted in favour of the report on effectiveness although I do not agree with all of it .
First , because Member States do not keep their word , which means that all the work carried out by European institutions ends up being worthless .
Moreover , the report does not show clearly how Member States commit themselves to one role ( supporters of partner countries in the implementation of aid ) but really perform another ( funding only those initiatives that are priorities for their own economies ) , without paying attention to the social and economic development of the partner countries ( orphans ) .
Second , because more effectiveness and transparency is requested when discussing the funding of projects .
Of course we want effectiveness .
However , transparency means more audits , more consultations , more controls - in brief , more waste of time and money on bureaucracy , and this slows down rather than facilitates the work of MANY people .
Transparency therefore reduces effectiveness .
I would like to see transparency being used as a tool to achieve effectiveness and that the latter always prevails .
in writing . - I welcome Mr Van Hecke 's follow-up to the Paris Declaration of 2005 on Aid Effectiveness .
The aid system must remain true to its primary goal of reducing poverty .
Indeed , for aid to be effective it must make use of local systems and fully engage with the recipient .
I also support the call for the Commission and EU Member States to make significant efforts in meeting the objective outlined in the Millennium Development Goals to devote 0.7 % of Europe 's GNP to public development aid by 2015 .
I believe that the report reflects these views and I voted in favour .
in writing . - ( PL ) The Paris Declaration of 2005 established an international aid effectiveness programme based , primarily , on eliminating poverty .
The document contains specific obligations that are aimed at increasing aid effectiveness on the basis of international cooperation .
It would appear that this will be effective aid in the full meaning of these words and that those who require this aid will receive it and will not have to pay for it .
Unfortunately it does happen that persons receiving ' aid ' have to pay for it .
In many cases this is an instrument to make the weak economically dependent on the strong , and the poor dependent on the rich .
At the beginning of the sixties an Indian who saw the ' aid ' being provided by developed countries to his own country said at a meeting of the World Food Organisation ' for the love of God , stop helping us ' .
I believe that this time things will be different .
Mr President , I would do almost anything to serve this Parliament , but even I have limits .
I almost reached my limit yesterday evening when I put the Aarhus Convention debate ahead of asparagus consumption on the famous asparagus evening .
I ' deserted before dessert ' , only to find the debate had been cancelled .
My question is , are we allowed to attach our unused speeches to the minutes of the session , since the answer from the Commissioner is there anyway ?
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Sudan and the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) ( debate )
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Sudan and the International Criminal Court .
author . - Madam President , once again we are returning to the topic of Sudan and what can be done to call the Government there to account for the suffering of the people of that country , and indeed for the effects on neighbouring states .
This afternoon 's resolution particularly concerns the International Criminal Court , and the fact that , over a year ago now , two arrest warrants were issued by that Court for Ahmad Haroun , the Minister of the Interior at the time , who is now the Minister of Humanitarian Affairs - which I think many of us find deeply shocking - and also for one of the former Janjaweed militia leaders , Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman .
We have seen absolutely no cooperation from the Sudanese Government in handing these people over to the International Criminal Court , although that Government is well aware that membership of the United Nations carries with it obligations .
We are seeing an ongoing culture of impunity , where nobody is ever brought to account , it seems , for the most appalling crimes .
We consider that all governments should be taking a strong stance on this , and the resolution says that we should be calling on the General Affairs and External Relations Council in June to adopt targeted EU punitive measures against a clearly identified group of Sudanese officials who bear responsibility for this non-cooperation , with that action including clear financial sanctions - it appears that when the cries of people do not work , maybe stopping the flow of money will .
My group commends this resolution to the House .
We look forward to firm action and hopefully seeing these men , and others , brought to justice .
author . - ( NL ) Madam President , a year ago we also had an urgent debate about Sudan .
Since then the situation has become worse , not better .
The agreement between the Islamic north and the non-Islamic south , reached after a long internal war , is under pressure .
The temporary cooperation in a transitional government and preparation of the referendum on independence for the south in 2011 are under pressure because the borders of those areas have not been finally demarcated .
Control of the oil-rich middle area is now the cause of further violence .
Also , the peace settlement does not apply to west Darfur , since Arab nomads and solders have driven out most of the black population to neighbouring Chad .
This is a conflict not between supporters of Islam and Christianity , but between nomads and the settled agricultural population for control of arid land that produces very little .
Because of population growth and desertification , the people are losing their traditional sources of livelihood and turning against each other .
The government is also responsible for driving out the originally non-Arab population .
There is now fighting from Darfur back as far as the capital , Khartoum .
Even when what is now Sudan was known as Anglo-Egyptian Sudan , it was debatable whether this huge area with widely differing populations should become independent as a single state .
A unified state would mainly be the state of the Arab populations in the north , east and centre .
It would be difficult for the black Islamic population in the west and the black Christians and animists in the south to gain an equal position .
The regions that were at the time much less developed were far from the sea and were given very little international attention .
Ultimately no one took any notice of them and we are now seeing the results of colonial shortsightedness .
The state is responsible for many crimes , but at the same time it is largely an instrument for one of the warring parties .
That makes it difficult for it to cooperate with punitive measures .
Obviously we are trying to keep the prospect of that open in the resolution , but in the current situation there is little cause for optimism .

author . - ( PL ) It is really shocking that the Sudanese government has appointed Mr Haroun ( the former interior minister responsible for Darfur during 2003-2004 ) as the minister for humanitarian affairs .
It is a sick joke that he has been given responsibility for the lives and security of the inhabitants of Darfur , when it was the same person who had persecuted them earlier , and that decisions concerning the largest humanitarian operation run by the UNAMID international peace mission are in his hands .
Let us not forget that the purpose of this mission is to protect civilians from crimes , that is , just the kind of actions that Mr Haroun was involved in .
The international community , the European Union , the African Union , the UN , the Arab League , all these organisations should put maximum pressure on the Sudanese government so that these people should finally answer to the International Criminal Court .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , Sudan is an enormous country covering an area of 2.5 million square kilometres , with a population of about 42 million people , that has been destroyed by two civil wars that claimed millions of victims and resulted in disability , degradation , and the destruction of property for many more millions of its inhabitants .
One issue that was at the basis of the fratricidal conflicts was ethnic differences - 52 % of the population are African , 39 % Arab - and religious differences - 70 % are Sunni , 30 % are animist .
During these wars the population experienced all possible atrocities at the hands of those with armaments and power , including murder , torture , rape , robbery and eviction , crimes that are prosecuted and punished by the International Criminal Court .
Unfortunately the ICC does not have the means to bring the perpetrators to justice .
The resolution presents the European view as regards the current situation and I support it .
I do think , however , that in these circumstances it would be worth considering the use of a more radical approach , for example , using UN special forces to take the accused to the ICC , and then imprisoning those found guilty and interning them for life , with no right of return , on some distant island with some telling name such as Evildoers ' Island .
I think that this would help .
author . - Madam President , the UN estimates that the conflict in Sudan has resulted in about 300 000 deaths and has left approximately 2.5 million refugees .
Reports of untold acts of barbarism taking place in the region have abounded in recent years .
The suffering of the innocent civilian population has been extreme .
Those that allegedly were responsible for instigating or carrying out war crimes or crimes against humanity should face the law and , if found guilty , must be punished accordingly .
This is not just necessary as a matter of natural justice but also in order to make sure that such individuals are prevented from repeating their crimes and that adequate example is given to other potential criminals to prevent them from carrying out similar crimes .
The International Criminal Court was formed in order to make sure that those that commit war crimes and crimes against humanity do not go unpunished .
Sudan has signed the Rome Statute which created the International Criminal Court but has not yet ratified it .
This is no excuse for not offering this court its full cooperation in according with UN Security Council Resolution 1593 .
The International Criminal Court issued two arrest warrants against Sudan 's former Minister of the Interior , Mr Ahmad Haroun , and against the militia leader Ali Mohammed Ali Abd-al-Rahman .
The warrants relate to 51 counts of alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity .
For more than a year now the Sudanese authorities have refused to hand over these individuals and are thus obstructing the work of the International Court .
This is absolutely and utterly unacceptable .
Such behaviour makes the Sudanese Government an accomplice of these alleged criminals .
We call on Sudan to think again , and think fast , about the grave position they have placed themselves in by protecting these alleged mass killers from the arm of international law .
We hope they will come to their senses and abide by the request of the International Court immediately .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) It is pretty scandalous when a country that is a member of the United Nations fails to respect calls addressed to it by the Security Council of that organisation for assistance to be provided to the International Criminal Court .
What can the international community do when the foreign minister in Sudan refuses to provide such help and also declares that the Court has no right to judge any Sudanese citizen and that the Sudanese government will not allow any Sudanese citizen to be tried and sentenced outside of its national courts ?
We are in quite a difficult situation , since , to a certain degree , Sudan is not dependent on aid either from the European Union or the United States or the other western democracies , but has based its development on assistance from China .
China , a country that , unfortunately , does not concern itself with human rights , even within its own borders .
The only reaction that is possible from our side is to ask for the assets of the Sudanese leaders to be frozen .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Since 2003 the conflict in Sudan has claimed 300 000 victims .
Two and a half million people have left their homes to escape from the violence .
Despite the partial stabilisation in the country , there are constant clashes between government forces and the rebels , which makes it difficult to use UN peacekeeping forces and to provide humanitarian aid .
No lasting resolution of the Sudanese conflict will be possible without the involvement of the UN and without the UN increasing the number of soldiers in the region .
The recruitment of children into the army and acts of violence against the civilian population , particularly against women , are clear breaches of international standards and human rights .
What is particularly worrying is the failure of the government to cooperate with the International Criminal Court as well as maintaining war criminals in power , who - and this sounds like some sick joke - are now in charge , among other things , of distributing humanitarian aid as well as contacts with the peacekeepers .
A call should be made to Sudan to start cooperating immediately with the Court in order to deal with the war crimes , since this is a necessary condition for the creation of democracy and the rule of law .
All attempts to disrupt the peace agreement and the military assistance coming from third countries , for both sides of the conflict , should be condemned .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , since 2003 Sudan has been a battleground due to religious and ethnic differences .
The conflict in Darfur resulted in the exodus of over two and half million people .
Civilian victims of this conflict have been murdered , beaten and raped .
There is widespread hunger and there is a lack of basic hygiene .
Children , orphaned , lost , have no possibility of education or a decent future .
Ever more restrictions are placed on humanitarian missions .
The Sudanese conflict has resulted in a breakdown of civilisation in Darfur and Chad .
The Sudanese government has refused to cooperate with the International Criminal Court , derides the ICC , which issued arrest warrants for war criminals and is unable , or just does not want to , remedy the situation .
Following the attack on Omdurman on 10 and 11 May , another 200 people lost their lives .
We call on the authorities in Sudan to start cooperating immediately with the International Criminal Court .
We expect the Council of Europe to take decisive steps to block access to European Union banks to those identified as financing conflict in Darfur and to freeze their assets .
( CS ) Having been a participant in the European Parliament 's fact-finding mission to Darfur and Chad in 2004 , I am a responsible political traveller .
I was present when a twelve-year old raped mother , when asked her child 's name , answered : ' I do not know ; the child has no name ' .
Therefore , we call on Sudan to ratify the Rome Statute , to cooperate without delay in accordance with Resolution 1593 and to immediately hand over Ali Kushayb and Ahmad Harun .
Most of all , though , we are asking Europeans to demand in their negotiations with the League of Arab States , and in particular with China , that China and the League of Arab States apply strict policies in relations with Sudan .
These are the partners who can help us .
We would call on the Council and the Commission to keep us informed of their negotiations .
( ET ) Colleagues , Sudan is a country which has exercised its right to be different .
A country where violence , terror and rape on a large scale are everyday , non-punishable events .
A country based on values other than human rights .
The situation is critical : over the five years since the start of the Darfur conflict more than 200 000 people have lost their lives .
Individuals who have committed crimes against humanity and war crimes live in freedom ; some of them have respectable posts in Sudan .
The judicial system in Sudan is unable and unwilling to tackle the situation in Darfur .
Reform is needed ; the system must be based on internationally recognised human rights norms .
Impunity must be brought to an end .
Cooperation on the part of the Sudanese government with the International Criminal Court is desperately needed .
It must ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and bring war criminals to justice .
The situation must not change now , it must change right now .
( PL ) Today , as on many such occasions when we have discussed killing and breaches of human rights in the world , we talk about who is responsible over there , on the spot .
However , it would seem to me that the situation requires deeper analysis since , behind these conflicts , there is always the trade in arms and oil .
This trade in arms and oil is not organised exclusively by people in those locations , whom we often treat as being worse people , but it is organised by people in the group of nations that have a more developed sense of responsibility and should have a more developed sense of responsibility for others .
If it were not for the interests of these people then it is very likely that the crimes that we usually discuss on Thursday afternoons , just as today we are discussing Sudan , would not exist .
Madam President , repeatedly on Thursday afternoons we discuss Sudan because the atrocities against human rights continue : murder , rape , abduction , child abduction and confiscation of property .
Poor security continues to be a problem for the men , women and children of Sudan , but also for people working in the humanitarian field .
This disregard of the jurisdiction of the ICC has led to criminals being allowed to walk free , particularly high-profile people like the former Minister for the Interior and a former Janjaweed military leader .
We must urge Sudan , with all the powers we can , to ratify the Rome Statute .
I once again adamantly call on the EU and the rest of the international community to exercise moral and social responsibility by taking decisive steps - which include confronting China with the part that it plays in Sudan and the arms trade that keeps this situation going - to protect the people of Sudan and the refugees in neighbouring Chad , and to end this conflict .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , in 2004 , the European Union called on the United Nations to set up a Committee of Inquiry into the atrocities and crimes committed in Darfur .
On the basis of the recommendations made by this Committee , the European Union asked the UN Security Council to refer the situation in Darfur to the International Criminal Court , which the Council did by adopting Resolution 1593 in 2005 .
Over the past few months , the European Union has repeatedly called on the Sudanese Government to cooperate unconditionally with the ICC .
On 31 March 2008 , the anniversary of the Security Council 's referral of the situation in Darfur to the ICC , the EU Presidency adopted a Declaration on behalf of the European Union expressing its outrage at the Sudanese Government 's failure to cooperate with the Court .
The European Union also expressed its willingness to support the adoption of new appropriate measures against those persons who bear responsibility for Sudan 's non-cooperation with the ICC , should the Sudanese Government still fail to comply with the UN Resolution .
On 6 May 2008 , I attended a meeting between donors and the Sudanese Government - the Sudan Consortium - which was held in Oslo .
At this meeting , I reminded my Sudanese interlocutors , while addressing the conference , that our development aid is intended to support development in Sudan subject to a genuine democratic transformation taking place in the country , as provided for in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement .
I emphasised that the principles underlying the CPA must likewise apply to Darfur and that there was an urgent need to restore security , deploy the United Nations Mission and facilitate humanitarian access .
The recent outbreak of violence in Abyei , a region fraught with complex problems that represent one of the major challenges in the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in Sudan , emphasises the importance of implementing in full the CPA .
I have just published a press release calling on both parties to comply with all CPA provisions , including the establishment of an immediate ceasefire and the withdrawal of other armed factions from the town of Abyei .
The Sudanese Government must know that the international community as a whole will remain faithful to the vision set out in the CPA of a peaceful , stable and democratic Sudan that demonstrates respect for the rule of law and for human rights .
This message is not directed solely at the Sudanese Government - it must also be understood by the various armed rebel movements whose political cause , whatever it may be , does not justify committing crimes .
The Court has issued a number of arrest warrants , including one against Ali Kushayb , a Janjaweed militia leader .
The meeting of the UN Security Council , which will take place on 5 June in the presence of the ICC Prosecutor , Luis Moreno-Ocampo , may be an important opportunity for the international community to present a united front and to send a strong signal in support of the Court 's work .
The External Relations Council scheduled for late June will most probably address the issue .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I want to join in condemning Sudan 's persistent failure to cooperate with the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) and to hand over to the ICC Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb .
To date the conflict in Sudan has claimed 300 000 victims and created two and a half million internally displaced persons .
Yet we continue to deliver aid via Ahmad Harun 's Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs .
I ask the Commission and Member States to cease such deliveries via this ministry , to press the Government of Sudan to remove him from office and to immediately arrest and hand him over to the ICC .
It is all very well to lecture China on its failure to act over Darfur , but in this case the EU is as weak-willed as the rest .
2 .
The arrest of political opponents in Belarus ( debate )
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the arrest of political prisoners in Belarus .
author . - ( PL ) Today we are once again discussing breaches of fundamental human rights in Belarus .
As usual in such cases , we note what it is that dictators do .
Obviously dictators always battle with organised religion , because , very often , this is the biggest voice that the population has .
They also always battle with the trade unions .
As it happens the trade unions in Belarus are rather weak , so , from this point of view , Lukashenko could seem quite a positive figure , as he does not have anyone to fight against , since they have not yet managed to create trades unions there .
In addition , dictators always fight against the opposition that wants to have democracy .
However , there is one thing we should also bear in mind : we should remember that Belarus is an important neighbour for the European Union in the East and should be treated as such .
We have a certain tendency to treat Russia as the only neighbour to the East and forget about the fact that Belarus should also be a partner for the EU in the East , as it is a large country with great promise .
author . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Lukashenko 's regime in Belarus deserves to be criticised for using repressive methods , arresting political opponents , using authoritarian governing methods , censorship and isolation of the country .
In addition to that , the refusal to grant entry visas prevents Members of the European Parliament and of national parliaments from seeing the situation for themselves .
All this is highlighted in my Group 's motion .
However , I think that our criticism of breaches of human rights must be measured by absolute criteria , rather than following a political scale of who in the world plays first fiddle at the moment .
That is not right .
We keep running around in circles ; we have not been able to take a step towards objectivity for millennia .
The Romans were always right and their chroniclers painted it as a wrongdoing when an attacked opponent was bold enough to defend himself .
Let me get back to Belarus , however .
Lukashenko 's regime is first and foremost an attempt to disrespect the direction in which the Euro-Atlantic initiatives are going .
Mr Lukashenko plays in his own narrow field , ignoring the fact that moderate-sized countries cannot behave like that since supranational capital will not allow it .
If you do not obey , you will be isolated and the international community will support the opposition within the country .
That is how it works and we all know it .
Sooner or later Mr Lukashenko and his party machine will pay dearly for acting in this manner .
Belarus is located in an area that is strategically important for the Unites States and for NATO .
The present US Administration and the governments of some other countries would very much like Belarus to join NATO , together with Ukraine and Georgia , thereby causing damage to Russia .
Our worries about human rights in Belarus would not be so intense if , in fact , the real issue was not Russia .
The question is , however , whether attempts to weaken Russia help the issue of world security .
I am rather afraid that such attempts may unleash powers that no one will be able to control .
Russia has been suppressing them for several millennia .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the Members of the European Parliament who are concerned with the issue of Belarus and who are monitoring the situation in Belarus are faced with contradictory information .
On the one hand there is the desire that has been publicly and officially declared to normalise relations with the European Union .
The opening of the representative office of the European Commission in Minsk is a symbol of this desire .
On the other hand , in the same month , the police brutally attacked demonstrators who wanted to celebrate the nineteenth anniversary of the country 's independence .
The following day the authorities sent KGB special forces to independent journalists .
A month later the activists were handed down long sentences and this is not even the opposition , just people who dared to demonstrate in defence of citizens ' rights and the rights of small businesses , such as Andrei Kim or Sergei Parsukiewicz .
We have also recently heard that Alexander Milinkiewicz was arrested and fined just for meeting Belarus citizens and for discussing public issues with them .
Alexander Kazulin , the most important political prisoner , a prisoner of conscience in contemporary Europe , is still in prison .
Speaking as the chairman of the Belarus delegation I would like to see the day when we can put forward a Resolution to the European Parliament that notes with satisfaction that changes have taken place in Belarus to make that country part of the civilised European Community .
Unfortunately this will not happen today .
Without any guarantees for the fundamental rights of free and democratic elections , to express one 's political opinions , freedom of the press and freedom to practise one 's religion , there is no possibility that the European Union should ever recognise the regime in Belarus as a country with which it is worth cooperating , or as a country that it is worth helping .
We shall never support the policies that are practised by Alexander Lukashenko .
We shall , however , support independent citizens ' groups and individual citizens from Belarus in their contacts with the European Union in the hope that one day the country will return to normality .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the use of force against non-governmental organisations , opposition activists and independent journalists in Minsk and other Belarusian cities at the end of March represents a drastic deterioration of the political situation in a country that is already in the grip of an authoritarian and dictatorial regime .
The only German political foundation that had been allowed to function in Minsk has had to close .
Newspaper offices are raided to intimidate critical voices in the press .
Free elections and freedom of assembly and expression are being severely restricted .
Opposition politicians are being systematically prosecuted and given lengthy prison sentences .
The authorities are taking repressive measures against movements within civil society , either by invoking obscure laws on NGOs or anti-extremist legislation or by using force to break up peaceful gatherings .
We , too , must move to promote the culture of political pluralism in Belarus .
Encounters with democratic structures , especially for young people , are particularly important for the future of the country .
The reopening of the European Humanities University in Vilnius , a Belarusian university-in-exile that offers a place of refuge for students who are victims of political persecution , was a wise move .
The next step must be visa facilitation , for which this House has called on several occasions .
It is not right that the EU should further restrict people 's freedom of movement by charging a fee of EUR 60 to issue a visa .
That is almost a third of a monthly income in Belarus and is therefore unaffordable for many people .
What we have managed with Ukraine , Moldova and Russia we should also be able to do with Belarus .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , Belarus is the only European country which still has a totalitarian administration and where the death penalty is still in existence .
President Lukashenko continues to keep a watchful eye on civil society and is unwilling to release his tight grip on the country .
Despite everything , the country 's government has said it wants to establish closer relations with the European Union .
Once again it is time for us clearly to explain to Belarus the terms of cooperation .
As the resolution states , the basic preconditions for close cooperation in terms of the European Neighbourhood Policy are the abolition of capital punishment , a free media , freedom of speech and assembly , freedom of religion , a respect for democratic values , and the immediate release of political prisoners .
This resolution calling for the immediate release of the members of the opposition who have been arrested is at the same time a show of support and solidarity for all those who are suffering under the current Belarusian regime .
Next week members of Belarus 's political opposition will come here to Parliament to ask the EU to support a petition rejected by Lukashenko to amend the law restricting freedom of religion which took effect in 2002 .
I hope that this important resolution and next week 's joint debate will persuade the Belarusian Government that it is in its own interests and that of the country 's citizens .
on behalf of the PSE . - ( ET ) Colleagues , on Human Rights Day , 10 December , the television broadcasting station Belsat began operating in Poland with the aim of broadcasting independent information on what is happening in Belarus , Europe and elsewhere in the world to Belarusians .
The channel , which broadcasts mainly in Belarusian , now reaches some 10 % of Belarusians via satellite .
The station is working under constant pressure .
At the end of March KGB and police in Belarus carried out a raid to apprehend Belsat 's local reporters .
Their basic tools , i.e. laptop computers and broadcasting technology , were seized .
Independent reporters live in constant fear of interrogation and arrest .
The situation in Belarus , an immediate neighbour of the European Union , is as harsh as it was behind the iron curtain .
As the Chair of the Moldova delegation and an Estonian , I state here that the citizens of Belarus , which was also part of the Soviet Union , today need independent information as much as they need oxygen .
Belsat is an excellent start , but good television does not come cheap .
The journalists working for Belsat Belarus are fighting for democracy ; they visited us in the European Parliament in March and they need our comprehensive support .
I call upon the European Commission and all our Member States to support Belsat financially and morally .
Let us not forget that a free press is the cornerstone of democracy .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) A few months ago Mr Lukashenko freed all political prisoners with the exception of Mr Kazulin , who was offered the possibility of leaving the country .
This is reminiscent of the methods used by the Communist authorities against the opposition in Poland .
It seemed that , as a result , the situation could be changing for the better , but , as the hero of Ilia Ehrenburg 's well-known story said : ' If they are releasing , it means that they will be putting new ones in ' .
Today the prisons are once again full of prisoners that are in prison because of their political convictions , which they expressed in various demonstrations .
I believe that there is only one correct response to this , which is to extend the list of persons that are banned from entering European Union countries .
This list already exists , but the fact that Mr Lukashenko himself cannot come to the European Union is not very convincing .
We should make the list considerably longer .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , once again we are talking about the situation in Belarus .
Mr Kazulin , Mr Lukashenko 's competitor for the post of President of Belarus , is still in prison , despite being ill .
The demonstrators who wanted to celebrate the nineteenth anniversary of Belarus 's brief independence and were arrested on 25 March 2008 , are still under arrest .
Repression is used against the opposition , and journalists have their property confiscated , they get beaten and exiled .
Recently Mr Lukashenko expressed the desire to stand again for the Presidency .
In addition , for the first time , he tried to blackmail the European Union by reminding us that 50 % of the oil , 50 % of the oil products and 30 % of the gas coming to the European Union passes through Belarus .
This is a reference to the Yamal-Europe natural gas pipeline and the ' Friendship ' oil pipeline .
Despite this , and in fact specifically because of this , the European Union cannot stop acting to defend human rights .
We should provide support to the developing civilian society in Belarus and this includes material support and access to independent information .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , in the seventeen years since the changes that took place during the break-up of the Soviet Union and the separation of free independent states , Belarus remains a relic as the last dictatorship in Central and Eastern Europe .
In this country respect for human rights seems to be very far off .
Falsification of election results , elimination of political opposition , arrests , beatings , restrictions on freedom of speech and freedom of the press , restrictions on meetings , and , above all , mass surveillance of the population by a highly developed security apparatus - this is the everyday reality faced by the citizens of Belarus .
I would also like to draw attention to a deterioration in the situation of many people living near the borders , including the representatives of Polish minorities living there , who , after Poland joined the Schengen Area , have found it very difficult to contact their families living in Poland , especially with the high visa costs .
This situation , which is continuing to be a problem , requires decisive measures to be taken by European countries .
Consideration should also be given as regards the best methods to be used to provide real assistance to those most in need .
Madam President , the Belarus regime shows its continued disregard for all the institutional guarantees that are central to a democracy .
It curtails the freedom to form and join political parties , the freedom of expression , the right to alternative sources of information and the right to free and fair elections .
The arrest of political opponents in Belarus violates all these basic freedoms .
The 19th century British politician Benjamin Disraeli once said : ' No government can be long secure without a formidable opposition ' .
As Lukashenko stifles all opposition , let us hope that Disraeli 's words prove to be a prophesy for the Belarus regime and that the suppression of the opposition will be the cause of its ultimate downfall .
( Applause )

( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , here in the European Parliament we keep coming back to the problem of Belarus , a country that , in fact , lies in the centre of Europe , looked at geographically , bordering the European Union .
It is an exceptional country by European standards in that it does not have a liberal democracy or rule of law and it has censorship .
Today 's debate takes place on the anniversary of the Prague Spring in 1968 , an anniversary of the moment when , in Europe , people finally said ' enough ' to censorship and press controls .
Today I wanted to devote my speech to just this issue in Belarus .
We had a very strange hacker attack on independent internet media : on Charter 97 , Radio Liberty and the Belarus Partisan .
What was strange was the hacker attack began the day before the opposition demonstration that was to take place on the anniversary of the Chernobyl disaster .
The internet media in Belarus are really the only independent media as the majority of the media are completely under the control of the Belarus regime .
Charter 97 are visited by about 9 000 surfers daily and , in Belarus , over 3 000 000 families are connected to the internet , over 30 % of the total population .
This shows the dynamism and vitality of society in Belarus .
Commissioner , the European Union must seriously consider what measures to take in order to help the ordinary people in Belarus .
( LT ) When Alexander Lukashenko started to feel the pressure from Vladimir Putin over gas , he declared his desire for closer ties with the EU .
However , today we can see that this was just empty rhetoric , which was not followed up with respect for human rights , freedom of the press and other European values .
There was no reaction to the non-paper ' What the EU could bring to Belarus ' .
Political arrests and repressions are continuing .
The EU should send its experts without delay to observe the preparations for the autumn parliamentary elections , to see how election laws are amended and whether the opposition is given a chance to act .
We cannot limit it to election observation only .
That would be a huge mistake .
Of course , first of all we need to ensure that EU diplomats and parliamentarians are freely allowed to enter Belarus .
The European Commission and the EU Member States should do everything in their power to achieve this .
( PL ) Madam President , Belarus , being a neighbour of ours , is particularly close to us , especially as many Poles live there .
It is important for us Poles , as well as for the inhabitants of other neighbouring countries , that there be a stable political and economic situation in the region as this provides the basis for development and improvements in quality of life for our inhabitants .
We must also remember that , like Poland , Belarus was forgotten about and handed over to Soviet domination after World War II and could not count on any outside assistance .
However , this country managed to become independent and now can boast of a GDP growth of over 8 % , and even 9.9 % in the years 2003-2006 .
We do not deny to President Lukashenko the right to choose the political direction that his country takes .
However , what does concern us is that one hears ever more frequently about breaches of human rights in Belarus , which means infringements of democracy .
This affects not just Belarus nationals , but also others , which includes Poles .
For this reason this resolution is a sensible one and has the backing of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group .
Madam President , we in Europe have come closer to some of the former Soviet States on our eastern border .
However , Belarus has resisted any attempts at dialogue .
Because Belarus is a dictatorship , the views of citizens who would like a more open and even westward-looking dialogue have no legal way of being heard .
When people call for democracy or highlight abuses by the regime , they are faced with imprisonment .
We must continue to urge the Belarus regime to release the iron grip it has on its citizens .
One way to do this is to keep the cause of political , social and religious prisoners in the public eye .
When history looks back , it is those prisoners who will be the heroes of Belarus 's freedom when it is finally achieved .
( DE ) Madam President , I believe this is already the ninth time we have dealt with Belarus , and we shall have to keep doing so until Members representing Belarus are sitting with us here in the European Parliament in Strasbourg .
We urgently need three crucial advances .
Firstly , we strongly urge the Government of Belarus to release its political prisoners at long last - not only the political prisoners who have already being detained for some time , like Mr Kazulin , but also the many new ones who have recently been jailed for exercising elementary fundamental rights such as freedom to practise their profession as journalists , freedom of expression or the right to demonstrate .
Secondly , we call for amendment of the Religion Act and for absolute freedom of religion .
There are European Christians who are being repressed here in the heart of Europe , and we in the European Parliament cannot tolerate that .
We must therefore resist this with all our might .
Thirdly , there is an urgent need for us to ensure that Belarus finally opens up to us as Members of the European Parliament and European citizens , that the wall of isolation is breached with which the Belarusian regime has systematically enclosed its people , that we can be present there and discuss matters and that we can help to foster something like a Belarusian Spring , 40 years after the Prague Spring .
Madam President , our message to Mr Lukashenko but also to the international community is that the European Parliament is and will be persistently concerned about the situation in Belarus , the last dictatorship of Europe .
This applies especially to the arrests of peaceful citizens on political grounds .
The regime in Minsk has indicated recently that it would like to improve relations with the European Union .
However , engaging in any meaningful dialogue has a very normal precondition : releasing all political prisoners , abstaining from arbitrary arrests , ensuring the freedom of expression and independence of the judiciary and allowing normal participation by the opposition in political life .
Finally , I would like to join the appeal of Ms Mikko in appealing to the EU to expand its political and especially material support for the operations of the independent television station , Belsat .
This is the real channel to changing the situation in Belarus , not necessarily our resolutions .
( SK ) Dear colleagues , it saddens me very much that the situation concerning democracy , human rights and the rule of law has not been improving in Belarus .
Alexander Lukashenko 's arrogance of power knows no limits .
The declaration by the Government of Belarus of its intention to improve relations with the European Union is the like totally scorning the democratic world .
I believe that the symbolic date 25 March 2008 , when Mr Lukashenko sent police to fight peaceful citizens of Belarus , will mark the beginning of the end of the totalitarian regime in Belarus , very much like the historic candle manifestation on 25 March 1988 in Slovakia .
I would like to express my solidarity with the united democratic opposition in Belarus and with all the citizens of Belarus .
I call on the Council and on the Commission to review the possibilities of lowering Schengen visa fees for citizens of Belarus .
This is the only way to prevent the citizens of Belarus from becoming increasingly isolated .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , to bring about democratisation and economic transformation , the authorities in Belarus have to enter into dialogue with all political forces including the opposition , and organise free elections .
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe , among them Poland , can serve as an example .
In order to transform the awareness of people in Belarus and to show them the principles of democracy and the free market , it is vital to simplify and increase contact between Belarusian society and EU countries .
This requires considerable simplification and liberalisation in the visa procedure , with reductions in visa payments for the citizens of Belarus .
European Union countries should open their universities and other institutions of higher learning to students from Belarus and provide them with grants from EU , national , local and private funds .
The EU should open itself to Belarus , even if the present authorities do not want this .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to add one point to these political and economic concerns .
As Commissioner Michel understands the importance of education both within Europe and beyond its borders , and I personally deal with students from Belarus , as we educate many of them at the Catholic University in Lublin , I would like to say the following : Commissioner , as much as it is possible , I would recommend increasing both financial and other assistance for this purpose , because investment in the education of Belarusian students will help Belarus itself , and will prove an investment for Europe .
( PL ) Madam President , Belarus , the Belarus of 2008 , is a blot on the conscience of all of us .
It is shameful that , at the beginning of the 21st century , there is a totalitarian state in Europe .
During our Thursday meetings in Strasbourg we discuss breaches of human rights throughout the world .
Belarus , however , is the European Union 's closest neighbour .
I have the impression that , up to 1989 , western democracies did everything they could to liberate many oppressed countries from Soviet occupation .
Today , Belarus remains as it was .
I have the impression that , although there are no longer many countries , but just one , we are doing less .
We are certainly not doing enough .
It is clear that we cannot have a direct political and economic influence on what happens in Belarus but we can have an influence on whether independent information , which will stimulate people in Belarus to fight for independence , will be broadcast there .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the positive momentum generated in Belarus by the release of five of the six political prisoners appears to have stalled .
Regrettably , renewed pressure on civil society and a number of particularly harsh and disproportionate sentences have ruined this positive atmosphere .
We continue to condemn the political arrests and the way in which civil society and the independent media are being treated .
At the same time , we must make Belarus understand that we mean what we say when we propose a partnership subject to progress being made with regard to respect for democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
However , in order to make such progress , Belarus needs to take a number of measures that , for us , are essential .
These include the unconditional release of all political prisoners , including Alexander Kazulin .
They also include the holding of parliamentary elections , scheduled for September , which must comply with democratic principles .
In this regard , we ask that the international OSCE / ODIHR observers be granted unhampered access .
The Belarusian authorities have informed us of their intention to admit both short-term and long-term observers ; we will be sure to hold them to their word .
Naturally , the presence of observers from the European Parliament would be an additional source of valuable expertise .
It is also vital that opposition parties participate fairly in these elections .
We will take into account any suggestions made by Parliament in this regard .
However , irrefutable evidence that progress has been made would be the presence of opposition in this Parliament , which is not currently the case .
In that event , the European Union would be ready to respond positively , as it confirmed only last month in a statement relating to sanctions and to the progress that would encourage us to ease these sanctions .
I shall now address an issue that we feel most strongly about : contacts with the people of Belarus .
However regrettable the situation in Belarus may be , we must expand our contacts .
Naturally , restrictions on ministerial-level contacts with the Belarusian authorities are still being maintained .
Nevertheless , I think that it is necessary to draw a distinction between political and technical levels .
Accordingly , the Commission is holding meetings to discuss technical issues such as energy , transport and the environment with experts from the Belarusian administration .
These contacts are obviously a means of getting across various messages on matters about which we feel very strongly .
The fact that we currently have a delegation in Minsk will also enable us to forge closer links both with the Belarusian administration and with civil society , local NGOs , independent media and students , all of whom we have a duty to assist , as you have rightly pointed out in your report and as several speakers have said .
In addition , aid is being provided to the European Humanities University , which is currently in exile in Vilnius and will continue its activities there for as long as the University is unable to return to Belarus .
Finally , I should like to broach a subject that comes up time and time again : visas .
As you and I are aware , we are unable , as things stand , to open negotiations on the easing of visa restrictions with Belarus - this has been determined by the Council - but this does not prevent us from taking advantage of the discretion enjoyed by the Member States under the Schengen rules as part of their consular prerogatives .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
, in writing . - ( IT ) Thank you Madam President . We have been here before , unfortunately , with indiscriminate arrests of anyone opposing the ruling regime .
Too often this Parliament has debated Belarus : so many words , so little meaningful action .
We should take note of the fact that the Lukashenko regime is openly hostile to the European Union and that our demands in terms of human rights and democratisation in Belarus are falling on completely deaf ears .
We are stepping up our contacts with civil society and with the internal movements in search of change : the Sakharov prize was the first concrete evidence of this .
However , there needs to be further progress along these lines .
I went to Belarus recently and noticed an increased awareness spreading among its citizens in favour of change , a change which guarantees freedom , justice , equity and democracy .
I call on the Commission to focus particular attention on Belarus , a country which is located in a strategic position for ensuring the peace and security of the entire European continent .
3 .
Rising tension in Burundi ( debate )
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the rising tension in Burundi .

author . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , initially , we did not wish Parliament to consider right now the situation in Burundi , for , as you know , the Burundian authorities are currently negotiating with the FNL , the National Liberation Forces ; they have reached a critical stage which is finally presenting a positive outlook and which should , we hope , lead to the practical implementation of the agreements entered into in Dar es Salaam that aim to put an end to the fighting , violence and insecurity affecting the country .
As we now know , the beating of a butterfly 's wings in Strasbourg may sometimes unleash a hurricane thousands of miles away .
On the other hand , not to speak of the situation of this small country that has been orphaned in terms of its development , having been stripped of its natural resources of the kind that often attract donors , would have been unthinkable .
Therefore , in agreement with the other political groups , we wanted to make this resolution into a call for positive action with regard to this associated country situated in the troubled Great Lakes Region .
We wanted to reiterate the EU 's determination , and especially that of Parliament and of yourself , Commissioner , to seek new solutions for development aid that are more effective in those countries that are weakened by situations of conflict - in this instance , civil war - countries where issues such as the process of democratic reconstruction , the restoration of destroyed public services and the relaunch of policies on matters as fundamental as health and education might be addressed and supported more effectively and more rapidly .
We wanted this resolution to form part of the action plan that the Netherlands has been asked to develop for Burundi , which has been selected - and we are delighted that it has been so selected - as one of three pilot countries under this new approach .
Therefore , we have made our wishes clear .
We want Burundi to become a model of development and , in order to achieve this , we want the authorities of this small country to be provided with the financial resources and support required for civil , political and economic reconstruction .
Parliament will monitor developments very closely , but it also wishes to call on Burundian MPs from all political groupings to seek , as a matter of urgency , ways and means of bringing their institutions back into operation , after having been prevented from carrying out their work for months , with a view to holding debates and voting , as well as allowing the Burundian Government to implement projects aimed at reconstruction such as the long-awaited reform of the judiciary and that of the healthcare system , among other areas requiring urgent action .
Finally , we should like to point out that Burundi , one of the world 's poorest countries , receives proportionately the least amount of development aid per capita .
This cannot continue .
We should like to request that additional financial resources be released quickly to finance priority development programmes and , in particular , the rebuilding of shattered infrastructure .
Along with the EU , only five Member States are represented in Burundi , a country where everything remains to be done .
We hope that these countries coordinate their efforts effectively prior to any decision-making in Europe 's capital cities and that the delegations on the ground in Burundi entrusted with implementing development policies continue working together and that their staff numbers are increased .
In conclusion , I should like to emphasise the paragraph in our resolution which refers to the maintenance of , and possible increase in , much-needed humanitarian aid , and I should also like to urge that arrangements for the withdrawal of this aid be made in close association with the stepping up of development policies whose implementation is more complex .
In this connection , we wanted to make the point so as to ensure that the visibility of the measures taken locally by the Burundian authorities , with the backing of the European Union and the Member States , is properly acknowledged .
Apart from the resolution of conflict with the FNL and the restoration of greater security , the Burundian people urgently need to see improvements in their country 's development reflected in their troubled daily lives .
author . - ( ES ) Madam President , the resumption of hostilities in Burundi represents a backward step in what is already a fragile process .
Dozens of deaths and thousands more displaced people show that the efforts to build peace are , at least for the moment , clearly not enough .
The responsibility for this state of affairs should be shared .
It is clearly regrettable that the FNL has taken up arms again , but it has to be said that there have been many allegations of human rights violations by the Burundian Armed Forces and police force .
It is also clear that instability in Burundi could have important and serious consequences for the region , especially in the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda .
I agree that greater stability has come to Burundi since the entry into force of a new constitution followed by general elections .
However , this also strengthens the need for the establishment of a peace and reconciliation commission as a confidence-building measure .
The European Union must support such an initiative financially and logistically .
It is in this context , and especially considering , as has been said , that the European Union has chosen Burundi as a pilot country for the implementation of a priority Action Plan aimed at increasing the speed and efficiency of assistance , that I think this resolution deserves special consideration .
Not only by the European Commission , but also , and fundamentally , by Member States , and especially two of its proposals .
First , the proposal to increase the financial resources that the European Union grants to Burundi , notably on the occasion of the mid-term review of the tenth EDF .
Second , that within the framework of the much-needed action plan , priority support should be given to programmes for better governance and democratic state management ; health policies , through the creation of health centres and the renewal of the hospital network ; the decision by the government of Burundi to provide free primary education ; and the continuing efforts to renew the country 's infrastructure .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , just like Sudan , which we were discussing earlier this afternoon , Burundi is an ethnically divided land , with long-standing disharmony between the various population groups .
The resulting problems are much harder to solve in Burundi than in other African countries .
It is difficult to draw a geographical border between areas that are typically the territory of different ethnic groups .
It is more akin to the caste system that traditionally existed in India .
Even before the German and Belgian colonisation , the Hutus were in the majority in Burundi and Rwanda and the Tutsis were in the minority .
The Tutsis , who are also recognisably different in appearance from the Hutus , were the rulers .
The Hutus were under their control .
In the European colonial period attempts were made to change that situation , but not with a view to equality and equal rights for the Hutus .
At the time the main aim was to play the two ethnic groups off against each other in order to make the Dutch or Belgian administration stronger .
Even after independence , a lasting solution was never found to the old differences .
Burundi was spared the massive campaign by the Hutu majority in neighbouring Rwanda to the north to wipe out the troublesome Tutsi minority .
However , that might also be due to the fact that emancipation amongst the Hutus was less widespread
When we speak in the resolution about 14 years of civil war , peace negotiations , the opposition movement FNL , the disarming of rebels and the fighting that broke out again on 17 April , we have to be aware of the background and the unresolved problems .
The main purpose of the resolution is that the violence should stop and that agreement must be reached .
I agree with that , but on that point in particular I see little cause for optimism .
The resolution also calls for European support for democratic government , education and health care .
We can contribute to that ourselves .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , we are very pleased to hear of the reopening of negotiations and peace talks between the National Liberation Forces and the government in Burundi .
This is not the first attempt by the rebels and the government to come to an agreement .
We are hopeful that the agreement will bring an end to the bloody conflict .
This conflict has not just resulted in innocent victims , but , first and foremost , is destabilising the delicate balance and is increasing tensions in the country , which saw positive results following the peace accord in 2003 .
After many years of conflict in Burundi , the country is trying to rebuild itself and to return to the international arena and has been achieving some success .
What is even more of a paradox is the fact that the problem being experienced by Burundi at present is not caused by Hutu-Tutsi tribal conflict , but has been brought about by a single , very radical , Hutu-FNL wing , which did not accept the peace accord and is still trying to fight the coalition government , which also includes the Hutu .
The international community should give its support to the peace agreement and bring about an end to the conflict .
author . - ( PL ) We are once again discussing crimes committed in various countries around the world and we will continue these discussions endlessly , until the European Union has a common foreign policy .
What is more , a joint foreign policy can only be effective if the European Union has a military force .
The Lisbon Treaty , which creates something like a foreign ministry , will not resolve the problem , since there will be no military force .
In his time , President Lech Kaczyński said that the European Union should have its own army .
Recently , President Sarkozy also spoke about this .
I believe that this issue should be on the agenda for public debate in the European Union .
There should be specific proposals for political solutions and , consequently , legal solutions .
Without military force there can be no foreign policy .
If the integrity and the strength of the EU are important to us , then the European Union has to have its own army in order to be able to intervene in situations such as the one in Burundi .
author . - Madam President , Burundi has been in a precarious state for a number of years .
The scenes of barbarism that took place in the 1990s between the Hutus and the Tutsis will always remain deeply embedded in our minds and will always seriously disturb our conscience .
Numerous attempts by the international community , as well as by regional players , have not yet resulted in the much desired long-lasting peace and stability in the area , although it has to be said that much progress has been achieved .
The recent military confrontations between the national defence forces and the National Liberation Front have resulted in the loss of innocent lives and are most disturbing .
Both sides must realise that they must resolve their differences at the negotiating table and not on the battlefields .
Both must realise that violence will only bring more violence .
The rebel group must denounce violence and lay down their arms , but at the same time the Government of Burundi must cease to provide impunity and to cover up for criminals within the security forces who carry out torture and illegal detention .
Let us hope that common sense will prevail at last and that the main sides involved in this brutal internal fighting in Burundi will manage to resolve their differences peacefully for the sake of the safety and well-being of the people of their country .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , in my mind 's eye I see a beautiful country .
I see people struggling to emerge from the aftermath of the civil war atrocities .
I see those memorials to the violence .
I see poor people struggling to cope .
I see Bujumbura closed at night , as one tries to get back in before the curfew because of the violence .
I see the health problems , the malaria , the respiratory and hygiene problems .
I see the refugee camps - people returning , not quite knowing where their homes were , people coming back from Tanzania and people coming across from Kivu in the Congo .
And now again of course we see the violence , the FNL breaking their agreements .
We again see the allegations of torture and rough treatment .
Burundi needs our help .
It also needs self-restraint if it is never again to slip down that slope of intolerance and inhumanity .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , we regret the recent clashes between the national defence forces and the National Liberation Front in Burundi .
We call on both sides to respect the ceasefire of 7 September last year and particularly demand that the leader of the FNL , Agathon Rwasa , should fully engage in the peace process .
We ask the Commission to provide resources to facilitate the reintegration of FNL troops into society , to help provide assistance to the refugees and in particular to demobilise child soldiers that we find in this country .
We have to demand that the Government of Burundi respect the rule of law , end the climate of impunity and ensure that those guilty are swiftly brought to justice .
That is what we expect from the Commission and the Government .
( FI ) Madam President , as we have heard , the war in Burundi , which has gone on for 14 years , has resulted in a huge number of refugees inside the country , food shortages and dreadful violence , even on the part of those who are supposed to be protecting the people .
Although the latest armed clashes have once again frustrated the quest for harmony and made one wonder if there is sufficient faith and political will among both parties for peace talks , important steps in the right direction also appear to have been taken .
As a result of long and hard negotiations among several parties , the rebel troops have agreed to release a considerable number of child soldiers by the beginning of May .
Burundi urgently needs the help of the EU Member States regarding its humanitarian crisis , as called for in the resolution , and I therefore urge everyone to support it .
( PL ) Madam President , the heightened tension in Burundi , the civil war between ethnic groups and the violence there should immediately be stopped .
Hundreds killed and injured is the price paid by unarmed civilians for this conflict .
It is essential that the cease-fire be respected , it is essential that peacekeepers be involved .
The financial support that the European Union is to give to Burundi must be carefully monitored and directed primarily for humanitarian purposes , particularly for healthcare , security and education for children .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen : firstly , the European Union called for the resumption of dialogue between the parties as the sole means of making progress towards peace and reconciliation , which is a fundamental expectation of the Burundian people .
The European Commission is therefore delighted that , on 16 May 2008 , a delegation from the Palipehutu-FNL - that is , the Party for the Liberation of the Hutu People-National Liberation Forces - returned to Bujumbura , and I hope that it will be possible for both sides to resume active talks .
I prefer to leave to one side the reply that I had prepared , for I have listened to a number of comments , and I feel that it is my duty to state a few facts .


I should like to say to you - to be brief and to avoid repeating the excellent speeches that I have heard , especially those made by Mr Hutchinson , Mr Kaczmarek and Mr Bowis - first of all , that the situation in Burundi today has nothing to do with ethnic problems and to suggest that it is an ethnic crisis is to look at it from a different and extremely dangerous perspective .
Therefore , I am inclined to share Mr Hutchinson 's view , although I do regret somewhat that this debate is taking place here and now .
It comes at rather an inopportune moment , for I feel that we must now give political dialogue a chance .
Speaking as you have done , Mr Meijer , of an ethnic cause , is extremely dangerous guesswork .

Secondly , Mr Hutchinson pinpointed the following fact : the international community , caught up as we are , and this applies to the World Bank - I have spoken on the subject with Bob Zoellick - and to the Commission , caught up in our procedures that prevent us , when a country is plunged into formal democracy , from releasing funds to show that there is a dividend to peace ; this is one of the reasons why Burundi is finding it difficult to get moving again , as is the case , for example , in Liberia , as is the case in the Democratic Republic of the Congo , as is the case in any country that is categorised as a post-conflict country .
We are caught up in our procedures , we have no flexibility and so we cannot offer a rapid response to these countries ' reconstruction needs , for this is where the real problem lies for Burundi .
I shall naturally refrain from commenting on the speech which called for the deployment of European military forces - I am not saying that this is a separate issue - but it is clearly an issue that is somewhat beyond the scope of this discussion .
We continue actively to support Burundi , both politically and financially , in its peace-building and socio-economic recovery efforts .
I should like to point out that our cooperation commitments for the period 2008-2013 currently amount to EUR 188 million , and it has been suggested that this funding might be further increased during the mid-term review .
In this connection , I must tell you that the rule is that it will be possible to increase this level of funding only if Burundi has properly taken up all the funds allocated under the initial aid package .
This is the rule , and I hope that the country will be in a position to benefit from this mid-term review .
The strategy adopted for this new period involves an increase in our budgetary support and identifies two areas on which attention should be focused : firstly , rehabilitation and rural development , which is clearly crucial for ensuring the survival of the populace ; and , secondly , the healthcare sector .
Our efforts to assist this country in its socio-economic recovery seek to demonstrate to the Burundian people what they can expect from the peace dividends as a stimulus to improve their situation .
Burundi has been selected as a pilot country with a view to implementing the Council conclusions of November 2007 , this has been mentioned , and I am delighted that is has been so selected .
We have also agreed , together with the United Nations World Food Programme , to implement a pilot operation in Burundi , particularly in the area of education and the provision of canteens for schoolchildren , for it is clear that when children are provided with free meals , they will naturally want to go back to school .
We shall also carry out a pilot case study that will include Burundi .
Moreover , I shall be visiting Burundi in the near future , as the Commission is very closely involved in all these mediation efforts .
I should like to add that , when I was Foreign Minister , I participated directly in the Arusha negotiations with President Mandela , so it is a subject that I know rather well , and I can tell you , Mr Meijer , that the Burundian Constitution , the Burundian legislat