Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 8 October 2009 .
Statement by the President
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Action taken on unfinished business ( Rule 214 ) : see Minutes
Request for urgent procedure
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 15 October 2009 , pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
Monday :
( FR ) Mr President , my speech relates , in fact , to Monday 's agenda .
The draft agenda that was issued before we received the document on which we have to vote included , I believe , a debate on three cases of parliamentary immunity .
These cases of parliamentary immunity are extremely important because they may have a bearing on the freedom of exercise of a Member who is exposed to the political hostility of the government , or to the political hostility of the courts , or to the political hostility of the courts as exploited by the government , via prosecutors .
I note that these issues have disappeared from the debate and I find that deeply regrettable .
There remains only one vote without debate on a report by Mrs Wallis , concerning the immunity of Mr Siwiec .
This vote without debate does not permit speeches and thus does not permit the Member concerned to express himself before his peers , before his fellow Members .
I find that deeply regrettable .

I will conclude by saying a word about the report by our fellow Member , Mr Speroni , which was adopted by a very large majority - by virtually the whole of this Parliament , I believe - on the attitude of the French authorities , who denied our former fellow Member , Mr Marchiani , the protection of his immunity with regard to phone-tapping , when such immunity is guaranteed to members of national parliaments .
I would like to know what has become of the recommendations from Mr Speroni 's report and , in particular , of the complaint that we had to lodge with the Court of Justice of the European Communities .
There has not been a request for a debate to be held on parliamentary immunity .
Therefore , voting will be held on this matter tomorrow .
Had there been a request , we could have considered this matter in a different way .
There is no discussion on the agenda because of the absence of any kind of motion on this matter .
Tuesday :
No amendments have been proposed .
Wednesday :
I have received a request from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for an amendment to the title of the draft resolutions on freedom of information in Italy and other Member States of the European Union .
The amended title would be : Freedom of information in the European Union .
Mr President , a common point that emerged from the debate we had last month on this resolution was that we need to discuss the issue of freedom of expression everywhere , both throughout Europe and outside it .
However , we cannot , Mr President , declare a crusade against one individual country .
The issue on Italy within this resolution is essentially a national political debate , and we , as the European Parliament , must hold back from intervening in a debate such as this one .
If we keep the word Italy within the title of this resolution , we would be assuming the role of some sort of higher court , which we are not , and we would , in fact , be undermining all the authority of and respect towards our institution .
We support freedom of expression within Europe and beyond it , and therefore we call upon all those who are truly for freedom of expression everywhere to vote in favour of the change in the resolution 's title .
Mr President , I should like to support and speak in favour of the motion .
Not every issue in Europe is an issue for Europe .
We practise subsidiarity and we in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) have confidence in our colleagues in the parliament in Rome and trust in the Roman courts , in the Italian courts , which can rule independently on what is good for Italy and what is not good for Italy .
The Italian parliament has just proven that it is independent .
We are happy to debate freedom of opinion , but then we should also debate freedom of opinion in the European Union .
That must be clear in the motion and its title , which is why we are asking for support for our motion .
Mr President , this is actually something of a humiliating spectacle .
We said clearly beforehand that this started with the Italian case , but we do not want to concentrate on that .
We want to say something in general about freedom of opinion in Europe .
That is why we chose this title ; it is about the case that started in Italy , but it is also about general statements .
We should not try and do everything .
For weeks , we have tried again and again to put the starting case to one side .
At least be honest : if you say we want to defend Berlusconi , whatever he does , that is an honest position , but now you are acting as if you wanted to be neutral , to be objective .
Let us stick to this title .
That is reasonable .
( Applause )

( DE ) Mr President , one short comment and one request to you , Mr President : on Thursday , we shall be discussing , among other things , the terrible death penalties in Iran , which are totally unacceptable and which are often handed down for so-called crimes which , under our sense of justice , are not even prosecuted .
We should take this opportunity to say clearly - and perhaps you should find an opportunity , like the Council , to say that , because we are against violence , we condemn terrorist violence in general , even if it is directed against the government bodies of Iran .
I think that our objective position would be stronger if we said clearly that the attack that cost 42 people their lives is not in keeping with our policy .
We are against violence , against the death penalty and also against terrorist violence as a matter of principle .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( LV ) Mr President , the whole of the European Union is feeling the global economic crisis , but the recession has had its most serious effects in the Baltic States .
For these states , the way out of the economic crisis is closely linked to a full transition to the euro .
Although , since 2005 , all the Baltic currencies have been directly pegged to the euro , because of the official Maastricht criteria they still cannot fully join the euro area .
It is therefore the case that the Baltic States are suffering from the European Central Bank 's low interest rate policy , which brought the loans and property bubbles to a head , but they are prevented from enjoying the true fruits of currency stability .
I call upon you to take a political decision so that the euro can be introduced in the Baltic States on an exceptional basis .
The small economies of these states are not a threat to the euro area .
The threat is instability in the region , if these countries remain outside the euro area . Thank you for your attention .
( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the very dangerous economic situation in the Republic of Latvia .
Currently , there is a plan in the country to close 50 % of the hospitals .
In some regions , unemployment is at 25 % .
In Latgale , 50 % of workers have been laid off .
30 % of police officers , 30 % of schoolteachers and 30 % of doctors have lost their jobs .
The tax reforms , which are designed to increase taxes , will lead to the utter collapse of the economy .
In this situation , instead of assistance , Latvia is being offered loans , which demand even more cuts to the very small budget .
Things have now gone so far that some Swedish ministers are literally blackmailing the Latvian Government , demanding a reduction in funding .
All this has led to a social explosion ...
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that Parliament should be very concerned by the latest report from the UN 's Food and Agriculture Organisation .
Indeed , while some governments in the European Union , and most recently the Italian Government , continue to make immigration a criminal offence , violate the right to asylum and indiscriminately refuse entry , I believe that we need strong cooperation since it is a disgrace that the level of poverty described by the FAO in Africa , the Middle East and Asia still exists .
Cooperation does not mean undertaking pointless projects which merely generate business for the same old companies , but helping these countries to emancipate themselves .
Another disgrace which Parliament needs to address is the privatisation of water , something in which certain governments of the EU engage .
Water is a resource that belongs to everyone , an essential resource and not a commodity at the service of the multinationals .
( FR ) Mr President , my speech concerns the deterioration in working conditions in Europe .
Today , nearly half of the people working in the world earn less than USD 2 a day .
12.3 million people are still victims of slavery , and more than 200 million children are forced to work .
In Europe , the number of working poor is increasing day by day , and each year the International Labour Organisation records 160 000 deaths linked to a lack of prevention .
In this context , I would like to emphasise our responsibility towards all those who are deprived of jobs and social rights , who work in unfit conditions , towards those millions of workers who suffer mentally and physically , who are , at times , driven to suicide , or who are victims of cancers or chronic diseases caused by their working conditions .
It is time to break with the religion that dictates that we must work harder , and to stop the race to make profits and to compete in the short term .
Guaranteeing the right to decent work and strengthening labour law must be the Union 's top priority over the next 10 years .
( PL ) Mr President , the Food and Agriculture Organisation released a report recently in which it states that world food production must rise by at least 70 % by 2050 , or humanity will face the threat of famine .
This is confirmation of an obvious truth .
It is well known that there are increasing numbers of people in the world , while the amount of arable land available is falling .
Meanwhile , European Union agricultural policy , under the guise of caring for market principles and improving the competitiveness of agriculture , is based on the systematic reduction of agriculture production in almost all of its sectors .
In the context of world tendencies , this policy may turn out to be lethal , and may cause hunger in the not too distant future .
I think that in the European Union , there is a need for a fundamental change in the political approach to agriculture and its problems .
We must really care for the food security of our continent .
Enough of the policy of restricting agriculture , because it is a policy which is short-sighted and devoid of imagination .
( GA ) Mr President , about this time three years ago , the British Government gave a commitment that they would bring in an Irish Language Act to protect and develop the Irish language in Northern Ireland .
The legislation to protect the rights of Irish speakers is a significant part of the peace and reconciliation process .
As such , the Irish language should have the same statutory protection as native languages in the South of Ireland , in Scotland and in Wales .
Three years on , that legislation is still not in place .
I would appreciate it if you , Mr President , could speak with the power-sharing executive in Belfast about the importance and influence of multilingualism in general .
Eleven years after the signing of the Good Friday Agreement , and three years after the signing of the St Andrews Agreement , it is a matter of urgency for us that an Irish Language Act be put in place to normalise the rights of Irish language speakers in Northern Ireland .
Thank you .
Please submit a written request on this matter .
Mr President , Wales is currently a major beneficiary of EU funding under the 2007-2013 Structural Funds programme .
The money is largely directed towards developing sustainable economic growth and creating jobs .
West Wales and the Valleys receives the highest level of support under the current Structural Funds , and rightly so .
Many regard the UK as a wealthy place to live .
Very few people know the reality of the scale of poverty and unemployment in Wales .
The Valleys have all but been destroyed by the closure of big industries which , at one point , were the backbone of solid hardworking communities .
Today , the mines are closed .
The factories that grew up in their place are outsourcing work overseas .
The communities that thrived on this employment have not just lost their jobs but also their sense of purpose and belonging .
With more and more countries queuing up to join the EU , I am worried that Wales will see much-needed support go to newer member countries .
I urge the Commission and the Council to ensure that Wales receives adequate funding , through a strong transitional settlement , when the current round of Structural Funds ceases in 2013 .
( DE ) Mr President , the extraordinarily dangerous Temelín nuclear power plant , at which there have already been 127 incidents since 2000 , is very close to where I come from in Upper Austria and there is another close to Vienna at Mochovce in the Slovak Republic .
Together , they form an unpleasant cocktail of old Soviet design and American engineering .
From a legal point of view , the whole issue is problematic , as environmental impact assessments are not carried out in compliance with European legislation in either country .
The parties to the proceedings have no possibility of obtaining judicial review of the final decision .
That contradicts Article 10 of the Community Directive on environmental impact assessments .
I should like to take this opportunity to call on the Community to firmly oppose this construction project .
( EL ) Mr President , given the resumption and intensification of Doha Round negotiations and in the run-up to the WTO ministerial conference to be held in Geneva at the end of November , we call for an in-depth debate with the Commission so that we can jointly decide on the European Union 's negotiating position in light of the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We also call on the Commission , as far as the agricultural sector is concerned , to respect its negotiating mandate in full and for any offer on its part not to entail further reform and , more to the point , not to pre-empt the review in 2013 .
In other words , we do not want a premature reform of the common agricultural policy through the back door or imposed from on high .
( HU ) Mr President , it is commendable if a politician wishes to gain the maximum benefit for his or her country .
We all do this , bearing in mind our voters ' interests .
However , this benefit cannot be gained to another person 's detriment , and cannot , in any way , be the result of blackmail .
Václav Klaus , the Czech President , has astonished us all with his tactics for blocking the Treaty of Lisbon .
This man who started his political life as a reformer has come up with demands that bring shame on both him and his country .
I feel it is unacceptable to link the signing of the Treaty of Lisbon with the immunity of the Beneš Decrees .
The Beneš Decrees passed in 1945 applied the principle of collective punishment , which is alien to the European legal order .
In accordance with these laws , millions of innocent civilians had their citizenship revoked and were forcibly deported from the land of their birth simply because their mother tongue was German or Hungarian .
According to our European legal order , we cannot tolerate violation of human rights and personal freedom in any shape or form .
However , this is what Václav Klaus is demanding from us .
( EL ) Mr President , the recent kidnap of Athanasios Lerounis , the president of the non-governmental organisation ' Greek Volunteers ' , is the last in a series of kidnaps in the chaotic area between Pakistan and Afghanistan which contains Polish , British , Spanish , Chinese and Canadian citizens , most of whom have not escaped death .
The residents of this area , also known as Kafiristan , which means land of the infidels , are fighting to uphold their principles , traditions and customs in a hostile environment which is gradually taking over .
Mr Lerounis and his team have been working effectively with the Kalash tribe for about fifteen years and have managed , during that time , to improve living conditions in this isolated community .
We call on the members of the European Parliament to use their power and to help rescue a volunteer who has devoted much of his adult life to understanding a community in central Asia threatened with extinction .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , two Member States - France and the United Kingdom - have announced their intention to send to Afghanistan refugees who came to Europe in an attempt to save their own lives .
I do not believe that we can continue to stand back in the face of this very serious threat to their lives .
The British newspaper , The Guardian , reported in October that some Afghan refugees expelled from Australia had been killed upon their arrival in their country .
I believe that all of this goes completely against all of our international commitments .
The European Commission itself said in an action plan dated June 2008 that legitimate measures to reduce illegal immigration should not result in refugees being denied access to protection within the European Union , and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has warned the European Union against making any attempt to undermine the Geneva Convention and the other additional forms of protection that are designed to ensure that Afghan refugees are not deported to Afghanistan .
A large number of MEPs , from four different groups , have signed an appeal along these lines .
I call on you , Mr President , to talk to the European Commission , the United Kingdom and France , and our House , our Chamber , must take up this issue in order to prevent this crime against the right of asylum from being committed .
Mr President , I would like to denounce the restrictions suffered by the Catalan language in the Spanish state .
More specifically , I am referring to the Autonomous Government of the Valencian Community which , in 2007 , closed the TV repeaters of La Carrasqueta and Mondúver .
Some other TV repeaters will be closed in the coming months .
These TV repeaters allow the reception of Catalan television in the Valencia region .
The Valencian Autonomous Government is acting against the Audiovisual Media Services Directive , which ensures the free circulation of television contents between European countries .
Inside the EU , cultural freedom exists but , inside the Spanish state - for Catalan television - it does not exist .
This is the sad paradox I wanted to share with all of you this afternoon .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ' equal pay for equal work ' is a principle of the 1957 Treaty establishing the European Community .
This principle is still topical today because , although more and more women occupy managerial positions , there is still a blatant income divide .
It is incomprehensible that women , merely because they are women rather than men , are paid a lower wage for the same work , especially the same standard of work .
The benefit to a modern democratic society when it finally fully implements this principle , which we should rather call a demand , should be clear and obvious to everyone .
I therefore think it is important for something to be done to improve current laws and wage transparency .
One small example is Austria , where the income divide is about 28 % .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to condemn an event that is without precedent in the ten year reign of King Mohammed VI in Morocco : the fact that a Moroccan military court is going to try seven Saharan independence activists for collaborating with the enemy , a charge that could carry the death penalty .
This has not happened since the times of King Hassan II .
A civilian has never been put in the dock in a military court .
This means that repression is once again intensifying in this former Spanish colony .
While the complicit silence of the European Union is very striking , what is even more serious is the silence of the Spanish Government , which is primarily to blame for the current situation in the Western Sahara due its abandonment of the area .
My question is therefore a very direct one : is this the Moroccan regime with which we want to have a special relationship ?
Is this the regime with which we want to establish a relationship of friendship and mutual respect ?
How many more times can we and must we keep quiet in the face of what is happening in the Western Sahara ?
Is this the way they intend to resolve the problems that are currently facing the whole of that population ?
I think that it is precisely now , in the context of these negotiations , that we should give a clear , firm response to this situation .
( RO ) The European Union has 1 636 border points designated as checkpoints for entering EU territory and every year , approximately 900 million border crossings are made .
I am actually from a region located at the European Union 's external border and I am very much aware of the problems encountered by the customs authorities .
This is why I believe that we must address this issue with utmost seriousness and review the Frontex agency 's mandate .
Frontex is currently facing a number of problems .
For example , Member States must take a more active involvement in cooperating at the European Union 's external borders .
More attention must also be focused on cooperation with third countries which are , in many cases , the countries of origin or transit countries for illegal immigration .
The Stockholm Programme actually helps reinforce the involvement of Frontex so that this agency will play a key role as part of the future integrated mechanism for monitoring the EU 's borders .
( PL ) Mr President , in view of the increasing amount of freight moving from the north to the south of the continent , and the insufficient number of transport corridors , I should like to underline the significance of the Central European Transport Corridor , CETC Road 65 .
This encompasses road , inland waterway and rail transport through an area which links the Baltic Sea with the Adriatic and runs from Sweden through Poland , the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary and Croatia .
The corridor would be an axis of regional development for the entire area through which it runs .
It would fully accord with the principles of intermodality and would have a balanced influence on the natural environment .
It would help increase the tempo of social and economic development in a large part of the European Union by increasing speed and volumes of trade between countries of the Baltic Sea region and countries of the Mediterranean and Adriatic region .
It is my duty as an MEP , but also as a specialist who has been associated with the transport industry for years , to ask for support for the CETC project .
It fully deserves to be included in the existing TNT network of Pan-European Transport Corridors .
( FR ) Mr President , following the dismantling of the ' jungle ' camp in Calais at the end of September , I wish to denounce here the organisation , by France and the United Kingdom , of forced returns to Afghanistan , a country in total chaos .
Like my colleague , Mr Désir , who spoke just now , I too call on the European Commission to put pressure on the Member States so that they stop putting these people 's lives in grave danger by forcibly returning them to Afghanistan .
We know that these migrants are unable to apply for asylum in France under the Dublin II Regulation because they are liable to be deported to Greece or Italy , where the detention conditions are unacceptable and the chances of them seeing their asylum applications succeed are slim .
The only effect that dismantling the ' jungle ' camp has had is to make the tragedy suffered by these migrants in need of protection even more traumatic .
In contrast to the objectives set by the French authorities , these migrants have become more vulnerable as a result of the camp closure , and they are even more likely to be handed over to people traffickers who , for their part , are not in the least bit worried .
Now more than ever , we must remember that the credibility of an asylum system is compromised if it fails to protect the people who need protection .
Mr President , I welcome the endorsement by the United Nations Human Rights Council ( HRC ) of the recommendations of the Goldstone report and their call for an end to the illegal siege of Gaza , which is causing so much human suffering .
I propose that our relevant parliamentary committees should now examine without delay what steps the European Union should be taking to ensure that the Goldstone recommendations are pursued in an effective way .
I was shocked that four Member States of this Union - Italy , the Netherlands , Hungary and Slovakia - voted against the HRC resolution .
Human rights and international law are not optional extras to be defended or ignored depending on the relevant political advantages .
All our Member States must defend international law and human rights without fear or favour , otherwise our credibility is undermined as a force for justice in the world - and , indeed , as an honest interlocutor for peace in the Middle East .
Finally , could I ask that , in the spirit of the Lisbon Treaty , you insist that no new agreements with Israel are signed by the Commission or the Council in the coming week .
( PL ) Mr President , in the second half of September this year , Russia and Belarus held military exercises codenamed ' West ' 2009 and ' Lake Lagoda ' 2009 .
It was the largest undertaking of its kind on the western borders of Russia since the end of the Cold War .
Assault exercises on a similar scale last took place in 1981 , at the height of the Cold War .
It is interesting that the ' West ' 2009 phase started on 18 September , which was almost to the day the 70th anniversary of the Soviet invasion of Poland .
Part of the exercises were held at the mouth of the Bay of Gdańsk , and ' Lake Lagoda ' 2009 is universally thought by experts to represent preparations for a potential attack on the Baltic countries and Finland .
Despite openly hostile moves by the Russian Federation , both the European Union and NATO have remained passive .
They still have not developed a strategy for defence in the event of an invasion from the east because some of the countries and NATO members consider the question too sensitive politically .
In view of the approaching EU-Russia Summit , and also in view of the facts I have mentioned , I have submitted a question on the matter to the Council of the European Union .
( ES ) Mr President , agreements should be honoured and rules should bind everyone equally .
This statement , which may seem obvious , is not so obvious in reality when we are talking about the Association Agreement between the European Union and Morocco , which contains consistent irregularities , as recognised by the European Anti-Fraud Office .
Spanish tomato producers , particularly in the Canary Islands , are going through a difficult time , and need the agreement to be honoured , but also want to know what the Commission plans to do about the new agreement that is still being negotiated : whether an increase has been offered in the preferential tomato quota and under what terms , whether the entry price system is going to be changed to prevent further breaches in the future , and whether the plant health requirements demanded of European producers are going to be enforced .
Also , while we are talking about agreements , banana producers are also following negotiations , in some cases bilateral negotiations with third countries , with a great deal of concern , because such dealings could have irreparable consequences if they do not go hand in hand with compensatory measures .
In both cases , the Commission cannot abandon its producers and we cannot allow that to happen .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the arrest of Mohammad Othman , a 33-year-old Palestinian human rights activist and supporter of the non-violent civil society campaign of boycott , divestment and sanctions .
Mohammad Othman was arrested on 22 September by the Israeli authorities .
Since then , his detention period has been repeatedly extended by the Israeli army .
A military judge is due to rule on his detention on Tuesday 20 October - i.e. tomorrow .
Mr President , on behalf of the European Parliament , I call on you to take action to ensure that this human rights activist , whose only crime is a thought crime , is released .
This week , we are going to award the Sakharov Prize .
Sadly , we cannot give the Sakharov Prize to all human rights campaigners , but at least let us offer them our support when their freedom is in jeopardy .
( PL ) Mr President , I speak today as a member of the Committee on Culture and Education , and also as a member of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
In this role , I appeal for continued , comprehensive consultations and efficient action on the matter of the digitalisation of books and the role of Google .
We cannot allow our market , all that we have accomplished in this area in Europe , to be dominated by one firm .
We must develop good legal instruments , which will protect the interests of our authors and publishers , and the European Union must do this together with others , especially with the United States , but also with other countries in today 's globalised world .
It is a question of our European literature , our culture , and our identity .
We must develop these things , and act together to protect them .
They are our European authors and our European publishers .
The problem of digitalisation is too important to be decided only across the Atlantic .
We must establish this legislation together , and we must devote the greatest attention to this matter .
( RO ) These days are crucial to the democratic development of the Republic of Moldova .
The election of the president by the new parliament , scheduled for 23 October , was postponed due to a lack of competition .
Once again , by resorting to subversive tactics through not put forwarding a candidate , the Communist Party is attempting to sabotage the path to democracy .
It is our duty to monitor the entire process closely to ensure that the constitutional provisions are applied and that the Republic of Moldova passes the democratic test of elections .
The strengthening of democracy in this country must be one of the priorities of the European Union in its neighbourhood policy .
This can then serve as an example for the entire area to the east of the EU .
It is our duty to offer this democratic government a new opportunity by providing it with the moral and technical support that it needs .
The most appreciated sign of this support would probably be to come up with a viable solution for giving the citizens of the Republic of Moldova access to the European Union .
( SL ) After some serious and careful thought , the voters of Ireland have ratified the Treaty of Lisbon with a two-thirds majority .
We receive this news with pleasure and pride , as the Treaty will enable further enlargement .
The only ones still making their minds up are President Václav Klaus and the Czech Constitutional Court .
I come from the former Yugoslavia and I have memories of us supporting Czechoslovakia , not just when they played ice hockey against the Soviet Union , but on every occasion and in every context .
From the time when the forces of the Warsaw Pact invaded Czechoslovakia during the Prague Spring , we always showed solidarity with them .
On this occasion , however , I cannot and must not do so , as that would be to the detriment of the European Union , my own country and any future candidate countries .
I must express our concern publicly and say that we will not allow ourselves to be blackmailed .
For this reason , I call on the political leaders and the public opinion of both the current and future candidate countries to let the President of the Czech Republic know that he is toying with our destinies and with their destinies .
It is high time that this game came to an end .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , three years ago , on 23 October 2006 , tens of thousands of people gathered in Budapest to celebrate in a dignified manner and commemorate the 1956 Hungarian Revolution and fight for freedom which our people waged against the Communist dictatorship .
Three years ago , terrorists disguised in police uniforms without any identification insignia used banned weapons to disperse the crowd that was holding a peaceful commemoration .
This was presumably under the political order of the party which has succeeded the Communist dictatorship .
It took 50 years after 1956 for Hungarian blood to be shed again on the streets of Budapest .
On Friday of this week , 23 October , at 15.00 , several thousand people will commemorate the events of 1956 again on Deák Square .
We Jobbik MEPs , along with several fellow Members , such as Andreas Mölzer and Bruno Gollnisch , will monitor at this location the physical safety of those attending the commemoration .
However , I would like the European Parliament to send observers and I would ask Mr Buzek in particular to draw the Hungarian police chiefs ' attention to observing the European Convention on Human Rights .
( MT ) The past weeks have witnessed a number of violent incidents in the Holy City of Jerusalem , in the Al Aksa area .
Both sides are pointing fingers at each other as to who is to blame , who the instigator is , and who is ultimately responsible for these violent acts .
As frequently happens in this region , one incident can quickly escalate into a crisis .
Let us not forget , in fact , that the most recent Palestinian intifada took place right after the incidents in Al Aksa .
In a situation such as this , I believe that we must analyse our duties as the European Parliament .
We are duty bound to take a clear stand against all unilateral measures and to ensure we put a stop to all international law violations immediately .
Experience has taught us that in situations like these , we should not remain silent .
( SK ) For three and a half months , Slovakia has been subjected to a brutal campaign of discreditation concerning the amendment to the national language law .
EPP Vice-President , Viktor Orban , said in Romania in July that Hungarian foreign policy must treat this matter as a serious instance of ' casus belli ' which translates as ' a cause for war ' .
One week later , the former Hungarian ombudsman for ethnic minorities , Jenö Kaltenbach , stated that all of the minorities in Hungary had suffered a complete loss of identity , unable to speak their own languages and unaware of their own history .
The words of the former ombudsman did not provoke the slightest political or media debate .
Greater Hungarian nationalists are not interested in the rights of minorities in Hungary but only in the rights of Hungarian minorities in other countries .
The innocent people living in the south of Slovakia have , in this way , become hostages to these nationalists and their dreams of a politically reunited Hungarian nation .
( PT ) Regional differences remain a challenge in the context of an enlarged European Union .
For this reason , it is essential that cohesion policy supports those regions and Member States that are less developed .
That is why we are extremely apprehensive about the recent amendment to the General Regulation on the European Regional Development Fund and the Cohesion Fund proposed by the Portuguese Government to the European Commission .
This amendment establishes exceptions to the general rule on the geographical eligibility of expenditure relating to operations with a spillover effect and those relating to technical assistance , allowing funds destined for the convergence regions of Northern Central Portugal , Alentejo and the Azores , to be actually disbursed in the Lisbon area .
This amendment may constitute a violation of the principle of economic and social cohesion - a principle that is a cornerstone of the European project .
( FI ) Mr President , I am concerned about freedom of religion in Turkey .
Turkey 's possible membership of the EU depends on its fulfilment of all the Copenhagen criteria .
Recently , the country has seemed less willing to improve the situation with regard to its human rights and freedom of religion because of internal tensions .
There has also been negligence in the investigation of crimes against churches .
What is more , the Orthodox Church , for example , is still unable to choose its Patriarch freely and irrespective of nationality , and there are ever more attempts to place restrictions on clerics as regards wearing their priestly garb in public .
Concrete measures are to be expected of Turkey in talks on its membership , measures which would demonstrate that it understands and recognises the value of the European cultural heritage , even on Turkish soil .
For that reason , Turkey should immediately allow the Halki Seminary , for example , to continue to function and , furthermore , restore the protection of church property .
( RO ) The surveys published by the European Commission indicate that the current account deficits of the large majority of European Union Member States are expected to exceed the 3 % of GDP limit during 2009 and 2010 .
Similarly , in 2010 , an average level of public debt of 80 % is envisaged for the 27 Member States and of more than 80 % for the countries in the euro area .
In the case of Eastern European countries , however , the need to curb the recession clashes with the duty to comply with the Maastricht criteria .
In fact , a discrepancy can be seen between the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact for the countries in the euro area , where deficits and public debt are on the rise , and the extremely stringent standards imposed on those wishing to join the euro area .
It is therefore necessary to adapt the Maastricht criteria to the current climate and economic realities characterised by larger cyclical movements .
Adapting the Maastricht criteria and providing quicker access for Eastern European countries to the euro area would strengthen the European Union and continue the integration process .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to speak about accidents at work in Greece and Europe .
The shortcomings and negligence of shareholders , control mechanisms and national and Community authorities in applying health and safety regulations is criminal .
The statistics for my country , Greece , are tragic .
There were 142 fatal accidents in 2008 and there have been more than 56 since the beginning of 2009 .
At a time when lives are being lost , companies , the national authorities and the Commission are addressing the issue in a very relaxed manner and crimes are basically going unpunished ; crimes for the sake of profits , such as the crime which France Telecom has been committing since February 2008 .
Last week , another worker , just 25 years old , committed suicide due to the intolerable working conditions .
What does the Commission have to say about that ?
Had it been a different matter , it would have intervened .
That is why I call on the Bureau and my fellow members to observe a minute 's silence at some point during the three-day plenary for the victims of France Telecom and other accidents at work .
Mr President , last month , I informed the plenary of the discovery of the remains of Cypriot soldiers who , during the invasion of 1974 , were photographed surrendering to the Turkish army , alive and well .
In a new development , the European Court of Human Rights has found Turkey guilty of cruel and inhumane behaviour towards the relatives of missing soldiers of that period by failing to investigate and inform the relatives about their fate .
Turkey was ordered to pay compensation in this regard .
I call again on this Parliament to urge the Turkish army to provide its records to the UN Committee on Missing Persons for the resolution of this humanitarian issue .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to thank you for asking the Belgian and French authorities to provide me with police protection .
To feel the solidarity of the institutions when you are on the frontline fighting a phenomenon such as the mafia in Italy , which has resulted in many victims over many years , is really important in my view , and I offer my heartfelt thanks .
However , for some time , Mr President , mafia organisations have been a global phenomenon : not just through money laundering , but also through their permanent presence in various European countries , and also via immigration .
When , on 16 July this year , I called for the establishment of a committee of inquiry into mafia organisations in Europe , I did so with the aim not only of serving my country , but also the European Community , in the belief that a lack of vigilance when it comes to organised crime associations such as the mafia could have a negative impact on citizens ' quality of life and safety and on development mechanisms .
And it is strange , I have finished , Mr President ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Thank you .
I would like to say that I have also asked the authorities in Brussels to increase vigilance around the European Parliament , because we have had an unfortunate incident recently .
The Brussels authorities have replied very positively to the European Parliament 's request , and talks are also being held on this subject .
( RO ) The report published to mark World Food Day indicates that one in six people are suffering from hunger and the number of undernourished people in the world has passed the 1-billion mark , while the number of people blighted by famine has risen by 100 million in just one year .
During this entire period , the World Food Programme has been facing a 50 % drop in international donations compared with 2008 , which is having a serious impact on the volume of food aid being supplied to poor countries .
The European Union is the leading campaigner against global famine .
Its position was strengthened by the commitment made at the G8 summit in L 'Aquila to provide EUR 2 billion , which is in addition to the EUR 1 billion Food Facility .
This is a large sum , but is still far from what would be required to meet the objective set by the UN , which is to halve the number of people suffering from endemic hunger .
A much broader political effort is required to mobilise the resources of all the major industrialised powers in the world .
I believe that a Marshall Plan is an absolute necessity with a much more specific and tangible objective , which is to help the billion of our fellow human beings suffering from hunger rise above the subsistence threshold .
Mr President , the missile defence project of the former US Administration , of which Europe has been made part , was fiercely contested by Russia , which chose to see in it a move directed against it , and by some Europeans who were upset because the Russians were upset .
The Obama Administration is trying to address such a position by shifting defence from the long-range to the short- and medium-range missile threat , thus increasing the direct protection of Europe , and apparently by accepting Russian cooperation through providing a radar facility in the Caucasus .
Still some Europeans contest the project , ignoring its new orientation .
Russia has not spoken yet .
I only wish that the European position is not moulded only by this fact , but reflects a genuine search to find the best way to protect European soil from this real threat , in cooperation with the US , and with Russia , too , if the latter is willing .
Mr President , last year , this House debated the use of whole-body scanners at airports and subsequently the European Commission withdrew its proposal in this regard .
Recently , at Manchester Airport , a new trial was started and legal advice has now been given that to use these machines on minors could be in breach of child safety and protection legislation because of the nature of the image produced .
Similar cases of this nature took place in 2005 and 2006 by the Action on Rights for Children group , which resulted in the banning of the use of body scanners on under-18 year olds .
Since the very raison d 'être for these machines has now been compromised by this legal advice - and I address this directly to Commissioner Barrot - is it not now time that the Commission ruled that the use of these types of scanner in the EU should not be allowed , since my constituents travelling anywhere in the Union should not be subject to this indecent and degrading treatment ?
I also call for a global ban on such technology in order to protect all EU citizens .
( HU ) Mr President , last year I protested against religious fanaticism and the persecution of Christian minorities , and I am doing the same again this year .
Having heard about the most recent anti-Christian acts in India , Bangladesh , Afghanistan , Pakistan and Turkey , allow me to speak out again against the continuing atrocities in the name of religious exclusivism , which are being perpetrated in general by Muslim and Hindu fanatics against our fellow Christians .
However , in India , in the states of Orissa and Gujarat , both practising Christians and Muslims are suffering severe persecution .
In Transylvania , Romania , where I come from , religious freedom was proclaimed by the Edict of Torda in 1568 .
Religious freedom is both an individual and a collective human right .
Jesus says : ' I desire mercy and not sacrifice ' .
According to the teachings of our faith , I call on Jerzy Buzek , the Subcommittee on Human Rights and the European Commission to ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the imminent closure of Independent Network News , a Dublin-based news agency providing a first-rate national and international news service to the majority of Ireland 's local radio stations , raises serious and legitimate questions about the ownership , plurality and regulation of the media in Ireland .
Local radio stations in Ireland are required to ensure that 20 % of their news content is national and international .
This service has largely been supplied by INN in recent years .
On foot of INN 's demise , the Newstalk station owned by Communicorp - which is also a major shareholder in INN - has been awarded the contract to provide a replacement service for the next six months .
UTV , whose withdrawal from INN precipitated the service 's demise , has also been centrally involved in the efforts to source a replacement service .
The National Union of Journalists has raised important questions over the appropriateness of the involvement of these two bodies in this process , in the context of diversity of media ownership in Ireland .
These questions must be fully explored .
( SK ) I would like to warn you that representatives of Hungary are attempting to provoke Slovakia .
On 21 August 20 years ago , a Soviet and Hungarian army invaded the former Czechoslovakia .
On the very same day this year , Hungarian President Sólyom , despite the reservations of three senior representatives of the Slovak Republic , was preparing to take the provocative step of unveiling a statue of a Hungarian king on the ethnically mixed territory of Slovakia .
Today , he is protesting that he was denied entry into Slovakia .
On a visit to Slovakia last week , Viktor Orban , head of the leading Hungarian political party Fidesz , called on the Hungarian minority to undertake autonomy-related initiatives .
He called for joint planning over the future of Hungarians in the Carpathian basin .
This is a revival of the idea of Greater Hungary - a provocation that has no place in a modern Europe .
It is playing with fire and the European institutions must not turn a blind eye to it .
( RO ) I would like to say that there is no specific mention made of sport in the Treaty of Lisbon , and particularly of football , an activity which has a huge social and cultural influence .
I would like to tell you that there is no legal basis for an EU policy on sport .
In actual fact , sports are governed by the rules of the relevant sports associations , but I believe , Mr President , that it must be clearly specified in the Treaty that activities and the organisation of sports activities should operate according to the rules of the relevant sports associations , while any activities linked to these sports activities should operate according to civil regulations and laws .
The debate is closed .
Evaluation mechanism to monitor the application of the Schengen acquis - Establishment of an evaluation mechanism to verify the application of the Schengen acquis ( debate )
Mr President , Mr Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , I am in favour of a mechanism for evaluating Schengen that will improve the system currently in place and make it more efficient , so as to ensure that the Schengen acquis can be applied more transparently and coherently .
Nevertheless , I am disappointed with the proposals put forward by the European Commission .
In essence , these proposals maintain the rules relating to the first part of the mandate without making any changes and , with regard to the second part of the mandate , or the evaluation of how the Schengen acquis is being implemented by the Member States that are already part of the Schengen area , they merely incorporate the recent improvements to the current evaluation mechanism .
Indeed , the only new thing , which I applaud , is the possibility of carrying out unannounced visits .
As far as the evaluation process is concerned , these proposals transfer the role currently played by the Council wholly into the hands of the Commission , allowing very limited forms of cooperation with the Member States , and removing the European Parliament from the entire process , without demonstrating what is being gained by these steps .
I am also concerned that we are moving towards the total separation of the evaluation mechanisms for each part of the mandate , which could jeopardise the efficiency and consistency of the system .
Countries that wish to join Schengen should not be subject to different rules and systems of evaluation to those that are already in it .
There are also data protection problems .
I shall give just three examples : firstly , the item about the security of consular facilities is incomplete , as the facilities of external companies , when outsourcing is involved , are not covered .
Secondly , the security requirements proposed for the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) should also be included in the item about visas .
Thirdly , Article 7 of the regulation should include not only the risk analysis but also the audits and reports on the security inspections carried out by the Member States in accordance with the rules introduced by the statutory instruments of the SIS and the Visa Information System ( VIS ) .
Besides the problems I have mentioned here , and the improvements that could be made , there is a fundamental problem in that the role given to the European Parliament is an irrelevant one .
According to our Legal Service , the Commission 's choice of legal basis is legitimate .
However , it would also be possible to apply the codecision procedure for the draft regulation .
Political will is the only deciding factor between the two possibilities .
After all , if the Treaty of Lisbon comes into force , which is to be expected in the short term , these proposals will have to be made into a single proposal and resubmitted , since the pillar structure will be eliminated .
We should not forget that we are discussing the security of the area of freedom , security and justice , which should involve all Member States and all the European institutions .
Hence , codecision is the right procedure to choose .
The European Parliament 's role should not be merely accessory , but should rather reflect the influence that it wields when it comes to adopting basic legislative instruments .
I would like to conclude by thanking the shadow rapporteurs for supporting this position for the European Parliament and I invite Vice-President Barrot , who has always shown respect for this Parliament , to resubmit these proposals , introducing not only improvements in terms of the content , but also establishing a proper role for the European Parliament as regards the procedure itself .

Mr President , I will try to respond to the concerns expressed by Mr Coelho in his report .
The evaluation mechanism is a key measure when it comes to preserving the integrity of the Schengen area and to maintaining mutual confidence between the Member States .
That is why the Commission is proposing that the experts from the Member States be fully involved in planning the visits , the in situ visits , and in drafting the evaluation and follow-up reports .
The Commission is , of course , convinced that Parliament should be involved in the Schengen evaluation , which is not the case at present .
The citizens must have access to the results of these evaluations .
That is why the Commission has offered to submit annual reports to Parliament indicating the conclusions reached following each evaluation and the progress of the corrective measures .
So that is the first response .
It is true that Mr Coelho raised the issue of codecision for Parliament .
The treaties currently in force do not permit this .
However , although there is no codecision as yet , the proposals do communitise the current mechanism .
Through these proposals , the mechanism can be made more effective with regard to planning , the in situ visits and the follow-up given to the evaluations .
Moreover , the role of the Commission , as guardian of the treaties , will be enhanced .
However , Mr Coelho , this enhanced role is being challenged strongly by the Council .
Therefore , under the treaties in force , two parallel proposals were required , since the Schengen acquis covers both the first and the third pillars .
The Commission considered that Article 66 of the EC Treaty , which provides for consultation of the European Parliament , was the correct legal basis for the proposal of the first pillar .
This legal basis was chosen as the correct one for the current Schengen evaluation mechanism when the Schengen acquis was integrated into the European Union framework by the ' breakdown ' decision taken in 1999 .
Articles 30 and 31 of the treaty were the ones chosen as a legal basis for the proposal of the third pillar .
That is why we had to refer to two different articles for the evaluation of the first pillar and for that of the third pillar .
The Commission , on the basis of the treaties in force and of the legal debates that derive from them , must stand by its proposals .
It must be said , Mr Coelho , that , given the difficult negotiations at the Council regarding the enhanced role of the Commission , it is conceivable that they will not be concluded in the short term .
We can hope , above all today , that this Treaty of Lisbon will be ratified , and then the matter will be reopened and the Commission will decide , when the time comes , what it considers to be the most appropriate legal basis for the proposed mechanism by involving the European Parliament as fully as possible .
Obviously , when that time comes , the Commission will be able to submit amended or new proposals depending on the situation .
As you know , I myself am generally very much in favour of this provision , which will enable your Parliament to act as a colegislator in most of the issues relating to justice , freedom and security .
Clearly , I can only be in favour of a much more active role for Parliament .
However , as things stand , I do not think that we could have done anything other than to propose this amendment on the current legal bases .
Nevertheless , as I told you , the discussions at the Council are not easy ; this is not because we did not want to involve the Member States , but because the Commission , in its role as guardian of the treaties , feels that it , too , is responsible for managing this entire evaluation mechanism , with the involvement of the Member States and , of course , Parliament .
The creation of the Schengen zone was undoubtedly a huge step forward for several European Union countries .
It brought along with it the concept of full liberty of movement for our citizens in a more realistic manner , and it could even be said that when a citizen travels within the Schengen area , he or she might almost feel as though they are travelling within their own country .
However we are all aware that for an ambitious project such as this to succeed as it did , a substantial amount of hard work was put into it , and considerable sacrifice was made .
Above all , when we chose to open our doors to each other , we had to place our trust in each other on an issue as delicate as this one , that is , the protection of our external borders .
When it comes to external borders , trust is placed in a country and trust is gained in return .
Therefore , when it comes to these reports , I agree with my colleague Carlos Coelho , in that they are meant to enhance the evaluation mechanism within the Schengen Area project ; a project which is of great importance , and which is built upon mutual trust .
Yet we also maintain that this evaluation needs to be carried out in an efficient and transparent manner .
Moreover , it must involve Parliament , which must be allowed to exercise its full powers , especially now that we are , or potentially are , a few weeks away from the coming into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
I am certain , therefore , that the Commission will understand when we say that , considering that the Lisbon Treaty is close at hand , we expect proposals such as this one to fully respect all the powers that the European Parliament will wield under this Treaty .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( RO ) The creation of an evaluation and monitoring mechanism to verify the application of the Schengen acquis is an important measure which will put into practice the decisions concerning the area of freedom , security and justice , especially the provisions of the Hague Programme .
The draft proposals submitted for debate today are a variation of an evaluation mechanism .
They include provisions specific to the targeted area , along with an adequate control methodology .
However , a closer analysis highlights that certain principles of interinstitutional cooperation are being ignored , both at European Union level and between EU Member States .
From this point of view , the proposal submitted includes provisions restricting cooperation between Member States with regard to evaluating the results from the application of the Schengen Agreement .
At the same time , it increases unacceptably the role of the Commission in this process , while the European Parliament is kept outside the entire evaluation mechanism .
Furthermore , the wording of some articles in the regulation leaves scope for different interpretations of the relationship between the Commission , Parliament and Council with regard to their access to information about the application of the Schengen acquis .
Therefore , Article 14 , aimed at sensitive information , emphasises that ' the reports drawn up following on-site visits shall be classified as restricted .
The Commission , after consulting the Member State concerned , shall decide which part of the report can be made public . '
I also wish to mention in connection with these provisions that Article 16 , which refers to the report submitted to the European Parliament and Council , does not imply that the annual report on the evaluations carried out will contain restricted information as well .
We could therefore deduce that it is up to the Commission to assess which information will be included in the annual report and which not .
This fact assigns the Commission functions which , in my view , are not justified .
The Treaty of Lisbon will soon come into force and from then on , codecision will become the normal legislative procedure , which also covers the area of freedom , security and justice .
The legislative proposals which we are debating at the moment contain provisions which conflict with the principles included in the Treaty .
Consequently , these drafts , if they are approved now , will need to be reviewed at the time when the Treaty of Lisbon comes into force .
Fellow Members , freedom , security and justice are areas of paramount importance to Europe 's citizens whose interests are represented directly by the European legislative .
Restricting the role of an institution like the European Parliament is wrong .
I wish to conclude by supporting the proposal made by Mr Coelho , that this draft , in its current form , needs to be rejected and returned to the Commission .
I propose to you that we support the draft resolution .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , our colleague , Mr Coelho , has yet again justified his middle name : Carlos ' Schengen ' Coelho .
He is our resident expert on the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , and we are very grateful for his work and his expertise .
He has done very good forensic reports on these proposals and they highlight what an awful muddle the European Union is in regarding monitoring and evaluation .
It certainly makes no sense to me that fitness to join the Schengen zone should lie exclusively in the hands of the Member States in any case , irrespective of any arcane split between pre- and post-Schengen accession .
We are told in the Commission proposal for the regulation that ' as evaluation before putting into effect is fundamental for Member States in order to gain mutual trust , it seems reasonable for this to remain the responsibility of Member States ' .
But we do not leave it to Member States to evaluate the Balkan countries , for which this evening the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs will vote on their fitness for visa waiver , for visa-free travel - it is the Commission which does the assessment and evaluation , so there is no consistency at all in saying that it should be in the hands of the Member States to judge other states .
To be honest , I do not grasp this peculiar split between evaluation of ' putting into effect ' measures necessary to join Schengen which , according to the Commission , has to remain intergovernmental , and checking the ' implementation ' of the Schengen acquis .
Certainly , it appears that the Member States do not do a very good job because we learn from the proposal for a decision that ' in recent years , Member States have not seen the need to carry out evaluations on the spot concerning judicial cooperation in criminal matters and drugs .
Data protection has also not always been subject to on-site evaluations . '
I think there are many people not only in this House but beyond who would think that issues to do with criminal cooperation , drugs , tackling drug smuggling and protection of privacy are rather important matters to have on-the-spot inspections about .
So I entirely support the conclusions of Carlos Coelho that we need to bring all this together , to have a consolidation of the procedures by which this evaluation is done , to consolidate the task between the first and the third pillar - and I hope that soon the phrase ' third pillar ' will be consigned to history and I never have to say it again - to have one simple , effective , efficient and transparent evaluation and to ensure that the transparency includes accountability to the European Parliament .
It is most strange that at this juncture , on the eve of what I am now convinced will be the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty - and I did my bit in the UK House of Lords last year , by the way - the Commission should put forward this extremely muddled and senseless set of proposals .
I support the rejection and I request the Commission to come back with a better proposal that takes account of the Lisbon Treaty , takes account of codecision , takes account of simplicity and effectiveness in monitoring and is consistent with the Commission 's and Parliament 's responsibilities in other areas .
It begs the whole question of the way peer review is done in this European Union of the 27 Member States .
As I say , that bears looking at , including in the human rights area , because we do not seem to have any clear principles and structures and simply adopt different things in different areas .
Much as I love the Member States , I am afraid they often adopt a practice of ' I 'll scratch your back and you scratch mine ' , which means they do not criticise each other , so actually they are not good people to evaluate each other .
The Commission , when it works at its best , is the one to do it .
As I have a few seconds left , I would like to challenge Mr Bradbourn from the ECR Group on an issue of free movement .
He called for a global ban on so-called ' naked body scanners ' .
It would have helped if he had been at the vote last year when his colleagues opposed a ban on the use of these body scanners without a fundamental review of human rights .
His colleagues voted against that ban .
Mr Bradbourn was not even present at the vote , so it is a bit rich for him to go on about it now .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I also want to thank our colleague , Carlos Coelho , for his report .
We do indeed need a simple and effective , transparent mechanism for the Schengen evaluation .
I agree that the Commission should play a more active role in the evaluation mechanism which Mr Barrot just talked about .
Nevertheless , we parliamentarians have a number of concerns .
You know that our Green Group has a very strong position concerning personal data protection .
The Commission forgot to mention outsourcing when speaking about the security of consular premises .
It has also forgotten about IT security provisions for these .
Besides the annual evaluation programme , Article 7 of the regulation must take into account not only the risk analysis provided by FRONTEX but also the audits and inspections conducted by Member States themselves .
Therefore , we demand that data protection concerns be taken into account .
When speaking about the codecision procedure and the proposal of Mr Coelho , our group , the Green / EFA Group , fully supports his position .
I shall not remind you about the role of the European Parliament as an elected institution .
We have heard already that , under the Lisbon Treaty , the codecision procedure will be the only option .
We fully support the rapporteur and we also support his proposal .
The Schengen Area is 20 years old - or nearly 20 years old - and it has been evaluated for 10 years , first by a standing committee , and then by the Evaluation Group .
It is , therefore , high time that we improved the evaluation procedures and responded to concerns about the Schengen area .
It is a shame that the Commission , on approaching this anniversary , has failed to do enough work or make much progress in creating a more effective and comprehensive evaluation mechanism which would be able to respond not only to the concerns raised in the early years of the Schengen area , such as efficiency and cohesion among Member States and a certain equivalence of procedures , but also concerns about transparency , control by citizens ( democratic control ) and , finally , concerns about respect for human rights , which are extremely dear to this House .
There are well-founded concerns that greater efficiency has been achieved at the cost of citizens ' rights , and it is high time that we bridged this gap .
I would also like to talk briefly about codecision .
The European Commission and all the others that defended the Treaty of Lisbon , extolling its democratic virtues , are now facing the test of whether they can make good their promises and allow more parliamentary and democratic control over the Schengen evaluation processes .
I cannot , however , support the conclusions of the rapporteur , our fellow Member , Carlos Coelho .
I believe that he does European democracy good service in exhorting the Commission to rework its proposals and deliver something that is simpler , more effective , more transparent , more respectful of human rights , and which provides greater parliamentary and democratic control .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , it is not very often that I find myself agreeing with something said by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
They are saying that these proposals on the evaluation mechanisms and on the Schengen acquis are pointless because , after the Lisbon Treaty is fully ratified , they will be changed anyway .
After the Lisbon Treaty comes into force , the first and third of the so-called three pillars of different policy areas will be consolidated into one .
The implementation of Lisbon will no doubt see attempts to use it as a tool to apply the Schengen acquis across all the Member States , including those currently exempted , which includes the United Kingdom .
You will notice that I said ' when the Lisbon Treaty is implemented ' and not ' if ' .
It seems that the one Head of State holding out against it , the valiant President Václav Klaus of the Czech Republic , will be browbeaten into giving his consent shortly .
Britain 's own traitorous Labour Government has reneged on its promise to give the British people a referendum on Lisbon and the one person who could hold out the hope of a referendum , David Cameron , does not have the courage , principle or inclination to do so .
The UK has a completely uncontrolled , unlimited and chaotic immigration and asylum system .
As a Member State of the European Union , we no longer control our own borders and under Lisbon , the tidal wave of immigration that we have experienced will become a tsunami .
So this report will make no difference whatsoever to anything and the comments made by the committee and the Parliament will be ignored by the Commission .
I have heard the words ' freedom , liberty and justice ' bandied around in this debate .
What freedom is there when the citizens are not consulted on their new constitution under the Lisbon Treaty because they would reject it ?
What liberty is there in laws made by undemocratic institutions that cannot be removed by the voter ?
What justice is there when , under the European arrest warrants , national courts have been stripped of their powers to protect their own citizens from unjust arrest and imprisonment ?
This Union is an Orwellian creation where words mean the opposite of what is said .
( DE ) Mr President , we need a democratic revolution .
You just heard what the previous speaker said ; we often see that when you go too far too fast , you achieve the opposite of what you were actually trying to achieve .
The motto of this group is that if the European Union develops too fast , it will result in precisely what it does not want , namely new nationalism .
That is what we are seeing at the moment in my country .
I come from what has become a divided country ; in the west , in Voralberg and a bit beyond , we are happy about the open borders , while in the east , you can see that we have gone too far too fast with Schengen .
What we are getting in return is new revanchism and nationalism in my country and elsewhere .
We must not hide behind technical debates .
We need to face up to these challenges .
Of course , this must necessarily mean that the European Parliament is granted codecision rights and that you , Commissioner , must wait until we have this codecision or it is at least granted to us by default .
( ES ) Mr President , I congratulate and support Carlos Coelho , and I would like to point out that this report was adopted unanimously in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
The Council 's proposal has a bearing on the second part of the mandate given to the Schengen Evaluation Working Group , which is to confirm that the acquis communautaire is being correctly applied following the lifting of internal border controls .
The aim of this mandate is to make the Schengen evaluation mechanism more efficient .
Evaluation of the correct application of the Schengen acquis has a legal basis in third pillar elements , while other aspects of the acquis have their legal basis in first pillar instruments .
In my view , the proposed legal basis is correct , but it does not seem to be very consistent with the more than significant entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , when the functions and powers currently shared between the two pillars will be consolidated .
The proposal scarcely contains any new elements that differentiate it from the evaluation mechanism that is currently in force , and Carlos has mentioned them ex novo .
However , it introduces a change that is obviously significant , as the document that is before us would mean transferring the functions currently carried out by the Council to the Commission .
This transfer of powers means de facto that Parliament and the Member States themselves are sidelined in the evaluation process , despite the fact that they are the ones with power over the security of their external borders .
Parliament , which represents European citizens , plays an essential , leading role in security matters .
Our task is important , and this is recognised in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Consequently , Mr President , what we want is to wait three months , because if we wait three months , there will be no need to reopen the case .
Mr President , another question : I have just seen the Vice-President putting on a pullover , and it is freezing cold here .
I must excuse myself because I have to leave , but I am not leaving because I do not want to follow the debate , but because I am starting to get bronchitis , which is no good at all , so I would be grateful if you could do something about it Mr President .
( SK ) Perhaps it is cold here also because the Commission takes very little account of our Parliament and the opinions of our Parliament .
Perhaps our relations will become warmer in the future .
I believe that this situation and this discussion are not very pleasant for the Commissioner , for it seems we all share the same opinion , or at least a majority of us share it .
All the same , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his report .
The creation of the Schengen area really did bring freedom of movement for our citizens within the Schengen area and , in my opinion , was one of the greatest successes in European history .
Much remains to be done , however .
The ending of internal border controls requires complete security and also trust between the various parties in relation to their ability to carry out the necessary measures .
The creation of a monitoring and evaluation mechanism is therefore very important if we are to win the support of Member State citizens .
This agenda is very often exploited by right-wing extremists , who spread claims that the Schengen area actually allows various criminals to penetrate into the countries that are inside the area , and the citizens of our states quite justifiably ask us how we intend to prevent this happening in the future .
Reinforcing the principle of interinstitutional coordination is also a very important point which the Commission rather suppresses in its proposal , which is clearly detrimental because , as a number of previous speakers have already said , we all believe that the Lisbon Treaty will soon enter into force and therefore it would be good if this context could be incorporated .
We also see no reason why the European Parliament should not receive in the annual report all of the relevant information - unfortunately , the Commission has failed to incorporate this principle of democracy into its opinion .
Therefore , like the rapporteur , my preference is for the draft to be returned to the Commission and for us to insist that a joint decision-making process be incorporated into it and that the entire principle be simplified and the entire process made more transparent .

( SV ) Mr President , like Mr Coelho and many other fellow Members , I would like to emphasise that the creation of the Schengen area during the 1980s and 1990s was one of the most important reforms of our time .
Jean Monnet , one of the EU 's most important figures , is purported to have said that the goal of a European Union is not to bring nations together , but to bring people together .
Over the centuries , people 's movement has been severely curtailed in Europe .
Suspicion of our fellow men has dominated relations between the countries of Europe .
Trust between the countries has , at times , been decidedly lacking .
Mistrust , rather than trust , has typified relations .
Fortunately , this is in the past and we are now seeing new possibilities for Europe .
Most of us here in the European Parliament have , for a long time , had the opportunity to avail ourselves of the freedoms that the Schengen area provides .
It is easy to forget the unique level of trust between the States that formed the basis of its creation .
It is easy to forget the arduous road to get to that point .
However , free movement is a prerequisite for people to be able to meet across national boundaries .
Mr President , as Mr Coelho so rightly said , it is , of course , important for there to be an effective and transparent evaluation mechanism for the Schengen acquis so that the area remains , and develops into , an area defined by free movement .
However , the basis of Schengen is trust between the States involved in the cooperation , not the mechanism itself .
It is important for this mechanism to be both effective and transparent and I therefore see a problem with the Commission 's proposal .
The problem is that the Council 's current role is transferred to the Commission and that the scope for cooperation is severely reduced .
However , my most serious objection is that we , the popularly elected representatives in the European Parliament , are excluded from the process .
We are talking about something as technical as an evaluation mechanism , but we must not forget that this concerns the basic foundation of European cooperation : freedom , security and justice .
It is therefore important for us all to be involved in taking new decisions in this area .
I would therefore urge the Commission to take note of the criticism expressed here in this Chamber .
I urge the Commission to come up with a new and better proposal as quickly as possible .
The substance of a new proposal must be that any amendments to the evaluation mechanism must be the subject of codecision between the Commission , the Member States and , in particular , the popularly elected representatives in the European Parliament .
( EL ) Mr President , the Commission proposal aims to strengthen the role of the Schengen Evaluation Working Group by making this mechanism more efficient and transparent so as to safeguard the effective and consistent application of the Schengen acquis .
However , it is curious that , free movement within the European Union notwithstanding , it is , at the same time , pushing for the establishment of a system which is far from meeting all the procedures for respecting human rights .
The difficulty we have in evaluating the application of the Schengen acquis lies precisely in the difficulty we have in accepting that it makes provision for the exchange of sensitive information , the ' personal files ' and repressive mechanisms which have been created with the excuse of the protection of , and free movement in , the European area .
The Commission is right to worry .
Abolishing controls on the internal borders depends on adequate compensatory measures in terms of strengthening controls on the external borders and cooperation between the police , customs and courts .
It has also meant , and it still means , a constant exchange of information and the use of biometric visas for entry into the European Union .
We consider that any evaluation must take account of the advisability of all the relevant measures taken and should not just verify their application .
Under no circumstances shall we agree to a proposal which , if approved , will give greater legitimacy to what are mainly repressive measures via mechanisms for their evaluation .
Mr President , I always thought being an MEP was a waste of time , but this really takes the biscuit here this evening .
We are here talking about something that does not really matter , because the Lisbon Treaty - which you know you have bullied your way through - is going to come into force within the next month or so and we are going to have to debate this again .
So here we are , wasting our time , thank you very , very much .
Let us take a critical look at the Schengen Agreement and what that has actually meant for Europe : it has allowed criminals , people traffickers and drug dealers to travel across thousands of miles unaided ; it has allowed camps such as Sangatte and the Jungle to develop on the other side of the English Channel , with people living in deplorable conditions .
I hope you are proud of yourself .
You would be aware of the 1951 Convention on Refugees that says that a refugee should claim asylum in the first safe country - but you disregard that .
You disregard international law and you purport to be a responsible legal personality , as Lisbon would make you .
Come on , pull the other one : this place is a joke !
The people of the United Kingdom want to control its own borders ; it has had enough of being ruled by you .
I leave you with this warning : the British people are a just , tolerant and trusting people , but when you push us too far , we fight back .
And when we fight back , we win .
( NL ) Madam President , a more efficient evaluation mechanism for the application of the ' Schengen acquis ' is certainly needed , but I have the impression that we are busy discussing the sex of angels here while the EU 's external borders are full of holes .
This certainly has more to do with the lack of political will to monitor external borders effectively on the part of the governments of most Member States and the EU itself than it does with the lack of efficient evaluation mechanisms .
We all know that there are some Member States who are unable or unwilling to protect their EU external borders against illegal immigration .
We all know that there are some governments who are undermining the whole Schengen system through the mass regularisation of illegal aliens .
I would cite the examples of the Zapatero Government in Spain and also the governments of Italy , the Netherlands and , last but not least , Belgium .
The Belgian Government is currently preparing to regularise new illegal immigrants on a massive scale and is thereby putting the whole system at risk , since the illegal immigrants thus regularised are able to settle wherever they wish in the European Union .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the modernisation of the Schengen Information System is becoming a nightmare .
With the further expansion of the EU , there is a growing risk of terrorism and organised crime and higher levels of security must therefore be a priority .
It is reprehensible that the changeover to the new database is again being delayed .
The system contains data on missing persons , stolen goods and judicial proceedings .
The current system has been in operation since 1995 and was developed for up to 18 countries .
I applaud the flexibility of the Commission , which has made the Schengen expansion possible , despite the delays with SIS II .
The incorporation of the nine new Member States was possible only under exceptional conditions , of course .
The second version of the system is delayed at least until 2011 .
It is supposed to bring improvements in administration , flexibility , security and data storage capacities , as well as providing other new functionalities .
It will enable other states to join , including a link to Great Britain and Ireland .
The FRONTEX agency must also have all the powers it needs for combating illegal immigration effectively .
Nevertheless , I have reservations over the communitarisation of the Schengen Working Group , because I am concerned that it will lead to Member States abandoning their responsibility to provide controls .
On the other hand , I would like to draw your attention to the experience of Czech citizens , as I know of cases where German and Austrian police officers have harassed Czech drivers without reason .
I regret that President Klaus is nonsensically delaying ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , but it is clear that soon after that happens , the Commission will have to submit the legislation again , this time under the codecision procedure of the European Parliament .
I am therefore now in favour of rejecting the submitted texts , as proposed by Mr Coelho , and I congratulate him on a fine report .
( PL ) Madam President , the word ' Schengen ' has been heard over and over again in this Chamber .
Most of us agree that Schengen has been a great success , and that for the people of the new countries , the new Member States of the European Union , this means the significant success of integration .
However , at the same time , Schengen is an enormous obligation , and it is the new countries which have taken it on - the Baltic states , Poland , Slovakia , Romania and Bulgaria .
Responsibility for the eastern land border of the European Union rests on the new Member States , and they are meeting this obligation extremely well .
However , I would like to talk about something which has not been mentioned in this Chamber .
What is for us a matter of admiration and pride - I mean Schengen and freedom of movement - is a nightmare and a source of huge problems for all those who are covered by the visa policy and the need to obtain what are called ' Schengen visas ' .
I am talking about the residents of Ukraine , Moldova and other countries to the east , who want to come to the European Union .
Schengen visas have been introduced , but they cost a great deal .
For these visas , people in those countries have to pay roughly as much as they earn per month .
They are subjected to a humiliating procedure for obtaining these visas , and they have to stand in gigantic queues .
This , too , is Schengen .
For them , Schengen means humiliation , a wall and a problem .
In order to establish a system to evaluate the function of Schengen policy , I would like at least to mention matters related to visa policy .
I would like to evaluate this .
Perhaps there was some kind of justification for this , but we do not know how long this policy will be in force , and I would like to evaluate how we introduced such instruments , which separate us from many people who quite naturally want to come to our area , to the Schengen area .
Although this is not the subject of the report , I wanted to say these words here during today 's debate .
( DE ) Madam President , as you know , there are now 28 countries , including 25 EU Member States , which have done away with passenger traffic controls at common borders .
This degree of freedom of movement obviously depends on broad-based trust between the states concerned .
It is absolutely necessary for the free movement of passenger traffic to be sustainably regulated by effective flanking measures .
Of central importance in this context is efficient supervision and control of the external borders , which - as we know - are to be carried out to a uniform standard through the Schengen Information System and by introducing harmonised entry requirements for third country nationals .
However , we are still miles away from that .
Compliance with accompanying mechanisms is therefore an essential factor for the security of EU citizens .
My country , Austria , is particularly affected , due to its geographical proximity to the eastern European states .
You only need think in this context of the latest incidents during the confiscation of a refrigerated lorry in Austria , which was found to contain 64 illegal Kurdish immigrants being smuggled from Turkey , via Hungary and Austria , to Germany .
This case shows how important it is to be able to rely on proper and effective control of external borders and how rare that is the case .
In internal affairs , we also have to battle with increasing crime in numerous regions of Europe which , increasingly often , stems from organised , cross-border gangs .
This being so , I believe that we should carefully consider temporarily re-introducing controls at internal borders .
As you know , this proved to be very effective during the 2008 UEFA Championship .
As the introduction of an evaluation mechanism to monitor the application of the Schengen acquis is a core concern of the Member States and , more to the point , of their citizens , I believe it is very important for the European Parliament , as the representative of the citizens , to be involved in these decisions .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , both proposals fully transfer to the Commission the powers which , until now , have been held by the Council .
With the impending entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and the consequent abolition of the pillar-based Community structure , the legal situation will be profoundly different and significantly modified .
Therefore , the evaluation mechanism will have to be based on a consistent allocation of the tasks currently shared between the first and the third pillars .
This is why I feel it is essential that the proposal provides for greater involvement of the Member States - I do not believe , Mr Barrot , that the involvement of experts is sufficient - and , above all , true involvement , true participation of the European Parliament within the coordinating group of the mechanism to monitor and verify the proper application of the Schengen acquis .
Furthermore , in my opinion , we should determine and better define , by means of more comprehensive , more precise criteria , how to use the migratory pressure parameter , which pinpoints the areas of greatest risk where unannounced visits should take place .
Lastly , the proposals should be treated as a single package and not separately , since they both represent common aspects of the same issue and have the same shortcomings .
This is also because , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the applicable procedure will be codecision .
I therefore fully support the position set out by Mr Coelho and the calls on the Commission to withdraw these proposals and submit other , better ones , which take into account what has come out of this debate .
( RO ) Membership of the Schengen Area entails complete freedom of movement for citizens of a Member State within this area , thereby totally removing borders between Member States .
The security of the Schengen Area depends on how stringently and effectively the controls are imposed by each Member State at their external borders .
Given that a two-fold evaluation mechanism is involved in this case , it must be implemented , as we are talking about evaluating and verifying the application of the Schengen Community acquis to ensure that it is implemented in a transparent , effective and consistent manner .
While we should welcome the Commission 's proposal for both a decision and regulation , as we feel that this will raise the level of mutual trust between Member States which are part of an area free of any internal borders and provide high uniform standards in the specific application of the Schengen acquis , we believe , however , that it ought to be reviewed taking into account and following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I welcome the fact that in the Commission 's proposal , Member States are working with the Commission as part of the coordination group to enable the Commission to implement this evaluation mechanism .
I also welcome that some multi-annual programmes are being developed and some national experts are being involved in order to carry out on-site visits , which will facilitate a better exchange of information between Member States in the area of Community acquis .
However , after the Treaty of Lisbon comes into force , the area of police and judicial cooperation will become part of the first pillar , the Community legislation pillar .
I also wish to draw attention to the fact that Article 14 of the proposal for a Council decision on introducing an evaluation mechanism to monitor the application of the Schengen acquis stipulates an annual report which the Commission must submit to Parliament and the Council .
However , I wish to repeat that the proposal needs to be reassessed to take into account the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
One last point I would like to add is that the suggestion which the Commission has made on the proposal for a Council decision for introducing this evaluation mechanism has significant implications for new Member States as well , as we are discussing in this case a procedure for implementing the Schengen acquis provisions in two stages .
Some of them feature in Annex I of the accession treaties , with the others due to come into force after a decision is adopted by the Council regarding certain provisions of the Schengen acquis .
( PL ) Madam President , it is good that the discussion we are having today to evaluate the Schengen acquis is taking place at the same time as a larger debate is beginning in the European Union , and also in the European Parliament , on the Stockholm Programme .
This is a major project concerning exceptionally important areas of the lives of EU citizens , such as justice , freedom and security .
For instance , two elements of the programme , the freedom and security of EU citizens , clearly should be included in the evaluation of the Schengen project .
We must , therefore , ask ourselves what the European Union was set up for and why it is so important for us that this great project succeed .
After all , it was not created for the politicians or for international organisations , but for particular states .
It was , in fact , set up for the good of its citizens .
Therefore , the good of the citizens , their freedom and liberty , but also the highest possible standards of security which should be guaranteed to them , are one of the main elements of the work which the EU institutions should undertake .
It is , therefore , not good that we are discussing the Schengen area on its own without combining this discussion with an evaluation of the EU 's migration programme , visa programme and the programme for cooperation with neighbouring countries .
For only then can joint discussion and common evaluation of the situation lead to our reaching appropriate conclusions - this is what the involvement of Parliament in making these decisions is for , and I hope this will happen .
I am , therefore , convinced that Schengen has performed well .
Despite the fact that it was said initially that the admission of new countries to the Schengen Area would be impossible without the adoption of SIS II , the admission of 10 countries in 2004 showed that it was possible , and that nothing disastrous happened .
Now we need only take care to ensure that mechanisms intended to improve and tighten up the functioning of the system be developed as quickly as possible with , of course , the involvement of the European Parliament .
This explains my esteem for Carlos Coelho and I fully endorse his report .
Madam President , I would like to add to the calls for this proposal to be withdrawn and for the Commission to submit a new one with a different legal basis .
There is a clear attempt to sideline Parliament on this important issue and Parliament 's Legal Service has confirmed that a different legal basis which would have allowed full involvement of Parliament in the process could have been chosen for this proposal .
The Schengen Information System , the Schengen visa , the Schengen Border Code and the Visa Code are all subject to the codecision procedure and , as we move towards ratification of the Lisbon Treaty and a more simplified and united legal structure throughout the European Union , we should be seeing greater involvement of Parliament in these issues , not less .
There is none reflected in the current proposal .
We have seen considerable cross-party agreement on these issues at committee stage , and I hope that a strong , clear position of the whole Parliament , together with a proper evaluation of the legal circumstances , will result in a redrafting of the proposal and the presentation of a more appropriate one to replace it .

( FR ) Madam President , like many of my fellow Members , I fully support the report by Mr Coelho , who I sincerely thank for the excellent work he has accomplished .
From the outset , the raison d 'être , the sine qua non of the lifting of internal border controls was the existence of compensatory measures designed to prevent the much-feared security deficit .
These measures form the basis of the mutual confidence that is crucial to good cooperation in the Schengen area .
Thus , it is only with an effective and transparent mechanism for evaluating the application of this Schengen acquis that we will be able to ensure that this confidence is maintained and , therefore , that the Member States cooperate at a very high level .
The challenge is therefore huge , and Parliament 's role in the creation of this new mechanism must be equal to this challenge .
It follows that , if this text is adopted before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the mechanism , or at least the elements that come under the first pillar , will have to be adopted by codecision .
Moreover , while conclusions must certainly be drawn from the integration of the Schengen acquis into Community law and into EU law , this does not mean that the management of this evaluation should be entrusted to the Commission alone .
Member States must have a greater involvement in this evaluation mechanism , or else this mutual confidence is in danger of diminishing .
The same goes for the domestic security of our Member States .
When a Member State does not apply this acquis properly , it is all of the other Member States that suffer the consequences .
Lastly , in terms of effectiveness , it does not seem appropriate to me to provide for two separate mechanisms for the two evaluation stages , which are the check prior to the application of the acquis and the application of the acquis by the Schengen States .
I therefore join with Mr Coelho in calling on the Commission to withdraw this proposal and to present us with a new proposal that takes greater account of the philosophy of the acquis and of the Member States ' role in evaluating its application .
Madam President , it is with great regret that I am addressing the House as a Member from a country that has not yet opted into the Schengen Agreement .
It is something I would support entry into .
It is my hope that the Schengen Evaluation Working Group will finally demonstrate to the Irish State , and indeed our neighbours across the way in Britain , the undoubted benefits of Schengen .
Freedom of movement is a basic right and a pillar of EU citizenship for which we are all striving .
Being able to reduce borders and allow the freedom and benefits of travel to EU citizens has been quite remarkable , especially considering European history .
The fact that this was done while increasing the ability of our authorities to tackle crime associated with crossing borders has been a major historic achievement and one of the great successes of the EU to date .
It was the Schengen Agreement that prompted Ireland to build a full data system of criminal information that will hopefully be linked up to a European system in the coming years .
Schengen has worked extremely well and it is visible for all to see .
It is because of this remarkable achievement that it is regrettable that my own country is only taking part in Schengen on a piecemeal basis .
While there has been full cooperation between the Irish security authorities and our European counterparts in the whole area of police matters , the full benefits of the EU are not being shared by Irish citizens .
The abolition of border controls requires mutual trust between all Member States involved .
Unfortunately , the Irish Government 's position so far is that it cannot trust its European neighbours in full and it is operating on a minor level when it comes to free movement of people in Europe .
I very much regret this .
What we really need is an EU-wide visa system to which Schengen and today 's debate will hopefully contribute .
Regarding the proposal in front of us , I would ask the Commission to withdraw it .
I believe that it gives too much power to the Commission .
In real terms , it tries to disregard the European Parliament .
It should come back to us with proposals that respect the codecision procedure and , besides this debate , post-Lisbon , there will be a requirement to bring in new proposals anyway .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to congratulate Mr Coelho for the very good work he has done .
The establishment of a simple , effective and transparent evaluation mechanism complementing the current Schengen evaluation is a most welcome initiative .
However , there are also several problems in terms of data protection that the rapporteur stressed earlier .
Unfortunately , in spite of the improvements needed , in the current procedure we are only consulted .
Once the Lisbon Treaty enters into force , Parliament will automatically have codecision powers in matters under the third pillar .
Since the security of the Schengen area and its citizens is at stake , all players should be deeply involved in the establishment of these evaluation systems , thereby making it possible to guarantee and consolidate the principle of mutual trust essential to maintaining the Schengen area .
For all these reasons , I support the rapporteur in this initiative requiring the Commission to withdraw the proposals and present new , more complete ones .

( RO ) I would like to congratulate Mr Coelho for the fine job he has done and for the determination he has shown in his desire for an evaluation mechanism to verify the application of the Schengen acquis in a simple , efficient and transparent manner .
I regard the introduction of free movement within the territory of the EU and the waiver of internal border controls as among the most important achievements of the European Union .
Taking into account border permeability , we need high standards when putting the Schengen acquis into actual practice in order to be able to maintain an increased level of mutual trust between Member States , including in their ability to implement measures accompanying the abolition of controls at internal borders .
We have to improve the evaluation mechanism for monitoring the application of the Schengen acquis .
The need to maintain a high level of security and trust requires good cooperation between the governments of Member States and the Commission .
Given the relevance of the regulations in this area from the perspective of fundamental rights and freedoms , the European Parliament must insist on the enforcement of the Treaty of Lisbon being a prior condition to any legislative developments involving the enhancement of border security .
Bearing in mind how important this legislative initiative is , it is regrettable that the European Parliament is playing the role of consultant rather than colegislator , as ought to have been the case .
Creating an area of justice , freedom and security is a top priority for the European Union .
This is why it is vital for Member States , the Commission and the European Parliament to be equally involved in maintaining and developing it .
Consequently , I give my full support to the rapporteur 's suggestion to invite the Commission to submit a new improved proposal to the European Parliament to provide Parliament with the opportunity to assume its role as colegislator .
Madam President , we have survived the cold snap here , in this Chamber .
There is probably a misunderstanding in this debate , in the sense that the aim of the proposal is to communitise this evaluation process .
It is true that we have Schengen - I also note that the vast majority of MEPs celebrated this Schengen success , which makes it possible to have freedom of movement and , at the same time , security .
It is true that the Schengen evaluation was on an intergovernmental basis to begin with , and that the Commission was there only in an observer capacity .
However , it is true that the Commission , as the guardian of the treaties , must be responsible for the evaluation .
There is no question , however , that it will have a monopoly over the evaluation - we must be very clear about that .
We will , of course , involve the Member States , and the experts from the Member States will be involved in planning the timetable of the visits , in performing the in situ visits , and in drafting the evaluation report .
It is quite clear that the misgivings that we sense within the Member States are also due to a misunderstanding .
Since we want mutual confidence between the Member States , there is no question of our not involving them closely in the evaluation of the measures taken to apply Schengen and the Schengen acquis .
I now come to Parliament .
There is a misunderstanding here too .
Our aim is not to exclude Parliament , as I heard someone say .
Our aim , as things stand , is simply to see how Parliament 's involvement can already be increased , with regular reports .
However , this does not , in any way , preclude the possibility of our giving Parliament a greater role in this communitised mechanism , once the Treaty of Lisbon has been ratified .
I am somewhat insistent because we know that the European general interest can prevail when this method is used , even if , at times , a Member State may drag its heels a little when it comes to defending this European general interest .
Thus , there are some misunderstandings that I would like to try to clear up .
Furthermore , I would also like to say that the proposals bring a certain added value when compared with the current mechanism .
The evaluations will be far more frequent and will be clearer .
Visits will be planned in situ , on the basis of risk assessments ; there will be unannounced visits and a high level of expertise throughout the evaluation exercise , and the number of experts taking part will make the visits effective .
The assessment of the follow-up to the recommendations made at the end of the in situ evaluations will be improved .
Those are my thoughts , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen .
I fully understand your impatience to see Parliament 's involvement increased when the Treaty of Lisbon is ratified .
There is no doubt that Parliament must play a major role in this Community method , but we have made this proposal for communitisation purposes , it being understood that this subsequently leaves the way very clear for the European Parliament to become involved .
I have listened carefully to all of the speeches and I have certainly noted Parliament 's virtually unanimous position .
However , I do believe that all of this is based on a misunderstanding , which can be cleared up .
I would like to make three final points .
Firstly , I would like to thank the Members who supported my report and made statements to this effect during this debate , and Vice-President Barrot for his statement encouraging the involvement of the European Parliament as a colegislator , making the very most of the possibilities that arise from the Treaty of Lisbon .
This was no surprise to me .
I know Commissioner Barrot has held this position for a long time , but it is good that he , as Vice-President of the Commission , has made this formal statement to us .
As a second point , I would like to recall something that Commissioner Barrot said when he mentioned that the negotiations with the Council were difficult .
We are also aware of this , and we realise that it would be difficult for things to be any other way when dealing with this matter .
For this reason , we also hoped that the Commission would see Parliament as a partner with powers of codecision , because in terms of their approach to Europe , the Commission and Parliament alike are positively identified with the idea that decision making cannot continue to be purely intergovernmental .
Thirdly , I would like to underline two things that I believe have come out of this debate .
In the first place , there can be no breach in consistency .
There cannot be two evaluation systems ; there must be one alone , whether for the new Schengen members or for the established ones .
Moreover , the principle of mutual confidence must not be undermined .
All parties must be involved .
Both the Member States and the European institutions must be involved in the process of evaluation .
The European institutions do not just include the Commission or the Council alone ; they also include this Parliament , and that is why we are asking for codecision .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
It is vital that there should be a simple , effective , efficient and transparent evaluation mechanism that will enable the Schengen area to be preserved as an area of free movement whilst , at the same time , it is indispensable to adapt the intergovernmental framework for the Schengen evaluation to the EU framework .
The European Parliament 's Legal Service carried out a study and determined that the codecision procedure should have been chosen over the consultation procedure to debate this proposal .
The Treaty of Lisbon will soon enter into force and according to it , the European Parliament will have greater powers in the area of freedom , justice and security , into which this proposal falls .
As the security of the Schengen area and its citizens is of vital importance we must choose the codecision procedure .
Schengen cooperation can take many different forms .
Very many applications can be picked out and closely scrutinised .
I believe that as an MEP , it is worth mentioning , here and now , that one of the basic conditions for the free movement of people is to have a complete Schengen system operating efficiently and built on mutual trust .
Border controls , our common visa policy , cross-border police cooperation and data protection issues are only components of this complete system .
These are different issues , but all connected by one important factor .
Europe 's citizens have been given , and are given , every day so much additional freedom , which symbolises for them one of the most obvious successes of the European Union 's existence .
As a representative of the electorate in a Member State which joined only a few years ago , I can happily confirm this .
If it was not for the proposal made by the Portuguese EU Presidency , the new Member States could not be part of the Schengen system .
As it is , the latest ( second ) generation of the Schengen Information System is still not working to date .
It is the responsibility of the Commission and Member States to preserve this freedom , a matter also referred to in two of the questions on the agenda .
The European Parliament also shares this responsibility , which is precisely why it cannot but get involved in issues relating to citizens ' freedom .
Consequently , I emphatically support the rapporteur 's efforts and agree with his proposals .
The creation of the Schengen area at the end of the 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s was one of the biggest achievements in European history .
The provisions of the Schengen acquis have been part of the European Union framework since the Amsterdam Treaty came into force in 1999 .
An essential part of the observance of the application of the rules of the Schengen acquis , which form part of European law , is the evaluation mechanism , which should guarantee the transparent , efficient and consistent implementation of the Schengen acquis , and also reflect the changes to the legislative situation which came into being after the integration of the Schengen acquis into the EU framework .
I agree with the rapporteur 's view that today , the proposals given in the bill are restricted to the adoption of some of the general suggestions for improvement to the valid Schengen evaluation mechanism which were made recently .
The only new idea in the whole bill is the regulation concerning the possibility of making unannounced visits , which is very welcome .
I cannot , however , accept the fact that the role currently played by the Council should be given over as a whole to the Commission .
This proposal leaves very limited opportunities for collaboration with the Member States , and keeps the European Parliament away from the process .
It should not be forgotten that this is an area based on freedom , security and justice , and also that the responsibility for preserving and refining this area does not rest solely with the Commission as guarantor of the supervision of the implementation of the constitutional treaty , but with the Member States , which are continually responsible for the security of their external borders , and also with the European Parliament , which represents the citizens of the European Union .
Agreement between the EC and Mauritius on the short-stay visa waiver - Agreement between the EC and Seychelles on the short-stay visa waiver - Agreement between the EC and Barbados on the short-stay visa waiver - Agreement between the EC and Saint Kitts and Nevis on the short-stay visa waiver - Agreement between the EC and Antigua and Barbuda on the short-stay visa waiver - Agreement between the EC and The Bahamas on the short-stay visa waiver ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mr Busuttil , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Mauritius on the short-stay visa waiver - C7-0015 / 2009 - ,
the report by Mr Busuttil , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Seychelles on the short-stay visa waiver - C7-0012 / 2009 - ,
the report by Mr Busuttil , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and Barbados on the short-stay visa waiver - C7-0017 / 2009 - ,
the report by Mr Busuttil , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and the Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis on the short-stay visa waiver - C7-0013 / 2009 - ,
the report by Mr Busuttil , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and Antigua and Barbuda on the short-stay visa waiver - C7-0016 / 2009 - ,
the report by Mr Busuttil , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and the Commonwealth of The Bahamas on the short-stay visa waiver - C7-0014 / 2009 - .
Despite the cold being felt inside this chamber , this topic will deal with countries boasting far warmer temperatures , which is rather more ideal .
These reports , in fact , consist of an agreement which provides for a short stay visa waiver between the European Union and its citizens and the citizens of six different countries - The Republic of Mauritius , The Republic of Seychelles , Barbados , The Federation of St Kitts and Nevis , the Bahamas as well as Antigua and Barbuda .
This waiver applies to European Union citizens who travel to these countries and vice-versa , that is , when citizens from these countries travel to the European Union .
It is valid for a maximum stay of three months within a six month period .
This waiver covers all categories of persons , meaning ordinary citizens as well as diplomats travelling for various reasons .
This applies particularly to the numerous tourists who are European Union citizens and who go on holiday to these six countries , and thus we will be greatly facilitating things for them .
This agreement however , specifically excludes those who travel for work and remuneration purposes .
In these reports , we have included a provision that says that each of these third countries can suspend or terminate this agreement with regard to all countries of the European Union rather than excluding individual countries .
This was done in order to safeguard a level playing field for of all European Union citizens and , beyond that , as an expression of solidarity .
On the other hand , the European Union will do the same , meaning that the European Community can also suspend or terminate an agreement on behalf of all its Member States .
The European Union or any of these countries can either suspend the whole agreement or parts of it , on grounds of public interest , protection of national security , public health protection , illegal immigration or in the case of a country 's re-introduction of a visa obligation .
Above all , I would like to clarify , Madam President , that before taking a vote on these reports at committee level , we asked for and were given a guarantee on the part of the European Commission that full reciprocity would be ensured .
This was an essential principle for us ; full reciprocity assured by these countries in the removal of their visa requirement whilst we would do the same in turn .
Thus , we would be eliminating visa requirements on both sides .
This agreement has been achieved in the requisite manner and once again clearly demonstrates how the European Union is capable of negotiating with one voice on an international level and by showing solidarity towards all countries .
I will conclude by saying that once more , this illustrates the European Union 's capacity to open its doors to citizens worldwide .

Madam President , I am also very grateful to Mr Busuttil for his excellent report .
The six non-EU countries - Antigua and Barbuda , the Bahamas , Barbados , Mauritius , Saint Kitts and Nevis and the Seychelles - were transferred from the negative list to the positive list of Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 pursuant to a new regulation , Regulation ( EC ) No 1932 / 2006 , adopted on 21 December 2006 , which confirmed that these countries fulfilled the criteria laid down in the regulation .

This regulation governed the implementation of the visa waiver for nationals of these countries upon the conclusion and the entry into force of a bilateral visa waiver agreement between the European Community and each of these countries .
As Mr Busuttil said , it was important to ensure full reciprocity , since back then , some of these countries were still imposing the visa requirement on citizens of one or more Member States .
Due to the temporary visa regime applied by the CARICOM - the Caribbean common market - countries to nationals of several Member States during the Cricket World Cup , formal negotiations on the visa waiver only began in July 2008 .
To ensure that citizens benefit from the visa waiver as soon as possible , the Commission proposed the temporary application of the agreements signed on 28 May 2009 and , since then , they have been applied temporarily pending completion of the procedures necessary for their formal conclusion .
Under the principle of reciprocity , the visa waiver covers all categories of persons - ordinary , diplomatic or service / official passport holders - travelling for all kinds of purposes , except for the purpose of carrying out a paid activity .
As Mr Busuttil said , in order to maintain equal treatment for all EU citizens , the agreements include a provision stipulating that the six non-EU countries may suspend or terminate the agreement only in respect of all the Member States of the European Community and , reciprocally , that the Community may also suspend or terminate the agreement only in respect of all of its Member States .
There you have it ; I am grateful to Parliament and to Mr Busuttil for his cooperation .
It reinforces this initiative , which will thus make travelling easier for our fellow citizens .
I would also add that , in this slightly chilly Parliament , we can dream of sooner or later visiting all of these marvellous countries , such as the Seychelles and the Bahamas ...
Madam President , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left is in favour of the European Union agreements with these six countries , which are indeed dream destinations , Mr Barrot .
As you informed us , with these agreements , citizens of these six countries and , reciprocally , EU citizens , will , in future , be exempted from the short-stay visa requirement - at least some of them will be , since excluded from this exemption are those who wish to work or to perform a paid activity , as an employee or as a service provider , in short .
This means that those exempted from the visa requirement are businessmen and women , sportspeople and artists - at least when it comes to performing a one-off activity - journalists and trainees , among others .
Let us not be fussy and let us welcome this progress , since we know all the administrative formalities that are carried out in our embassies in order to issue visas to citizens of countries of the South .
I am sure , ladies and gentlemen - at least those who are left - that you have all heard about these cases of artists who are prevented from attending a festival or of sportspeople who cannot take part in competitions .
We in the GUE / NGL Group are in favour of abolishing all short-stay visas .
They go against the free movement of persons and plunge the citizens of those countries into a vicious circle that encourages them to apply for short-stay visas and , once they have obtained them , not to return to their countries for fear of not being able to obtain another visa .
In return , we , in our countries , keep cracking down on short-stay visa holders , and a vicious circle emerges .
This even leads to actual family breakdowns between migrants , who are living in our countries , and their families , who remain in their countries of origin .
We therefore believe that these agreements are a positive step in the direction of another migration policy , which would see men and women move as freely as capital and goods .
We do have one small point - one small technical point to make - however , Commissioner .
We noticed that the English term ' valid passport ' was translated into French as ' passeport ordinaire ' , but we do not believe that this is the same thing .
We would therefore be delighted to have clarification on this point , since we believe that the correct translation would be ' passeport en cours de validité ' .
We are also surprised - the word ' surprised ' is perhaps a polite way of putting it - we are therefore surprised that these agreements do not apply to the outermost regions of France when they do apply to the outermost regions of Portugal .
( PT ) I would just like to support Simon Busuttil 's report , which endorses the European Commission 's initiative , by making three brief points .
Firstly , with this decision , which facilitates movement , we are disproving the idea of a Fortress Europe .
Secondly , we are not throwing open the doors at random .
As Vice-President Barrot reminded us , we are opening them in accordance with the rules .
As he said , the countries have complied with the rules and can come off the negative list .
I believe that it is important to take a European approach , and avoid ' picking and choosing ' countries , accepting some and barring others .
Either the whole European area is accepted or it is not .
Finally , as Simon Busuttil and Vice-President Barrot emphasised , guarantees of reciprocity are essential in these agreements .
We cannot very well ask Europe to open its doors to other countries if these countries do not open their doors to Europe , and this is amply ensured in these agreements .
Madam President , I should like firstly to thank Mrs Vergiat and to tell her that she is perfectly right - it is indeed ' passeports en cours de validité ' - and , secondly , to say that this opportunity is one that we wish to pursue as far as possible .


I think that Mr Coelho also made it clear , after Mr Busuttil , that we have to be very strict as regards reciprocity and that we also need real European solidarity : we cannot leave a Member State to the mercy of the reintroduction of visas .
We need real solidarity on the part of all the Member States and of the Union .
I am grateful once again to Mr Busuttil for clearly identifying the problem and for offering us Parliament 's support in this way .
I would simply like to thank all those who have intervened .
This goes for my colleagues as well as for the Vice President of the European Commission , Jacques Barrot .
If I had to summarise this institution 's political message in a single phrase , it would clearly be that of the principle of reciprocity .
This is important to us .
It is of considerable significance in the agreement we have before us , in the same way that agreements with other third countries are essential .
The Vice President of the Commission knows that there are several other third countries that are still not honouring the principle of reciprocity with regard to all the Member States of the European Union .
The United States are amongst these , having recently included a number of countries into its visa waiver programme but left others out .
Brazil , with whom negotiations have recently taken place , is another case in point .
I augur that whenever an agreement is concluded , insistence be made upon the principle of reciprocity , and I believe that it is these type of agreements that can serve as the foundation for this to happen elsewhere .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Progress of SIS II and VIS ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the progress of SIS II and VIS .
Madam President , I would not wish to try Parliament 's patience , but all the same , I do need to clarify a number of things for the MEPs here present and for Parliament .
When , a year and a half ago , I took on the portfolio of commissioner responsible for justice , freedom and security , I found on my desk two large-scale information technology projects aimed at equipping the Member States with modern and effective cooperation tools .
Those two projects , SIS II and VIS , formed part of the same contract , signed in 2003 , between the Commission and a consortium of information technology companies .
Both of these projects are technologically complex .
We need to interconnect a central system and national equipment with particularly demanding specifications , and make them interact .
I have always tried to keep Parliament informed of these developments .
Following the Justice and Home Affairs Councils in February and June 2009 , I wrote to Mr Deprez , the chairman of Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , to inform him of how the work on SIS II was progressing .
I sent you a copy of that correspondence , Mr Coelho , because you are the usual rapporteur for SIS-related issues , and you follow these issues closely .
Motivated as I am by this spirit of openness , I should like today , once again , to give you as much information as possible .
It is true that , like most major industrial projects , both SIS II and VIS are in danger of going over schedule and over budget .
It is true that the situation is unsatisfactory as regards both SIS II and VIS .
Despite the involvement of experts from the Commission and the Member States , SIS II continues to come up against various obstacles .
VIS , for its part , has entered an important phase .
The initial specifications made it difficult to perform the planned tests but it seems that , with the Member States ' agreement , the review of these specifications should enable the tests to be completed successfully next time .
I come firstly to SIS II .
The Commission is working closely with the Presidency , the Member States and the contractors to implement the guidelines laid down in the conclusions of the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 4 and 5 June .
Firstly , all the parties concerned are actively involved in the technical preparations for a first ' milestone ' test aimed at ensuring that the current technical solution is built on a solid foundation .
With this in mind , the Commission has negotiated the contractual changes required with the consortium in charge of the project .
For the first milestone , there is an extra cost of EUR 1 026 000 .
At the same time , our services have stepped up the governance and monitoring of the project .
They have introduced contractual penalties so as to put added pressure on the contractor .
On Friday evening , I summoned and met with the CEO of the company in charge of the project so that he could inform me personally of the measures that he was implementing to resolve the technical difficulties .
Finally , for precautionary purposes , as was stipulated by the June Council , the Commission has begun the preparatory work with a view to potentially switching to the alternative scheme should the current technical solution fail .
In order to take account of this data and of the new timetable , we must obviously translate these circumstances into legislation .
That is why , on 29 September , the Commission proposed some amendments to the SIS II migration instruments , amendments on which your Parliament is currently being consulted .
This will give us an opportunity to review the issue in detail .
As regards VIS , in April 2009 , the contractor began a series of tests on the central system in order to assess the progress made .
The contractor has not yet succeeded in meeting all of the contractual criteria required to conclude this series of tests , even though its deadline was extended .
The Commission has , of course , applied the contractual penalties provided for to punish this delay .
It has ordered the contractor to implement all of the appropriate corrective measures .
I do not believe , but I may be proved wrong , that there is a design problem .
On the other hand , it would seem that the STT is going well .
The tests should be concluded on 11 November .
However , in parallel to this , the Member States must also adapt their own national systems so that they can use VIS .
At least three Member States are encountering major difficulties , and the delays due to these three States are even more significant than those caused by the central system .
Thus , we are currently performing a detailed analysis with the Member States in order to set out a new timetable for the launch of VIS .
To do this , however , we need to have a clear idea of the outcome of the series of tests on the central system .
My meeting on Friday gives me reason to believe that 11 November could be the date when we will know whether the tests under way are successful .
In any event , however , both the national systems and the central system must be fully operational before the system is launched .
I will , of course , inform Parliament of this new timetable as soon as we have been able to draft it .
I shall finish here - please excuse me for my rather lengthy speech , but I really wanted to give a detailed account of the progress of SIS II and VIS .
There is real cause for concern ; there is no point in hiding it .
The technical , budgetary and political risk profiles of both projects justify us all getting involved , given our respective responsibilities .
Significant financial resources have been harnessed .
The total amount of the Commission 's budget commitments on SIS II stands at just over EUR 80 million , of which just over half , or EUR 44.5 million , have so far been paid .

The total amount that the Commission has already committed to VIS so far is in the region of EUR 74.5 million .
In terms of budgetary implementation , nearly EUR 43.3 million have actually been spent to date .
These figures are in line with those of projects on a similar scale developed in Europe and elsewhere in the world .
Madam President , I am anxious to say here that I will definitely inform Parliament of any developments that may have an impact on the budget , or indeed on the launch date for these systems .
However , if we succeed with VIS and SIS II , we will have equipped Europe with the most effective system in the world .
We therefore have to tackle the obstacles in a calm , clear and practical fashion , and in this respect , I will take the liberty of requesting Parliament 's help as often as I need it in order , once again , to monitor these two issues very closely and to ensure their successful conclusion .
I would like to start off by thanking the Vice President of the European Commission for the explanation he just gave us and , in turn , I would also like to explain why we requested this debate .
This was because the Schengen area is extremely important to us in light of the freedom of movement of our citizens .
Yet , although we intended the Schengen area to offer complete freedom to our citizens , we do not want to bestow this privilege upon criminals .
For this reason , we created the Schengen information system , which was meant to be upgraded to a new generation system known as SIS II in order to help us strengthen our citizens ' freedom whilst holding back criminals from gaining any sort of leeway .
Therefore , the fact that this new generation system , SIS II , is well overdue and yet still does not look like it is anywhere near being finished is of concern to us .
This is why we are putting these questions to you now as to the reason for this delay and as to whether it would be possible to guarantee a date by which the system will be up and running .
However , I would like to make it abundantly clear that our final target is to work together with the European Commission to ensure that the Schengen area is fully operational and that it works in the best interests of our citizens , without giving free reign to those with the wrong intentions .

on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for coming here today to update us on these issues in some detail .
We appreciate the manner in which he has done that .
Like Mr Busuttil , I want to set out an explanation - which is a joint explanation - of our serious concern regarding the significant delays in migration from SIS to SIS II and the development of VIS .
I think you will understand why we tabled a joint resolution , because there is a genuine concern here .
Mr Coelho and others have been making this concern known for some time and it is worth putting on record that , while these significant delays are obviously highly worrying on their own , the key issues here for Parliament , as you know , are those of transparency and accountability , particularly when we are dealing with sensitive data , and sensitive data in this area .
As co-legislator and the EU 's only directly elected institution , Parliament needs to be kept informed about the developments of these systems , as it has requested many times in the past .
In our resolution , we do not want to be seen to be making unreasonable demands .
We want to be reasonable , and we want to respond to the way in which you have given us the information today .
We simply want to be informed of the current state of play , to be given explanations about the reasons for the delay , and to be reassured that these problems will be resolved .
It is vital that a project as important as this , which will have an impact on vast numbers of people - both EU and non-EU citizens - is developed transparently .
However , in addition to the issues of transparency and accountability , it is also important to point out some of the wider implications .
The technical problems we are seeing , and the development of these large-scale databases , do not inspire wider confidence .
Many of our Member States - including my own Member State - have had significant difficulties in their own development of major databases , in development of ID databases and so on .
Public confidence in these systems is absolutely vital .
Therefore , we certainly have to look jointly across the political parties to see how these problems arose , how they can be prevented in the future , at the planning stage rather than the development stage .
Lessons have to be learned ; we have to have confidence in these systems and , above all , we have to have full and effective oversight .
In the end , these systems will only work through technical cooperation - but also through that public confidence in this system and the fact that Parliament is seen to be scrutinising these matters openly and with some results at the end of the day .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I have never had so much speaking time in one evening in all my 10 years in the European Parliament !
Ten minutes in total is an unaccustomed luxury , and I am not sure I will be able to use it .
I , too , am grateful to Vice-President Barrot for coming to report to us on the problems , although I feel we should not have had to keep asking for those updates .
Anyone who has the merest familiarity with the installation of large IT works in the public sector in their own Member State will know that all these technical and budgetary problems frequently arise .
Unfortunately , however , when you have two such high-profile , big systems - the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) II and the visa information system ( VIS ) - being affected , this also affects the credibility not only of the Union 's internal security - and I will come back to that later - but also of the EU 's visa policy .
As rapporteur on the VIS , I can say that we were under pressure to get the legislation done in time , because we wanted to press ahead with having the VIS up and running - as it should have been by now - and any slippage in the programme is deeply disappointing .
I would like to ask Commissioner Barrot what the implications are going to be for visa applicants .
Are we going to end up with a lot of confused people , because the VIS is destined to deal with 20 million visa applications a year and delays presumably have a knock-on effect ?
And what about the outsourcing arrangements which are being established ?
You mentioned that there have been contractual penalties imposed owing to the delays in the visa information system .
Could you tell us what those penalties are ?
What are the estimated extra costs envisaged ?
And could you tell us , Commissioner Barrot , whether overall , you have continued confidence in the contractor , or are we looking at a potential cancellation of the contract ?
This presumably also has implications for the setting-up of the agency for the common management of the SIS and VIS - and , potentially , other databases in the future .
Perhaps some of the ambitions for the collection of data and large-scale surveillance systems might have to be looked at again , which would be no bad thing from the privacy point of view if we are going to have all these technical and infrastructure problems .
The last thing I wanted to ask the Commissioner is this : the current estimate is that the SIS II will be in operation in the last quarter of 2011 .
We can , I guess , expect some further slippage .
In the summer of 2012 , the Olympics are being held in London .
The UK Government did not take the opportunity to go into SIS I for reasons best known to itself .
It actually had quite a few years when it could have gone into SIS I but said ' oh no , no , we will wait till SIS II ' .
In answers to me , the Government has said that it is not worried about any implications for security .
However , not only UK but also European security could be put at risk if the UK does not participate in access to the policing side - which it is allowed to do - of the Schengen Information System , by a time well ahead of the London Olympics taking place in 2012 .
Could you tell us , Commissioner Barrot , what you think the implications could be for security around the Olympics , which , especially as they are being held in London , and not least in my constituency , I am greatly concerned about ?
I think we would all be greatly worried about the security of the Olympics .
Those are a few of the questions I would like to ask you .
Thank you again for coming here .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , on behalf of my group , I too thank Commissioner Barrot for his explanations .
Of course , we also deplore the current situation with SIS II and VIS .
But I would also like to raise some other concerns as well , because you know that our group has a specific position on using biometric data , in particular in VIS and SIS II .
I would like to use this opportunity to underline our position .
Like Sarah Ludford , I am also extremely thankful for the extra time to speak this evening .
For me , too , it may be too much , even though my time is six minutes , not ten .
We also regret that more and more authorities have access to these systems .
Currently , we are concerned that SIS is being transformed from a technical tool into a general system of control and surveillance .
Therefore , we would remind the Commission that a coherent legal framework for data protection based on the highest standards , and the adoption of a legal instrument on minimum safeguards in procedural law , is the necessary precondition for the full implementation of those new systems .
We also want to deplore the lack of cooperation from the Council , in particular , the refusal to use the codecision procedure for the implementing measures .
We hope that in future , the European Parliament will regularly receive reliable information on the tests , costs , etc .
I do not want to repeat an earlier speaker 's question , but we , too , would like information from Commissioner Barrot on the contract and obligations arising from it , and what will happen if the test is unsatisfactory , and we would also like to know about possible costs .
The issue is perhaps also one of approval : we would avoid a lot of questions if our Parliament were allowed to participate actively in the whole process from the very beginning .
Therefore , I hope that this case will also prove that now it really is time to cooperate .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , as ECR signatory to the joint motion , I am very pleased we are now engaged in this debate .
It is of vital importance that we in the European Parliament call the Commission to account when we are discussing matters involved with the spending of substantial sums of European taxpayers ' money .
It is correct that there is a special interest from the general public in such a sensitive area that relates to data protection and exchange .
There have been numerous problems and delays , meaning that the new system has still not begun operation .
Indeed , there are now doubts over the viability of the project .
I would like to ask the Commission why there have been such delays and overspending .
What action is being taken to address the shortcomings ?
We would like to see full transparency as regards the implementation process as well as concerning the financial aspects to which I have referred .
As our resolution states , the United Kingdom - not , of course , as a full member of Schengen at this time - along with a number of other Member States , will not want to be part of this system until a solution has been found .
I would also like to ask what action has been taken against contractors to secure some damages .
We would like the Commission and Council to respond to the questions asking them to give an explanation of the grounds for continuing to have confidence in the current contractor and in its ability to successfully take the systems forward .
In fact , is there a future for this project or should we now be rethinking the whole initiative ?
As Commissioner Barrot has said , some states are delaying , but without confidence you could hardly blame them .
The European Parliament must be kept constantly informed on the state of play of the deployment of these systems .
I look forward to reading the Commission 's response to the questions my colleagues and I have raised .
Madam President , first I should like to say that we do not share the concerns of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
It is perfectly simple : we believe that further development towards SIS II is not necessary and is politically wrong .
We take this view for three reasons : firstly , because it mixes secret service and police data , giving rise to a data system that no longer guarantees controllability and in which personal data is not , in fact , protected .
The second is biometric data , which is being anchored here as a large-scale experiment and , thirdly , SIS II is , of course , to be used against so-called illegal immigration .
Hence our proposal : as we all know , we have SIS I. We consider it reasonable to develop this further ' as one for all ' .
It is a pragmatic approach , even if we are strongly criticised for it .
However , we believe that , with the approach being pursued here , nothing more can be done .
To put it simply : SIS II is a de facto failure and to keep on crawling round it - to put it one way - is meaningless .
What is important is that money which is being put to the wrong use here should be saved , which will mean we have fewer problems with the whole thing and can stop worrying about the delay with SIS II .
I say this also from the point of view of Saxony , a region of Germany close to Poland and the Czech Republic .
I know full well here that it would certainly make more sense to do something towards stabilisation within the police than to introduce something like this .
( PT ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking Vice-President Barrot for his statement , although he is in an unfair position , because it would also be good to hear the Council 's position .
Clearly , it is easier to exercise parliamentary scrutiny of the Commission than of the Council .
In December 2001 , the Commission was given a mandate to introduce the second generation of the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) , which was expected to come into operation in March 2007 .
There have been many problems and delays .
The new system is still not working .
Some people predict that it will not be running before 2012 , while others question the very viability of the project .
There are now delays not only in SIS , but also in the Visa Information System ( VIS ) , as both projects are being developed by the same company .
I must say here that I continue to have confidence in Vice-President Barrot .
In his political life , he has always shown himself to be competent , serious and a true pro-European .
We know that he did not initiate the SIS project ; he inherited it when he accepted a change of portfolio at the request of President Barroso .
However , the services of the European Commission and the company contracted to develop the central system should clearly be held to account .
Parliament has budgetary authority , and we have the right and the obligation to seek an explanation from the European Commission .
Why do we need SIS II ?
We need better control of our external borders , we need more security , we need biometric data , and we need alerts to be interlinked .
Two global technical tests , the so-called milestone tests , are planned , the first on 22 December , and the second in the summer of 2010 .
The aim of the first test is to check the smooth , reliable and effective operation of SIS II under operational conditions , for a period of 72 hours , and to check that the vital core features and data consistency can function without any problems or interruptions .
This raises a number of questions .
First , is there any risk that might jeopardise the implementation of the test in December of this year ?
Secondly , in order to lower the risk , is the possibility of reducing the level of requirements or even the number of states participating in the test being considered ?
Thirdly , can these new tests be considered part of the annual contract with the company , or will they be regarded as additional requirements , incurring extra costs ?
Fourthly , has the detection of problems and technical errors led to additional services being added to the contract ? How much money has been paid out on these grounds ?
Fifthly , what was the total amount of the penalties imposed on the contractor - as mentioned by Vice-President Barrot - for the delays and technical errors that caused the previous tests to be unsuccessful ?
In the sixth place , does the Commission consider that , if there is a switch to implement an alternative solution , this will mean the termination of the contract with Steria ? If this is the case , what implications will it have for the VIS ?
Finally , Madam President , one last question : Is it true that Bulgaria and Romania have given up waiting for SIS II , and their integration into SIS I is already being planned ?
( DE ) Thank you Madam President .
I shall try to keep to my speaking time .
In principle , we welcome the introduction of SIS II and its functionality .
In my time as Minister for the Interior at the beginning of this millennium , I lobbied intensively for this system .
At that time , we were promised that it would be introduced in 2007 , one reason being that we urgently needed it for the new Member States so that they could participate in this security architecture .
The new Member States are here , but SIS II is still not here .
The delay needs to be relentlessly analysed and investigated .
There must also be clear consequences .
We should learn from past experiences for the future .
We must admit that the Commission has done everything to advance the SIS II project , including putting up with less than perfect test results .
However , we must not forget that it makes no sense to make too big a compromise here because it would be at the expense of the stability and reliability of the system .
We should therefore prevent any additional financial burden for the Member States which might come out of the analysis or the tests and any further delay in the system .
What we need for this is 100 % transparency , as well as clear language for those implementing the project on the Commission 's behalf , and that must also mean that , where necessary , there are financial consequences for these project managers .
( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , in 2006 , when the new Member States were waiting to join the Schengen area , we stipulated , and it was stipulated to us , that one of the conditions was that SIS II had to be in operation .
In the meantime , it transpired that the system would be unable to operate at all .
We then heard that the floor was not strong enough to support the weight of the technical equipment and certainly , if the Portuguese Presidency had not come up with a solution for operating the ' SIS one for all ' system , the eight new Member States would still have been waiting to join the Schengen area even now .
Meanwhile , we should remember that new contracts had to be signed , new financial packages had to be found for developing the SIS II system , while the operation of the SIS I + system still has to be financed .
Therefore , in practical terms , we are financing two systems , which is costing European taxpayers no small sum of money .
We are obviously talking about a large investment when it comes to safeguarding European citizens ' safety .
Unlike my left-wing fellow Member , I feel that it can bring about a huge change in terms of quality for the benefit of European security .
I am also curious about the delay given that in 2001 , the system 's development was planned to take five years , from 2002 to 2007 .
We are now talking about it being developed perhaps over 10 years .
Commissioner , it is not possible to have such a degree of uncertainty with a technical system that its development time doubles .
We are well aware that technical gremlins can throw a spanner in the works and that public investment has been delayed , but we ultimately need to ask the question : what is the reason behind this ?
Are not some countries , some Member States in fact , deliberately stalling the SIS II system 's development ?
To simply conclude my question , what guarantee is there that we will not have the same story with the VIS system ?
( PL ) Madam President , in view of the delays and problems in completing work on SIS II , and of forecasts which say that it will not be fully functional by the end of 2011 , and even , as some are saying , by 2015 , it has been decided to conduct tests on SIS II before the end of this year which will assess its functionality .
If SIS II proves to be defective , it is said that an alternative plan will be introduced , based on improvements to SIS I.
This , therefore , raises several questions .
Is the European Commission ready to implement an alternative plan ?
What will be done about the investments made by Member States which have borne costs associated with the purchase of equipment to service the new system ?
Will this equipment be used in the alternative plan ?
Finally , how does the Commission intend to exact contractual penalties on those responsible for the project ?
Madam President , I cannot reply to all of the questions that have been put to me , given that we find ourselves at a difficult moment in time .
With regard to VIS , it is the tests which affect the central system and which must be performed by 11 November , and for SIS II , it is the milestone , that is to say , this criterion that must be fulfilled by the end of the year .
Firstly , I am very grateful to all of the speakers .
I want the European Parliament to have full access to all of the information .
I would remind you that these two major systems were devised by the Member States precisely so that they could enjoy freedom of movement in secure conditions , as Mr Busuttil and Mr Moraes , in particular , pointed out .

I would firstly like to try to respond on VIS , and in particular to Mrs Ludford , who , as rapporteur , has taken a particular interest in this problem .
What we can say is that tests will be carried out on VIS by 11 November , and these tests will tell us whether we ought to change course .
Until now , VIS can be thought of as having a sound architecture and , in fact , a few bugs , but ones that can be put right .
Nevertheless , it is these tests that will show whether we need to terminate the contract with the contractor .
It is too soon to tell , but the timetable would be reviewed accordingly in that instance .
I would point out that , in 2005 , the Council decided that VIS had to be rolled out in a consistent and coordinated fashion by the Member States .
That is why the VIS regulation stipulates that the system will begin operating in the first region on the date set by the Commission once all of the Member States have notified it that they have made all the technical and legal adjustments necessary to use VIS in that region .
This means that VIS will begin operating in the first region - North Africa , which covers the countries presenting the biggest risks in terms of illegal immigration and security - on the same date for all the Member States .
This leads me to say that it really is important for all of the Member States to be able to get up and running and manage VIS because it would be extremely damaging if the central system proved to work normally but we were forced to extend the deadline even further because of these delays on the part of a few Member States .
Hence , I am somewhat insistent on this point .
I note that Mrs Ludford made particular reference to the problem of the Olympic Games .
I sincerely hope that we will have made progress by then .
However , it is true that provision has been made for the United Kingdom to connect to SIS I + ahead of the Olympic Games , if such action proves necessary .
What I would also like to say is that , with regard to visa applicants , we sincerely hope not to deviate too much from the deadline that was set , since that is very important for us , and the serious risk of people ' shopping ' for visas at consulates may increase if we delay VIS too much .
Mrs Ždanoka talked to me about biometric data and controlling access to the system .
I think that we will have an opportunity to discuss this again , but these controls will be subject to a number of clear rules .
I noted that Mrs Ernst is against the system , but I wish to remember what Mr Kirkhope told me , also .
I now come to Mr Coelho .
Mr Coelho is well acquainted with SIS II , and I would like to try to answer some of his questions while keeping the option open to write to him in order to give him the other answers to his seven questions .
What I can say is that the Commission opened the contractual negotiations with its co-contractor and that those negotiations were focused on two areas : the commissioning of the additional services and equipment required to perform the test of the first milestone , and an amendment to the basic contract to enable the milestones within SIS II to be formalised by contract .
We reached an overall agreement at the end of July .
We reached an overall agreement at the end of July , and it is true that the co-contractor pointed out that there were specifications that seemed to make the achievement of this first milestone a very complicated business .
Nonetheless , we signed a contract with the contractor that stipulates that this milestone must be achieved .
The analysis and repair period made it clear , however , that SIS II was built on solid , though at times excessively complex , foundations , and that , although some efforts needed to be made , the system was repairable .
This in-depth analysis enabled us to identify several ways of improving the system , but it is true , Mr Coelho - and I say this to the whole of Parliament also - that we have a very ambitious project before us in this area , and that it is not easy to see exactly what is going to happen .
I can say , however , that we have imposed contractual penalties on the Hewlett-Packard-Steria consortium in order to punish it , on the one hand , for its inability to bring the system up to the contractually required level at the end of the contractual phase of the operational tests on the ST and , on the other - for the time being , in any case - for the delays caused in the internal VIS tests .
Both of these projects are governed by the same contract , so the penalties are deducted equally from the invoices for SIS II and for VIS .
These penalties amount to almost EUR 3.5 million , and the penalty meter keeps on ticking in the case of VIS , while that of SIS II has been switched off since the start of the analysis and repair exercise begun in January .
Should these projects have to be abandoned , the co-contractor will obviously have to bear the corresponding costs .
Madam President , as things stand , and given what I said in respect both of VIS , about the tests that are going to take place by 11 November , and of SIS II , about the aim of confirming , via the end-of-year milestone , whether the architecture really is viable , I am unable to provide a more precise answer , since we are now at the stage of carrying out these tests and of preparing for the milestone .
I wish to say that Parliament is welcome to help us spur on the co-contractor .
As you have seen , I am very determined and I have become personally involved in this matter .
I hope that , as in the case of Galileo , I will succeed more or less in saving both of these projects , which are very interesting in technological terms and which would enable Europe to benefit from a high-performance system , but I cannot be sure of that yet , this evening .
Parliament is also welcome to help us spur on the Member States : as regards VIS , we are finding that the longest delays are being caused at the moment by a few Member States .
Madam President , I am well aware that I have not answered every single question , but I remain fully at Parliament 's disposal to provide all the information that the MEPs and , in particular , those who put questions to me this evening , want , as and when I receive it .
Thank you for your reply , Commissioner .
I have received three motions for resolutions to wind up this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.00 on Thursday , 22 October 2009 .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was suspended at 20.45 )
Opening of the sitting
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Decision on urgent procedure
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , here we are once again discussing the crisis in the milk sector .
The dramatic nature of this crisis continues to concern us , just as European farmers continue to express their hardship and voice their fears for the future .
Parliament has already expressed its views on this matter , both by adopting a resolution with our proposals and by adopting the Commission proposal to extend the intervention period for milk powder and butter , to which we added the request for the measure on the private storage of cheese .
At that time , we pointed out that the measures proposed by the Commission did not go nearly far enough .
We now have to decide whether or not to allow the urgent procedure for the extension of Article 186 of the single CMO Regulation to the dairy sector , namely the possibility for the Commission to decide , in the event of a market crisis , to implement emergency measures without going through the normal procedure in Parliament .
Yesterday evening , an extraordinary meeting of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development was held to discuss this , with Mrs Fischer Boel attending .
Firstly I , and the committee which it is my honour to chair , would like to thank the Commissioner for coming to us in Parliament right at the end of the Agricultural Council which was held in Luxembourg .
This gesture was one of great attentiveness which we appreciated .
Yesterday evening , the debate was very spirited , Mr President , and our fellow Members voiced a lot of criticism .
First of all , it was pointed out that the Commission was very slow to act , and did not adequately grasp the seriousness of the crisis under way .
Then the objection was raised that Article 186 deprives Parliament of its decision-making prerogatives , thereby giving carte blanche to the Commission .
It was also said that the Commission should have made more funds available to tackle the crisis .
These are legitimate concerns which we agree with in part .
Nevertheless , Mr President , I feel compelled to admit that the Commission has made considerable efforts and progress , showing that it takes Parliament 's opinion and wishes seriously .
It has explained how it intends to use a fund of EUR 280 million - which , I would remind you , we will be voting on this Thursday in the context of approval of the 2010 budget - and set out some of the measures it will implement , such as the private storage of cheese and raising the ceiling of de minimis aid from EUR 7 500 to EUR 15 000 , as requested in our resolution which was adopted in September .
Although I am aware that all this still does not go far enough , I nevertheless believe , Mr President , that today we should vote in favour of the urgent procedure .
European farmers expect immediate answers and too much time has already been wasted .
Today we must take responsibility for speeding things up in order to face the crisis head on .
Let us show , ladies and gentlemen , the same responsibility which pervades our preparations for the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon with codecision in agricultural matters .

( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are arguing against the urgent procedure , not because we do not believe that there is an urgent need for measures , but because we believe that the Commission is not implementing the right measures and is not willing and able to solve the current crisis in the dairy sector .
The Commission is not part of the solution to the problem , but is actually the problem .
We must point out , therefore , that the Commission has caused part of the problems itself by increasing the quantity of milk .
It failed to react in any way for months as the crisis went on .
The Commissioner told us as recently as four weeks ago that there were no problems , that the market would improve and that we must be patient .
This , of all Commissions , is the Commission to which we are handing our powers and this , of all Commissions , is the Commission from which we are expecting help .
No , I do not think that is the right way to proceed .
Even yesterday , the Commission was unable to tell us what the additional funds are to be spent on .
The Commission talks of restructuring .
Over recent years , all restructuring has meant has been fewer and fewer dairy farmers .
The Commission has also failed to say how it intends to reinforce the producer organisations going forwards .
No , it wants to continue paying out export refunds .
We have also heard no answer about how we are to strengthen the producers ' position in their struggle against the supermarkets .
The Commission was unable to put forward any solution in this regard yesterday either .
In the light of all this , we are highly doubtful that the Commission is wholeheartedly working to resolve this crisis .
We are writing a blank cheque without knowing what the Commission is doing , how it is doing it and with what it intends to do it .
Yet another issue was the crucial reason for our decision to reject this procedure , however .
We , Parliament , have long been fighting for more rights - particularly in the field of agriculture .
Yet just as we are on the verge of the Treaty of Lisbon being ratified , the first thing we do is to give these rights away again !
That simply cannot be allowed to happen .
As a new Member of this House , this strikes me as somewhat extraordinary .
We must exercise our rights , we must hold the debates in this House and we must keep our hand on the tiller .
We , too , have responsibility here , I am happy to accept that .
We must not , however , give up any responsibility .
Rather , as parliamentarians , that responsibility is our calling .
We must provide the dairy farmers with serious and long-lasting help .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the request to use the urgent procedure put forward by the Commission is certainly not perfect .
I can partially agree with what the previous speaker said .
However , to not allow this request to use the urgent procedure now would send completely the wrong signals to the dairy farmers , who are expecting at least initial responses .
That is why I support this request to use the urgent procedure .
In the course of this procedure , we will have the opportunity to improve the motion by means of amendments and , as Mr Häusling suggested , to cede powers .
It is absolutely the case that there are possibilities to put a time limit on these powers so that we only give the Commission a power for two years before we then decide on the matter again .
I would therefore ask for your support in order to put this request for use of the urgent procedure on the agenda .
( Applause )
Climate change and developing countries in the framework of the UN Conference on Climate Change in Copenhagen ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on climate change and developing countries in the framework of the UN Conference on Climate Change in Copenhagen .
Mr President , we are at a decisive point in time .
In just under two months ' time , the world will sign an agreement in Copenhagen for combating the climate challenges that we face .
This agreement must meet three conditions : it must keep global warming to less than two degrees Celsius , it must encompass all nations and it must adapt future efforts to higher levels of ambition as new knowledge becomes available .
With just 48 days left to the opening of the UN 's major Conference on Climate Change , it is high time that political will was transformed into concrete actions .
Negotiations are moving too slowly , however .
A number of key issues have not yet been resolved .
Many people are now taking the easy way out - by giving in to pessimism .
Let me make one thing clear : that is not what the EU is here to do .
We want the EU to show leadership by expressing a clear , unequivocal political will .
A comprehensive and ambitious agreement on climate change has the very highest priority for the Swedish Presidency .
The EU 's response to the negotiating difficulties is that we must step up the pace .
We must drive things forward to ensure that the world reaches the agreement required .
We will take on the challenge of bringing the other nations of the world with us into an agreement that is sufficiently capable of meeting the challenge of climate change .
We are therefore taking an intensive two-track approach : firstly , sending a powerful message to our negotiating partners ; and secondly , bringing the EU together behind a strong negotiating mandate ahead of the Copenhagen conference .
The EU has already laid the foundation for this with the climate and energy package agreed on by the European Parliament and the Council in December 2008 .
I would like to express particular thanks for the commitment shown by many here in Parliament in the work on the climate and energy package .
The decision made by the European Parliament at that time places the EU in a strong negotiating position .
This week , the final pieces will be put in place to provide a complete picture of this strong position .
The negotiations will be concluded in the European Council next week and I know that many of you will be following this closely .
I am pleased that some of you will also be able to be present in Copenhagen .
I also welcome the resolution that the European Parliament is in the process of preparing .
Emissions must be restricted to the level required to keep global warming down to less than two degrees Celsius .
This means that the bids currently on the table are not enough .
The EU will reduce emissions by 30 % by 2020 provided that other parties also make adequate commitments .
We view the 30 % goal as a way of leveraging others to join us in raising their ambitions .
Emissions should be cut by at least 80 % by 2050 .
However , measures by the EU alone are not enough to ensure that global warming does not exceed two degrees Celsius .
We need to get everyone on board .
We have seen promising signals , for example , from the new government in Japan .
We now urge other developed countries - not least the US - to raise their bids .
The developing countries have an opportunity to achieve sustainable development while , at the same time , reducing emissions .
This means planning low-carbon growth , integrating climate measures and adapting national development strategies .
It is a way of making sure that climate and development measures are incorporated into all political decisions and ensuring that growth benefits everyone ; a way of constructing and opening up democratic governance , contributing to equality and fighting and reducing poverty .
We make particular demands of the fastest-growing developing countries - not least China , which is the country with the highest emissions .
Emissions need to be cut by approaching 30 % by 2020 compared with the situation where no measures are taken .
Development issues must be absolutely central in the agreement reached in Copenhagen .
The European Council has concluded that climate change is undermining efforts to combat poverty and achieve sustainable development .
Climate change poses a threat to the Millennium Development Goals .
Experts in development will also take part in the negotiating work .
We will particularly highlight development issues within the context of the ongoing negotiations .
All nations - except those that are least developed - should share responsibility for the costs of measures to combat climate change , but those of us in the developed countries must take the lead by ourselves reducing emissions and financing important measures .
We need a sustainable international structure for cooperation and support for developing countries .
Such a structure would also allow us to assist the very poorest and most vulnerable countries , which are often the hardest hit by climate change .
Adaptation measures are required in this regard .
Finally , let me state that the EU is prepared to take its responsibilities seriously .
The Council is aware of the scale of the financing required .
The Commission estimates that the costs will amount to nearly EUR 100 billion per year in the developing countries by 2020 .
We in the EU are also prepared to provide prompt financing for immediate measures in the period up to 2012 , as a way of increasing trust between North and South in the climate negotiations .
We face a great challenge in these final weeks leading up to Copenhagen .
I am therefore asking you to set the pace .
We need leadership from the governments of the Member States , efforts by national parliaments and support from the populations of the EU Member States .
The European Parliament has a very important part to play in this work if we are to achieve our goals in Copenhagen .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first of all thank you for giving me the opportunity to express the Commission 's views on this sensitive issue .
You are already aware that there will be no ambitious deal in Copenhagen if the concerns of the developing countries are not taken into account , not only those of emerging countries , but also very much the concerns of the most vulnerable and the poorest developing countries .
Nevertheless , reaching a good deal in Copenhagen is in our common interest .
Developing countries are the most vulnerable countries to climate change .
The EU is the first donor in the world and a leader in the fight against climate change .
We have to combine our efforts .
There is no place for North-South confrontation when you are dealing with climate change .
I would even go further and say that no other alliance can be as determining and effective as the one engaging the most vulnerable countries and the ones who have put on the negotiating table the most ambitious proposals to fight this plague - that is to say , Europe .
Our general approach towards the most vulnerable countries , followed up to now through the Global Climate Change Alliance , is made up of three parallel strands , which are interlinked and are mutually reinforcing .
First , building political alliances through reinforced dialogue on climate change .
Three joint political declarations have been signed respectively with Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific , plus one with the ACP group as a whole .
Second , promoting sound policies and strategies linking climate change and development .
I am of the opinion that climate resilience and low-carbon policies must be integrated into wider developments and the poverty reduction strategies of our partners .
There can only be a single development strategy , which incorporates climate concerns pursuing the objectives of sustainable development and poverty reduction .
It is not a matter of choosing one or the other : both are essential .
In this spirit , we already support the implementation of the existing national adaptation programmes of action of LDCs in 15 eligible countries .
Third , encouraging adequate EU contribution to finance climate actions , in particular , for adaptation , which is the priority concern for those countries that are most vulnerable to climate change impact , but who barely contribute to greenhouse gas emissions .
We are only 50 days away from Copenhagen .
Expectations are very high .
And we are worried because the negotiations are dangerously close to deadlock at the moment .
It is now the time for putting offers on the table .
That is what Europe has done , and that is what we expect our partners to do as well .
Firstly , we have made offers in terms of commitments .
The EU has already put on the table ambitious targets and commitments - so far , the second most ambitious on the table of negotiations .
We have already guaranteed a unilateral 20 % emission reduction by 2020 , and we are committed to increase to 30 % if comparable efforts are made by others according to their responsibilities and capabilities .
Second , offers in terms of financing .
We are all conscious that a deal on financing will be crucial to achieving an agreement in Copenhagen .
To move forward in the negotiations , the EC issued in mid-September its own proposals on finance .
One of them is the need for short-term international public funding for climate to be scaled up for the period 2010-2012 to respond as a priority to urgent needs identified in the most vulnerable developing countries and , in particular , LDCs , SIDs , and African countries as defined in the Bali Action Plan .
Another one is the readiness of the EU to take on its fair share of the estimated financing requirements , public funding contributions being based on preferred criteria of ability to pay and responsibility for emissions .
This may lead to an EU contribution between EUR 2 billion and EUR 15 billion annually in 2020 .
These proposals will be discussed by the European Council at the end of October and will hopefully be the basis for a fully-fledged EU negotiation position on finance .
But action by the EU alone is not enough .
We strongly hope that other developed countries will follow our paths as the pressure grows before Copenhagen .
We count on developing countries as well .
They have to take the opportunity offered by climate financing to fully integrate adaptation into their development strategies and to move gradually to low-carbon development paths for the longer term .
Although the focus has been , up to now , on adaptation for the poorest and most vulnerable developing countries , there is some ground to promote the design of low-carbon development paths ( i.e. mitigation ) , which are compatible with poverty reduction objectives in those countries .
A specific focus on mechanisms to avoid deforestation and promote sustainable management of forests is crucial .
Indeed , the fight against tropical deforestation is the largest immediate mitigation challenge for the LDCs , and they can be beneficiaries , through mechanisms such as reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation schemes , of its international financing .
Similarly , ensuring in the future a more balanced distribution of the CDM ( clean development mechanisms ) investments in favour of the LDCs should also be part of the current reflection on the reform of this mechanism .
Finally , a word on the delivery channels for climate funding .
We as the Commission are not in favour of creating new funds .
New funding for climate should use existing and potentially improved delivery channels , promoting a decentralised bottom-up governance structure in support of country-owned actions .
Mr President , I am very pleased to see you here for this debate , particularly as you are a former member of the Committee on Climate Change .
President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , it is absolutely right that the European Union should send a clear signal to Copenhagen .
Over the next 50 days , however , it is not so much in Copenhagen , but behind closed doors at the conference that the real activity will take place .
I have been involved with this since the climate conference in Rio in 1992 .
The mood before these conferences is always the same , but there are also opportunities .
Commissioner , I would like to see you engaged somewhat more enthusiastically in putting your US colleagues under a positive pressure to negotiate , as you continue to exude a certain phlegmatic quality that we need to work on .
I think it is right that we should not start with some sort of financial competition now .
One party says 15 billion , another says 30 billion .
There are some who simply put up the money , who want to put 150 billion on the table each year , starting now .
Let us develop criteria for how the money is used .
We will then be able to provide a large contribution from Europe , but it cannot be a bottomless pit .
Enough has been said about the crisis .
I would like , however , to once again go into the opportunity that the industrialised world in the United States and Europe has .
If we lay down the right standards , we will be able to develop efficiently .
That will then enable Europe to sell efficient machinery across the globe , for example , to China , where , at the moment , for example , energy is produced in the most inefficient ways .
I also do not see only the threat of climate change but also very much the opportunity to drive forward business and the economy through developing ultra-modern technology .
We must seize this opportunity , we must be much bolder and we must act as entrepreneurs , as political entrepreneurs , because if we do not do so , then we will be being neglectful and we will have chosen the wrong path .
Commissioner , I wish you a great deal of luck and all power to your elbow !
Go forward positively !
Take the Americans and the Indians with you , and we will already be half way there .
Mr President , climate change is responsible for more than 300 000 deaths each year .
It affects 325 million people , and more than 90 % of the people affected , more than 90 % of the deaths , are in developing countries .
The economic losses due to climate change are estimated at more than USD 125 billion per year and , once again , 90 % are borne by developing countries .
These countries are being hit at the same time by the financial crisis , climate change and the extremely unequal mechanisms of a form of unbridled capitalism that plunders them in every corner of the world .
So , what are we calling for ?
Firstly - and it is true , as you said , I am addressing the Council here - large-scale and long-term action to combat climate change , which means having a new , more ambitious Kyoto Protocol , and that is why the Copenhagen Summit in December is so important ; secondly , an increase in the financial aid for the commitments already made so as to attain 0.7 % of GDP by 2015 ; and , lastly , thirdly , legal protection for these new environmental refugees who are starting to flood in .

For what are we going to do with them ?
To where are we going to return them if , by chance , they want to enter Europe ?
To Libya , as this trade agreement that I invite you to study , Mr De Gucht , this future agreement that we will have with Libya , proposes ?
We absolutely must establish a proper plan and proper means of managing the flows of environmental migrants and we must bridge the legal gaps that affect the protection of these migrants .
I believe that we have a huge responsibility because it is clear that there is much more at stake here than solidarity ; we really are dealing with the future of this planet .
Mr President , we MEPs have a twin responsibility towards , firstly , our citizens , who expect us to make real efforts in Copenhagen , and , secondly , the countries of the South , of which Europe has always been a supporter , if not the supporter , at international level .
We must send out a genuine message to the countries of the South by means of a clear financial commitment that will permit an aid package to be agreed on in addition to development aid , which absolutely must reach the agreed level , i.e. 0.7 % .
The Union 's contribution should not be less than EUR 35 billion per year by 2020 and , from 2010 , between EUR 5 and 7 billion should be made available to the countries of the South to cover the most urgent requirements .
My second point concerns the method of financing .
We will not limit ourselves - we will be unable to limit ourselves - to the existing funds alone .
Other methods of financing will have to be found , because if there is no money in Copenhagen , then there will be no ambitious agreement in Copenhagen either .
This will most probably mean - even though the subject is very controversial - that we will have to raise the issue of a tax , a kind of ' green Tobin tax ' , to finance the fight against climate change .
Thirdly , on the matter of deforestation , which I would point out accounts for 20 % of today 's greenhouse gas emissions , it is absolutely imperative that we uphold the target of zero gross deforestation by 2020 .
I would draw your attention to the difference between gross deforestation and net deforestation , which would enable primary forests to be replaced with poplars , the idea being that it produces the same result .
We all know that it does no such thing .
It is true that we do need to be realistic about our industry , but we also need to be realistic about our survival and that of our children .

Mr President , Mr Carlgren , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that the world 's future will be at stake in Copenhagen , but before that , it is the credibility of the European Union , as the global leader in the fight against global warming , that will be at stake at the end of October in Brussels .
The Member States must make climate-related financing proposals that are proportionate for a tragic situation .
Together with the commitment - which I hope will be ambitious - to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , the issue of financing and of reducing and adapting to climate change in developing countries will represent a major theme in the forthcoming negotiations .
The figures speak for themselves : 100 countries , most of them poor , account for only 3 % of global emissions .
Although developing countries have contributed the least to these greenhouse gas emissions , they are already the worst affected .
According to a recent report by Oxfam , 26 million people have already been forced to migrate due to the effects of climate change or other forms of environmental damage .
By 2050 , these climate refugees could number more than 200 million .
The effects of climate change could destroy the progress made in some developing countries and could quite simply prevent the Millennium Development Goals from being achieved .
This is therefore not a question of charity .
It is a question of us accepting our full responsibility and laying the foundations for a fair and peaceful world .
The European Union 's current strategy is unworthy of the ambitions declared by the leaders of environmental diplomacy .
It must lay its cards on the table now in order to relaunch the negotiations .
The Union cannot reasonably pledge less than EUR 35 billion in public finances .
It goes without saying that these funds can only supplement those already pledged for official development assistance , all the more so because the commitments made in this area are not always honoured by our Member States .
Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the future of our planet is in our hands .
If we do not stop the damage being done to our environment and the inequalities , we can fear the worst .
We have a choice between an ambitious and proactive Europe and a timid Europe that is aligned with the United States , which cares little about the fate of developing countries .
I urge you to make the right choice .
Mr President , Mr Carlgren , Commissioner , I would like to begin by responding to the previous speech .
I do not believe that the European Parliament or the European Union should restrict themselves to modest ambitions in this area .
A year ago , we completed the preparation of a climate package which is clearly the most advanced and most ambitious of its kind in the world .
We should also acknowledge the fact that it will have perhaps the greatest economic impact of any legislation that has been passed here in the last decade .
When I read through the declaration drafted by the European Parliament for Copenhagen , I see things there that I like .
The declaration talks of the need to strengthen the role of the European Parliament , of the need to get ready for adaptations to climate change and we can surely all agree with the article on deforestation , in connection with which I would like to stress that deforestation is not , and has not been , a problem just of the developing world , but is also a European problem , so we must focus our attention on it .
What is missing , however , is a reference to the need for global agreement , as has been pointed out both by the Council representatives and the Commission representative who is present here .
Without a global agreement , we will go nowhere .
We talk here about assistance for the poorest countries , which is all very well , but if you look at the current numbers for greenhouse gas production , you can see clearly that even if we were more ambitious in Europe and actually disconnected all of our energy sources , it would not change anything at all in terms of climate change as it is simply impossible for us to slow down this phenomenon .
We know there is a need today to talk not only about China , which is repeatedly mentioned , but also about other rapidly developing economies such as Mexico , Brazil , South Africa and particularly India .
I cannot imagine what India 's next steps will be and what I have heard so far has not , I must admit , been very pleasing .
I would like to emphasise in this Chamber that if we do not reach a global agreement , then all of our efforts will simply amount to a burden on the European economy and a masochistic annihilation of European competitiveness .
Mr President , we must give support to developing countries to help them adapt to climate change - a phenomenon for which they are not responsible , but as a result of which they are suffering disproportionately .
Developing countries do not have the resources to combat climate change that we have in Europe .
As we turn our attention to the United Nations negotiations in Copenhagen , what we need is solidarity that is real and practical .
This solidarity must be demonstrated through financial and technical support .
This support must be in addition to our Overseas Development Aid .
We should not give something with one hand while taking it away with the other .
The countries must have a full participatory role , no matter what financial mechanisms are in place to distribute this financial support .
One of the most important ways in which we should measure any deal made in Copenhagen is to look at the way in which it helps the developing world deal with the challenge of climate change .
For example , significant help to combat deforestation will be vitally important in a comprehensive agreement .
Without financial solidarity and the transfer of technology , we will not see the progress which we all need .
There is no doubt that climate change is accelerating .
No further time can be wasted .
If climate change is not dealt with , it will result in disasters all over the world .
The economic recession should give us the courage to move more quickly towards a green economy .
Our scientific approach should not be changed .
We should not back down from the courage and political will we have shown hitherto .
Actions that will be carried out at international level must be ambitious and tied to the scientific reality of our own weather , and we most move ahead with the understanding that it is not the developing countries who created that problem .
We created it ourselves .
Mr President , last night , to great applause , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety adopted a Christmas list for the climate change conference in Copenhagen in December .
The list includes a lot of well-intentioned , large and heavy presents .
But , dear Santa Claus , a.k.a. the Commission : is there any chance at all of all these well-intentioned desires being realised , when 500 million US citizens have health , pensions , jobs and welfare on their agenda , and 2.5 billion Chinese and Indians just want the same living standards that some of us here in western Europe have ?
We have no influence on what the Sun does .
As we all know , it determines a great deal of the climate on our planet .
To put it another way : what can the Commission realistically do to make all 6 billion people on this Earth use fewer resources , not in the future but right here and now ?

Mr President , there are two overriding themes in this place : first , concern with the growing gulf between the political elite and the ordinary taxpayers .
Second , a hysterical obsession with man-made global warming .
These two themes are intimately linked .
The global-warming fixation is a classic example of how the political class here is out of touch with the little people who have to pay the bills .
While the EU backs the Copenhagen proposals to further the deindustrialisation of the West and the corporate domination of the Third World , a growing majority of ordinary people regard climate change as an elite scam - an excuse to tax and control us and to impose internationalist dogma and global government at the expense of the nation state .
Can you not see the danger in this growing gulf ?
It is time to look at the facts .
Man-made global warming is an unproven theory based on manipulative statistics .
The so-called consensus on the issue is the product not of debate but of the suppression of expert dissent .
Before the political class and the green industrial complex dare to impose a single new tax , poisoned light bulb or useless wind farm on the ordinary taxpayer , they need to try to convince the public that global warming is man-made , that returning to the warmer climate of medieval times would be a bad thing and that there is something that Europe - as opposed to the United States , China and India - can actually do about it .
Either hold a debate and close the gap between you and the people , or do not complain when we nationalists - the ones who listen to the people - close it for you .
Mr President , I would like to thank more or less everyone who has taken part in this debate for the support you are giving the EU in its highly important work in the climate negotiations .
The EU has a vital responsibility .
We will really need Parliament 's support if we are to successfully play our part .
The efforts and views of Parliament are crucial to this work .
Can I also state outright that I very much appreciate the fact that development issues have been so central in this part of the debate .
I agree with Mr Florenz 's comment that it is incredibly important that this does not simply become a ' beauty contest ' .
It is not a London auction in which our task is to outbid each other .
Rather , it is about creating a robust architecture that genuinely creates foreseeable and extended initiatives for developing countries in the long term .
In this context , the very strong work of the EU is vital .
Consequently , I also agree with Mrs de Keyser 's challenge to developed countries to finally meet the 0.7 % goal for development aid .
Ultimately , this is a matter of solidarity .
As one of the wealthier regions of the world , the EU has good reason to demonstrate its strength and solidarity .
I would also say to Mrs Lepage that I absolutely agree that there is a need for new , increased and foreseeable initiatives and resources .
However , Official Development Assistance will also play a part in ensuring that development issues are integrated with climate policy .
Consequently , both ODA resources and new funding will be required .
One crucial development issue is ending the deforestation of rainforests .
I would like to see strong support in Copenhagen for initiatives to combat rainforest deforestation and to promote reforestation and sustainable forestry .
The system currently being constructed under the name REDD ( Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation ) will be of vital importance in this context .
I believe that those who deny the climate problem are actually passing on the bill to the ordinary people .
Moreover , it is a way of hiding the problem and of hiding the reasons why ordinary people are having to pay the price of climate degradation .
This is the case in developed countries - and it is even more the case in developing countries , where the very poorest are likely to be those hit hardest by climate degradation .
That is why we are turning to the group of developed countries as a whole .
As Mr Florenz says , we need to cooperate with major nations such as the US .
However , pressure is also needed to increase efforts to drive home the message that emissions must be sufficiently reduced .
That is why it is so important for the EU to get to the heart of the emissions problem , i.e. the actual increases in emissions .
We have the most ambitious and the most far-reaching targets in the world .
It is now a matter of making sure that we get others to join us in taking measures at the level required to save the climate .
The economic crisis provides an excellent opportunity to increase investments in green initiatives ; in other words , in new green products , in new companies with green production , in growth companies with green production , and in new jobs created through green initiatives .
It is also a way of rejuvenating our economies .
We must take the lead in the offensive towards a low-carbon society , which will also create the conditions for real development opportunities in developing countries .
We must make it possible for developing countries to bypass the fossil fuel-dependent economies route taken by the developed countries and to create low-carbon growth for the future instead .
It is also a way of finally turning to the rapidly growing developing economies and telling them that developed countries have a responsibility for the poorest and most vulnerable ; but the fastest growing economies among the developing countries - and China already accounts for the world 's highest emissions - must also shoulder their responsibility and make a contribution to solving the climate problems .
With this approach , Europe will be able to play a vitally important role as we lead the way towards an ambitious agreement in Copenhagen .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , firstly , what I have noticed in the debate is that all political groups agree on the principles that we should put forward in Copenhagen .
I think this is a very important feature .
It is not very common in a Parliament with so many political parties and political groups to nevertheless have unanimous support for what you are proposing .
Secondly , Mr Florenz and others have said that there should not be a competition to put bids on the table - it is about commitments .
This might be true but , on the other hand , I think it is important that we have put a bid on the table and said that we are ready to do this , provided , of course , that we get the green light from the European Council later this month .
This is not simply a competition .
It is about an engagement of the European Union .
We look forward to the other political and economic heavyweights also putting bids on the table , which has not been the case up to now for several of them .
We understand that the situation of the United States is not very easy at the moment but it is important that they put a bid on the table so that we can negotiate .
Otherwise , the deadlock that we fear we are in at the moment will continue .
( FR ) I believe that it is true that developing countries are the worst affected , both by the economic crisis , for which they are not responsible , to say the least , and by climate change .
We must offer developing countries a substantial amount of support in this regard .
However , we will not only have to support developing countries in this spirit , but we will also have to be courageous with regard to our own industries and our own economic operators .
When people talk about deforestation in developing countries , this too is a responsibility of our countries , of the European Union .
I believe that , following Copenhagen , we will have to acknowledge the need to adopt laws with extraterritorial aspects so that we are not confronted with a situation in which , on the one hand , we are financing the adaptation to climate change and the mitigation of that phenomenon and , on the other , economic operators are having an opposite effect in developing countries .
A last word on ODA : I think that this is a very important topic that we will also have to tackle amongst ourselves , because one of the biggest fears is that the 0.7 % of GDP would be reached by adding adaptation efforts .
Already now , ODA includes many topics which constitute adaptation , and that is quite normal .
That will continue , of course , but we should find a measuring mechanism by which we can clearly distinguish the present efforts we are making from the additional efforts which have to be made for climate change .
That is something that we will certainly have to come back to after Copenhagen .
( NL ) Mr President , following 10 years of discussion , we are now approaching the Copenhagen climate change conference .
We have 50 days left in which to reach an ambitious agreement with binding targets , not only for Europe but also for the United States and countries such as China and India .
An ambitious agreement requires adequate financial resources - as was mentioned a moment ago in this debate - and these not just from the European Union .
All countries will have to provide financial resources so that developing countries , too , can participate in a climate agreement .
After all , solidarity with the very poorest must be firmly embedded in any climate deal .
The Commission has rightly taken the lead on financing , but what Mr Florenz was mainly driving at was that , in this House , we are pretty much trying to outbid one another as to who gives the most , and the question is whether this is really helpful .
You have rightly challenged the Member States to participate , and I also commend the Swedish Presidency on its efforts .
Yet the United States and the emerging economies , too , must put their hands in their pockets .
You can count on our support .
Much remains to be done in Europe , too , however .
Although we are among the world leaders when it comes to our emission standards , we are lagging far behind the United States in terms of private-sector investment in technological innovations and sustainability .
I see positive incentives for green investments and innovations by enterprises as more promising than a new European tax .
After all , particularly at a time when we urgently need more activity and employment , European investors and enterprises must be increasingly challenged to do their bit towards this necessary transition in Europe and worldwide .
( SV ) Mr President , Mr Carlgren - who is representing the Council here today - started by saying that many people are tending to give in to pessimism ahead of the Copenhagen conference .
I can only agree , and I really hope that a majority of the European Parliament can ensure that the pessimists that Mr Carlgren must do battle with within his own Presidency government and on the Council are not allowed to have the casting vote .
We have to resolve two specific issues if we are to prove the pessimists wrong .
The first , which has already been mentioned , is , of course , the financing of climate efforts in developing countries .
The Commission 's proposal is quite simply not enough .
The EU 's contributions to developing countries must be at least EUR 30 billion per year by 2020 and we must provide substantial support for restructuring measures as early as 2012 .
Naturally , this support must be in addition to regular aid .
Reallocating money that has already been promised would only jeopardise our ability to reach a global climate agreement .
I would like to ask Mr Carlgren whether he has the Council 's backing for his high ambitions .
Secondly , we must take the two degree target seriously .
If we are to succeed in this , it is not enough for the developed world to reduce its emissions of greenhouse gases by 20 % .
I would therefore like Mr Carlgren , as the Council 's representative , to once again state his position on this matter .
Many of us consider it necessary to reduce emissions by between 30 % and 40 % by 2020 .
What level of ambition does the Council have - and does Mr Carlgren have the Council behind him ?
( FR ) Mr President , there are , in my view , three essential points in this debate .
Firstly , the Copenhagen conference is a gamble on the future .
The gamble has not yet paid off , as the Presidency has just pointed out .
I will not go so far as to say that everything depends on the European Union , but without determination and credibility , as Mrs Joly has just mentioned , nothing will be achieved in this area .
My second point is that we must be careful not to add confusion to uncertainty .
The European Union must remain credible when it comes to the impact of climate change on developing countries .
It made a commitment in 2005 concerning the level of official development assistance , which must reach 0.7 % in 2015 .
Skimping on that objective is out of the question .
There can be no question of diluting that promise , either through a reduction in the commitment as I just explained it , or through a reallocation of the amounts paid in official development assistance for the purposes of combating climate change .
It should be pointed out that the sums that are due to be announced in Copenhagen as being earmarked for developing countries must be additional funds .
The sum of EUR 35 billion has just been mentioned ; we are talking here about an additional EUR 35 billion .

The European Union would be well advised not to allow the slightest doubt to remain about its determination to fight for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals , on the one hand , and against climate change , on the other .
Were the European Union to deviate from this path , it would amount to a political breakdown that would undoubtedly undermine developing countries ' confidence in the European Union .
If we even manage to agree on this point , this debate will not have been in vain .
Thirdly , we need the United States , China , India and all of the industrialised countries , but we also need emerging countries and , of course , developing countries .
To that end , it would be wise to think about new North-South partnerships , particularly in the area of alternative energy production .
The use of solar energy to generate electricity in the south of the Mediterranean can become , if we so wish , one of the major North-South projects , in response to the economic crisis , on the one hand , and the climate-change crisis , on the other .
This should not , under any circumstances , undermine the efforts that must be made in the context of combating deforestation , for example , where the responsibility - I am also keen to point out - of emerging countries , some of which are members of the G20 , is overwhelming .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a Finnish poet compared humanity to passengers on a train who are on a journey to hell , but who focus their attention on squabbling over a seat in first class .
Once again , this is a time for EU leadership .
The best way we can help break the deadlock over climate talks is for the EU Summit next week to make an offer to finance climate measures in the developing countries .
Yesterday , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety gave its support for a figure of EUR 30 billion as the EU 's share of financing .
It is obvious that the EUR 2-15 billion proposed by the Commission cannot be enough .
If we are honest , we must recognise our historical responsibility for climate change and that our emissions per capita are still many times greater than those of China or India , for example .
( NL ) Mr President , the climate change summit has to succeed , and so Europe must speak with one voice and set its sights high in the negotiations .
Copenhagen is important because God 's creation is highly vulnerable , and is deeply affected by man 's actions .
Special attention is required for developing countries .
People in these countries make barely any contribution to climate change , but it is they who bear the brunt of it .
Crops wither or are washed away by flooding , villages are destroyed by cyclones , the development of whole regions is set back years in a single night .
Our industrialised countries have greatly contributed to climate change , and therefore bear responsibility for providing developing countries with adequate and sustainable financial and technical support .
The Bali Action Plan put that well .
Therefore , it is also important to make sufficient European funds available ; after all , that is what this is all about .
That is why we are saying that an annual minimum of EUR 15 billion must go into the Climate Fund , plus a contribution from the other major world economies .
They , too , must face up to their responsibilities .
Finally , I am pleased that the President-in-Office of the Council has drawn attention to deforestation .
We consider this an essential area .
Combating deforestation is the best way of reducing CO2 .
( NL ) Mr President , deforestation is often somewhat neglected when climate issues are debated in the light of development aid .
Fortunately , this is not the case in today 's debate in this House .
Forests , including the tropical rainforests , counteract a substantial proportion of CO2 emissions .
Land-use change , such as deforestation and destruction of the rainforest , accounts for at least 18 % of contemporary CO2 emissions .
An equally sinister result of deforestation is that many indigenous peoples in developing countries are driven from their territories and are no longer able to meet their subsistence needs .
Nor does the Clean Development Mechanism ( CDM ) work ; that is , the financing of projects in developing countries in order to be able to emit more CO2 ourselves .
Unfortunately , it is still the way of the world that the interests of rich countries and major industries are deemed more important than social and economic justice .
Deforestation must be stopped , but industrialised countries are morally obliged to give developing countries financial and technical support with this .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , yesterday evening , the Lega Nord delegation was the only political party which voted , in committee , against this resolution .
We voted against as we consider it to be euro-folly .
At a time of industrial crisis such as the one we are experiencing , with the loss of competitiveness and jobs , the idea of funding the technological innovation of third countries that are developing countries equates to sounding the death knell for European businesses .
This text lays down an appropriation of EUR 30 billion a year until 2020 for countries such as China , India and Brazil , which are our most dangerous and dishonest competitors , and , at the same time , asks our industries to further cut emissions , with serious economic consequences .
We cannot transform the legitimate battle to protect the environment into a war between poor peoples .
As long as there are countries like China , which make unfair competition their industrial policy , there can be no eco-sustainable global market .
We in the Lega Nord support the workers , the businessmen and women who , on a daily basis , have to fight the mammoth industrial groups of countries which have no concept of rules .
' Yes ' to the environment but ' no ' to funding our competitors at the expense of our workers .
( HU ) Mr President , opinions vary as to what extent mankind influences climate change .
My view is that we do have an influence , and the purpose of the Copenhagen climate conference is to mitigate this .
I strongly believe that the outcome will be decided in the political domain .
What means can we use to successfully persuade the biggest polluters to cut their emissions ?
We will not do it by promoting the strong message from Europe that we will make cuts of not 20 % , but 30 and 40 % .
We must get the biggest polluter in the world , the United States , to reduce its large-scale pollution .
A decision implementing such an amendment was actually proposed in the relevant committee .
There were many people who optimistically expected that Barack Obama would bring about major changes and travel to Copenhagen .
However , he attended the International Olympic Committee meeting to campaign for Chicago instead .
Without success .
The European Union 's leaders act on behalf of 500 million people on many occasions unnecessarily .
The question is why they are not daring to act more decisively now because it is only with their intervention that we will be able to achieve success on a global issue , something which cannot be done at a local level .
( PL ) Mr President , it was with great unease that I received news of the meeting of finance and environment ministers , and specifically of the draft final document , which does not contain a solution to a key question : how does the European Union want to support the poorest countries of the world in their efforts to limit carbon dioxide emissions and adapt to climate change ?
This is , indeed , a key matter .
In the draft document , there is not even a repetition of the sums which the European Commission is proposing - that the needs of developing countries in this area are estimated at EUR 100 billion annually to 2020 , and what the EU 's contribution to that amount might be .
What is more , there is no decision as to what mechanism of cofinancing by Member States would be introduced , and we know that proposals on this are very diverse .
Of course , we can understand arguments which say that we should be cautious about making specific declarations , and that we should wait for proposals from other countries , especially those which have strong economies .
If , however , the EU wants to be a leader in the fight against climate change , it must present specific proposals and specific solutions , especially because part of the problem is our internal affair , as is the cofinancing mechanism .
It is our duty to negotiate a fair agreement with developing countries .
The poorest countries of the world have contributed to climate change to the least extent and , at the same time , are bearing the greatest consequences of that change .
The significant dependence of many of the poor countries on agriculture and fishing , and also their weak infrastructure , leave them in a very difficult situation when it comes to climate change .
Over the last four years , Africa , which is the poorest continent and one of the most exposed to the consequences of climate change , has received less than 12 % of the funds which are available for fighting climate change .
This is not the way to persuade such countries to become involved in the process .
( NL ) Mr President , in the Pacific region , thousands of people are having to move because their islands are being flooded ; in Sudan , the livestock is dying of thirst .
Everyone has seen the pictures , and the most important thing with regard to these and other effects of climate change is that the polluter must pay .
In Copenhagen this December , the world faces the historic task of giving substance to those words .
However , Oxfam calculates that , to date , three quarters of changes in poor countries have been made by the countries themselves .
Meanwhile , the oil disappears unhindered from these developing countries , often without fair payment reaching their treasuries .
In the future , climate change will cost developing countries more than EUR 100 billion per year .
This money goes not towards development but merely towards creating the preconditions for development , as a Pacific island may just escape submersion thanks to climate policy , or desertification may be prevented , so that people can continue to live and work where they want .
Of course , there are climate measures that can also stimulate the development of poor countries .
Planting trees helps to combat desertification .
At present , however , money for climate policy comes mainly from development-policy funds , and that is unacceptable .
' No new funds , ' says Commissioner De Gucht .
Fair enough , but then it should be ensured that the existing funds are topped up .
The developing countries are now suffering a triple blow .
Most EU countries are failing to keep their own promises with regard to development policy , the economic crisis has meant that less is being invested in poor countries , and the development budget is decreasing .
A fourth point could be added : the poor countries themselves are having to pay for the climate damage they have not caused .
We must break through this logic in Copenhagen by introducing new financing mechanisms .
Development policy must also be coordinated with climate policy from now on .
The two will have to be aligned with each other as never before .
The most important thing is that the developing countries themselves be given a say when it comes to spending the Climate Fund transparently .
This fund must be introduced , therefore , for the EU and for the world .

( FR ) Mr President , we are the main ones responsible for climate change , but developing countries are its main victims , which is why the developed countries , which are also the biggest polluters , will have to make some strong commitments in Copenhagen .
This is necessary for us , but it is even more necessary for the countries of the South .
We have accumulated a debt over a long period of time , particularly with Africa .
That is why we will have to find the right level of financial and technological compensation .
Europe will have to step up to the plate even if it is painful for our fellow citizens .
We will have to help these countries to adapt their economies and to combat climate change , but we will also have to think up a radically different development policy .
Africa needs a protected market if sustainable agriculture is finally to emerge .
Africa needs to protect its forests , its soil and its resources from the plunder of the developed countries .
Copenhagen will only succeed if we can convey this message of shared responsibility and solidarity .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , climate change has already caused 300 000 deaths and will cause millions more in the future .
Inaction is a crime against humanity .
This is an emergency , but the negotiations are at a virtual standstill .
However , countries such as Japan , Australia , Norway , China , Brazil and South Africa are making efforts that are commensurate with their responsibilities .
This is not the case with the United States , and it is unfortunately no longer the case with Europe .
Extending Europe 's ambitions to the entire planet would result in global warming of 4 degrees .
That is totally unacceptable .
However , it is Europe that holds the key to Copenhagen .

Mr President-in-Office of the Council , if the European summit , acting on the European Parliament 's recommendations , takes the right decisions at the end of the month , then Europe can boost the negotiations - with targets of a 30 % reduction and a EUR 35 billion aid package for the countries of the South .
Mr President , the way in which certain Member States today use aid for the countries of the South as a negotiating tool is , in our view , absolutely shocking .
The distress of the countries of the South is not a matter for negotiation .
Mr President , it is critical for an international consensus to be reached on tackling climate change and global warming .
The Copenhagen Summit provides us with an opportunity .
But let us think for a moment of the problems facing this summit .
The US , the world 's biggest economy , has failed to agree to specific greenhouse gas emission reductions for 2020 , and many other developed industrialised nations are uncertain as to whether the ambitious actions required are possible .
Let us be clear : we really have no choice .
The EU , in setting ambitious targets for 2020 and 2050 , has acted courageously and must now urge others to do the same .
We cannot meet our targets without cooperation from other states .
The establishment of an effective global carbon market is crucial , as is international consensus if we are to avoid the risk of protectionist measures relating to CO2 emissions within the EU .
At Copenhagen , we must encourage courageous leadership from the national governments of large industrialised nations .
Although individual states in the US have begun to tackle climate change , there is a woeful lack of leadership from the Federal Government .
We need the US and emerging economies such as India and China to form a partnership with us for the future of our planet .
We can encourage developing nations to follow a different , less environmentally damaging path of industrialisation .
They still have time to take a fresh approach that will be less environmentally damaging , and we must help them in the planning and building of the infrastructure which will achieve this .
( PT ) Mr President , the approach to the problem of climate change has been stripped of certain essential aspects and , above all , skewed by so-called ' market solutions ' .
At present , fossil fuels provide for almost 85 % of the world 's energy needs .
A consistent approach to climate change should focus on reducing this dependence .
Instead , the main tool proposed by the European Union to tackle climate change , carbon trading , will not only fail to help alleviate this dependency ; it will itself prove an obstacle to the necessary change in energy paradigm .
Experience tells us that trading in emission allowances has not led to a reduction in the emission of greenhouse gases ; quite the contrary .
Various examples belie the ability of the market to control emissions , while others demonstrate the effectiveness of normative regulation and targeted investment , particularly in relation to impacts and safeguarding the environment .
The environmental problems that humanity faces today are many and diverse , and are serious enough to threaten the existence of life on earth as we know it , but they are unlikely to find a solution within the irrational system that caused them in the first place .
Mr President , I take this opportunity of wishing well the east European cities in the coming of the very early skiing season , with the snow and ice that have come there .
Of course , this is indicative of the fact that , as independent science has now confirmed , the globe is actually cooling and has been cooling since 2002 , and temperatures have been broadly flat since 1998 .
So we are all talking here about something which is not happening .
Time and time again I have heard Members here talk of CO2 as a pollutant .
A pollutant !
It is a life-giving natural gas .
It gives me the impression that some of our Members have not had the benefit of a formal education .
Isn 't this really just about the state being able to get its hand in ordinary people 's trouser pockets to steal yet more tax from them ?
Isn 't this all about political control ?
Isn 't this all about politics and big business ?
The whole thing is a sham - this bogus hypothesis , this ridiculous nonsense that man-made CO2 is causing global warming .
Enough please , before we damage irrevocably the global economy .
( RO ) I include myself among the MEPs who believe that agriculture is a solution to and not merely a cause of climate change .
I think that it is even one of the victims of this phenomenon because drought and floods are affecting us all in Europe with ever-increasing regularity , but their impact is felt primarily by farmers .
I also include myself among the MEPs who believe that we need a common agricultural policy in the future as well .
We need it so that we can develop new models and new methods of production to restore the agricultural and domestic biodiversity which we had already lost 70 % of at the start of this millennium .
When we talk about agriculture , we are talking about living beings , starting with the soil , then the plants and especially the trees , forests and pasture land .
I would like to think that this is the kind of message and approach which will be in evidence in Copenhagen in two months ' time and that the EU 's policy in this area will be seen in a concrete and strategic manner , as well as in budgetary terms , to treat agriculture as a solution , as I mentioned at the start of this speech .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is politics , and not religion , that we are debating here .
For that reason , we should make a distinction between facts and empirical certainties on the one hand and hypotheses on the other .
It is a fact that the global temperature has risen by around 0.7 ° C when compared with the pre-industrial age .
It is also a fact , however , that the temperature has hardly risen at all over the last ten years .
A further fact is that Copenhagen is an international conference and that the Community 's CO2 emissions make up approximately 17 % of the global total .
The Community has already implemented legislation requiring that its CO2 emissions be cut by 20 % by 2020 .
Now let us consider the hypotheses .
One hypothesis is that the global temperature will continue to rise .
A second hypothesis is that there is a direct connection between CO2 emissions and the CO2 content in the air and the rise in the temperature , while a third hypothesis has it that humanity can have a real influence on this CO2 content in the air .
There are various scientific opinions on this .
This is a dilemma that we , as politicians , are facing , and that we must make a decision about .
It would be useful , however , to take a second observation into account in order to provide orientation for our policy making , and that observation is that all societies which work in a very efficient way with their energy and resources are very successful .
In the light of this it makes sense to operate a policy that makes it possible to be energy and resource-efficient and to do so at Community level so that we can continue to play a leading role internationally from a economic policy point of view , but also to offer help to other States , especially less developed States , to take the same path .
If we now look at the funds transfers that are being discussed in this regard , it is a key point that they should be very well monitored and be tied to conditions , because otherwise all we are doing is opening a second route to development aid .
Mr President , I do not think Godfrey Bloom heard the BNP speaker , but if he had he would have seen that they have so much in common , as I always suspected .
It was almost a carbon copy speech .
We heard something about polling .
In fact , in a recent survey , more than two thirds of Europeans said that climate change was a very serious issue , and 20 % said it was a fairly serious issue .
For the UK , that same figure was 51 % saying it was a very serious issue and 30 % a fairly serious issue .
That is 81 % .
In fact , only 10 % of Europeans said it was not a serious issue at all .
The opinion polls show that people in Europe do care about climate change and they do understand .
That is why all the mainstream parties in this House are backing the Council and the Commission in Copenhagen and why we backed the legislative package last year .
Last night in the Environment Committee , Members voted by 55 to 1 to back an ambitious negotiating position of the European Union in Copenhagen .
On the financing side , which is extremely important this week - and we know the finance ministers are meeting today - we want funds , additionality , no double counting and good governance structures .
Sometimes in life you see things you never forget .
About three years ago , Fiona Hall and I went to northern Kenya .
We went to one of the poorest communities and met pastoralist farmers there .
We met young women - girls - who were being married at ever younger ages in northern Kenya .
Why ?
Because when a young woman gets married in Kenya , in return for her hand in marriage , her father receives cows in payment because cows are the currency .
Cows are becoming a rare commodity in northern Kenya because of climate change .
We will never make poverty history unless we tackle climate change , and this House has a duty to respond to that call .
( SV ) Mr President , if you include the complete production chain , around 40 % of all greenhouse gas emissions come from food production .
You could say that agriculture is the big villain in this context .
We have to understand that agriculture and forestry are probably one of the most crucial areas to look at if we are to get to grips with the emissions problem .
To do so , however , we rich countries must be brave enough to adopt new technology and to move away from our past experience .
We have to change our agricultural policy so that we no longer dump produce on the developing countries ' markets .
Perhaps that would be one of the most useful measures we could take to get Africa 's agriculture standing on its own two feet and to liberate the women of Africa .

( SV ) Mr President , Mr Carlgren , you come here time after time with fine speeches , but what about the actual content ?
In developing countries , the land is drying out and diseases are spreading .
There are growing numbers of climate refugees .
Do you ask them to smile in the face of death ?
You can turn around the pessimism that you on the Council are yourselves creating by making some specific promises .
So I wonder : will you offer EUR 35-40 billion a year in new aid for climate measures ?
Will you rule out nuclear power and carbon capture and storage from projects qualifying for assistance ?
Will you accept compulsory licensing of important green technology to the poorest countries ?
Will you save the forests by refusing the market-based mechanisms of REDD ?
If you can promise all this , then you will also achieve a 40 % reduction - and then we will all leave here with a smile on our faces .
( PL ) Mr President , the position of Parliament on the global division of obligations concerning CO2 reduction unfortunately lacks balance regarding the way the costs of this reduction are to be borne .
By adopting the resolution , we are undermining the climate package , which was so hard to negotiate , and the costs of which currently fall unequally on the Member States of Central Europe .
Adopting the solutions proposed today will increase the inequality still further .
We are trying to force on Member States norms which are lethal to their economies while , at the same time , not requiring anything specific of the countries which bear the greatest responsibility for CO2 emissions on a world scale .
This is unjust and ineffective .
Without proportion on a world scale , we are only increasing the competitive edge of China , India and Brazil .
The resolution goes even further - it proposes subsidising the poorest countries .
The sum of EUR 330 billion until 2020 means a contribution from EUR 16.5 billion up to as much as EUR 40 billion from a country like Poland .
This is political madness , which undermines the economic sense of membership of the European Union .
Furthermore , it is an ineffective method , as is demonstrated by the preparations being made to begin the exportation of electrical power from the Kaliningrad region bordering Poland .
In Copenhagen , it will not be worth signing an understanding in which the burdens associated with limiting CO2 emissions are not spread proportionally on a world scale .
( PT ) Madam President , considering a plan of action for supporting developing countries in terms of climate change is a simple matter of justice and equality .
They are the worst affected countries , yet they are also those who have contributed least to the situation in which we find ourselves .
That is why we have to go beyond a mere declaration of intent .
Going beyond a declaration of intent shows that we are decided and serious about fundamental issues such as financing .
However ambitious our strategy may be , if the funding issues are not clearly defined , we cannot have any kind of concrete policy .
The Council is talking about EUR 100 billion by 2020 .
There are various estimates , including those that mention the need for EUR 120 billion per year , every year , to support developing countries .
We need our own resources , therefore , not just palliatives .
For this reason , it is vital to establish how this financing is going to be implemented , and who is going to provide it .
We must have the courage to tackle this issue and get all the stakeholders involved , while also including the private sector and industry .
Or are we hoping that they will offer to contribute to this undertaking of their own accord ?
( FI ) Madam President , the climate mafia is using gullible green politicians to shift hundreds of millions of euros of the developed nations ' tax resources to supranational companies making huge profits in developing countries , and to state-owned companies in developing countries , in the form of this type of climate charge now being promoted .
For example , China could very easily attend to its obligations itself : it is the world 's richest country in terms of its reserves of foreign currency .
Finland and the European Union need to rescue their own steel , engineering and forest industries by calling for a decision at Copenhagen to be taken to introduce a specific emissions system to achieve climate targets for climate products , instead of the present targets based on percentages and emissions trading .
This is the fairer option .
( Applause )
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to thank the Council and the Commission .
With regard to the subject that we are debating , there are some certainties and a set of uncertainties .
The first certainty , or the first common element , is that there is now a major convergence of opinion that emissions need to be reduced and that clean energy sources need to be developed .
The second certainty is that there needs to be a global approach to or way of dealing with the problem .
Therefore , the countries that emit the most CO2 into the atmosphere need to take part in all international agreements .
The major producers of CO2 include the United States , China , India and Brazil .
The third certainty is that the European Union is putting a proposal on the table that is an obligatory system of targets : 20 % or 30 % .
The fourth certainty is that there are no reasonable signs , for various reasons , that the major CO2 emitting countries are going to accept an agreement of this nature , and that is the reality .
There is not such a lack of optimism if we acknowledge the reality ; pessimism wins the day if we do not know the reality .
It is only by acknowledging the reality that we can create an effective policy , and it will be a more optimistic policy .
I think that the European Union , as it takes the lead on this issue , has a duty to put additional measures and additional proposals on the table .
Japan has been mentioned here , and we have to talk about the success of projects such as the Sector Focus project , which affect the most polluting industries .
On the basis of a process of benchmarking , such projects have achieved extraordinary objectives in Japan .
These are the realistic ways of tackling climate change .
Copenhagen is an opportunity , but it will only be an opportunity for efficiency rather than rhetoric if we base it on reality .
Madam President , Commissioner Olli Rehn has praised this Parliament for its activities in bringing about the climate protection package and , in fact , we aim to continue to be ambitious .
Last night , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety voted 55-1 in favour of adopting a resolution that sets high targets for the negotiations in Copenhagen .
This result shows that the denial of climate change , the ignorance of these matters , is represented by a vanishingly small minority of individuals here in this House whose views really should be disregarded and who have made their views known here on a number of occasions , but who are actually swimming against the tide of opinion of the citizens of all the countries of the European Union .
It makes no difference to the Earth 's atmosphere where the CO2 comes from .
That means that we need a global agreement for every country and not - as is already being argued in Bangkok - multiple agreements , with one for the US , one for Europe and one for the developing countries - that would be disastrous .
We need a global pact against climate change and that means that we also need a global pact of solidarity of the rich countries with the poor ones .
This point has already been made many times .
Climate change represents an opportunity for us and also for the developing countries to set in motion low-carbon development with new technologies , together with the modernisation of the infrastructure .
Europe must help this come about .
When it comes to funding , we have endorsed the demand that the EU needs EUR 30 billion by 2020 and that we must develop funding tools that are durable and predictable .
They must not simply be dependent on funds from the budget , but must also have other sources of funding .
I want to stress , once again , that marine transport and aviation must be included and that , of course , the forests and agriculture have their own , significant share .
Development and climate protection are not opposites - rather , they must be brought together into a synthesis in Copenhagen .
( NL ) Madam President , when all is said and done , there is only one solution to the problem of climate change , and that is technology .
Only new technology can enable us to maintain our way of life .
Yet the development of technology is too slow and its diffusion , especially to developing countries , is particularly slow .
The climate is a global problem , but has not been tackled by sharing the best available technology .
This was a complete failure under Kyoto , and so let us learn the lessons .
We must , of course , take account of intellectual property .
Particularly enterprises at the forefront of such development must be encouraged and rewarded accordingly .
Yet this knowledge must be diffused more quickly .
A fund was established to this end with regard to the ozone problem under the Montreal Protocol , and the idea of a Multilateral Climate Technology Fund has been raised .
Can the Commission and the Council explain their views on this ?
Finally , halting deforestation is particularly important as far as developing countries are concerned , yet I gather that the European Union is now divided as to the role of forests , especially thanks to Sweden , Finland and Austria .
How can we induce developing countries to halt deforestation if the EU itself has an ambiguous attitude towards its own forests ?
I would welcome Mr Carlgren 's comments on this .
( NL ) Madam President , we are talking about climate change , but we should be talking about the people who are hardest hit by it , namely those in the least developed countries .
In the Maldives , people are fighting rising sea levels , and in Sudan they are fighting for fertile land .
The Commission keeps assuming that market actors will make a substantial contribution to climate-change adaptation .
If one talks to all the investors , however , they keep saying the same thing : ' Yes , we are giving money , but mainly to the emerging economies .
We are not going to invest in vulnerable countries . '
After all , these are unstable markets , and the projects involved when it comes to investing in climate-change adaptation are small in size .
This is not the kind of thing investors put their money into .
It must now be made very clear that public funding must be channelled to the least developed countries .
The World Bank states clearly that the amount concerned must be at least EUR 80 billion .
It is time the EU showed serious leadership by making a serious offer rather than offering the vague figure of EUR 2-15 billion .
The EU must simply follow Parliament 's lead and come forward with at least EUR 30 billion .
Madam President , the climate change conference in Copenhagen in December presents us with a unique opportunity to address this massive and huge problem .
If we consider the consequences of global warming , it is obvious that the developing world is paying the price for environmental damage caused by the richer nations .
Climate change is not the only environmental problem we face but it is imperative that we attempt to address it in Copenhagen .
It is the opportunity for the EU to speak with one voice and find solutions to a problem which is affecting us all .
All countries must play their part in terms of achieving targets and sustainable development .
The developing world must be supported and encouraged , but the targets set for these nations must be realistic .
I know that there are others who hold a different view from the one that I hold , but I do not believe that we can afford to wait 50 , 60 or 70 years to find out who was right or who was wrong .
We have a responsibility today to act now to do what we can while we are here .
Madam President , what a relief that they have stopped burning heretics or I would be well and truly alight by now .
I am , though , glowing hot in my opposition to the concept of man-made climate change .
Carbon dioxide accounts for only 0.038 % of our atmosphere and only 4 % of that is influenced by man 's activity .
It is a vital and irreplaceable food for plant life .
The more plants receive , the faster they grow .
A shortage of this gas will be far more serious than a surplus .
The alarmist and incorrect statements that suggest any increase in carbon dioxide will create significant rises in sea levels is being used as an excuse by local authorities not to maintain low-cost wooden sea defences .
When these inevitably rot , after 40 years ' service , nothing is done to repair them and homes are lost .
This is creating an aura of despair among coastal communities .
If computer predictions cannot forecast the weather properly in the short term , they have no place whatsoever in predicting long-term changes .

( SL ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Minister Carlgren and Commissioner De Gucht for the statements which they have given , but there is still something causing me concern .
What concerns me is that we are talking about quantitative targets which will not have to be met until 2020 and 2050 , respectively , while the experts are warning us that we need to start reducing global emissions as early as 2015 .
I would like to know whether perhaps the Commission has overlooked or abandoned this target .
Secondly , we will need to come up with an all-encompassing agreement in Copenhagen , one which includes all countries .
It is not enough for us to impose these ambitious environmental standards on Europe alone , as that will just mean that the technology that causes high emissions shifts to other parts of the world .
I would be really interested to hear from the Commission how it intends to introduce into the negotiations the issue of apportioning the burden equally across developed industrial countries and what arguments it is going to use to encourage developing countries to shoulder their responsibilities .
How are we going to prevent carbon leakage ?
I would really like us to have an ace in our hands , a good card up our sleeves .
Thirdly , I would like to point out that we cannot close our eyes to reality .
Fossil fuels are the main source of emissions and we are not going to be able to ban them in the immediate future .
Expecting countries to abandon coal just like that is unrealistic .
Developed countries are not going to do it and developing countries are even less likely to do so .
This is why we also need to devote a great deal of attention in international negotiations to the continuing development and use of technologies which enable fossil fuels to be used efficiently , without emitting greenhouse gases .
There is one more thing that Europe can do right now : we can increase funding for the Seventh Framework Programme , which has been designed for the purposes of international cooperation on climate change .

( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Carlgren , ladies and gentlemen , the subject of climate change will keep us occupied much longer than the financial and economic crisis .
There are parallels - both cost lots of money , and Copenhagen will be about reaching an agreement on the financial tools for the third world and the developing countries .
The Copenhagen conference must succeed , and we can play our part in achieving that .
Yesterday , we did a good job , we adopted the resolution in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety by a large majority , and I think that the resolution will achieve a large majority here in Parliament , and in so doing , we will change the political climate as Copenhagen approaches .
There is often a psychological side to it , and we should all play our part in that .
I do still have one specific concern .
In the European Parliament , we have worked to get aviation included in emissions trading , and in the end we succeeded .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Council to ensure that this subject is pursued consistently in Copenhagen .
We must achieve international agreement to the effect that shipping , and also aviation , are incorporated into the successor treaty to the Kyoto Protocol .
This is because these two transport sectors are growing to a disproportionate degree and are therefore contributing in a disproportionate way to global warming .
We should not exceed the 2 degree Celsius mark . That , in fact , is where the parallels between the financial crisis and climate change cease .
If we go over this mark , we will have done irreparable damage to our planet and that means that it is damage that we will not be able to reverse .
Madam President , we must look at the opportunities that can flow from striking a comprehensive international agreement in Copenhagen so that we can effectively arrest climate change .
The Union is committing to ensuring that 20 % of all our energy needs will come from the renewable energy sector by 2020 .
Europe - and indeed my own country , Ireland - can become world leaders in developing new and innovative wave and tidal technologies .
The development of such technologies is a vital component of our strategies to achieve our climate change targets .
We must ensure that we maximise funding under the seventh and eighth EU research and technology framework programmes between now and 2020 .
( GA ) The investment in green technology will help to create jobs in Europe at a time of economic crisis .
We know about the great difficulties that will result if we do not accept our international responsibilities .
We know about the challenges ahead of us .
As such , we 'll face these challenges steadfastly and responsibly .
Madam President , do you know Russian roulette ?
Have you ever played Russian roulette ?
Of course not , because you have one chance in six of being killed or injured .
If Copenhagen is not a success , we do not even have a 50 % chance of keeping this planet from going into dangerous climate change .
Why are we in this impossible situation ?
We have basically lost twenty years - twenty years from the big Rio conference , twenty years of being lobbied by dirty industries from oil to coal to cars .
Twenty years of the Centre-Right in the US and in Europe making it too difficult for Greens and others to push an ambitious agenda .
So next week 's European summit in Copenhagen is the last occasion for the Centre-Right in Europe - with the Swedish Presidency of the Council , and Denmark , as well as France and Germany , being ruled by Centre-Right politicians - to act responsibly .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Union is seen as a leader in the international arena in the area of promoting dialogue on action against climate change and setting policy priorities for the reduction of CO2 emissions .
As part of the preparations which are under way for the Copenhagen conference , the European Union has made more pledges than any other region of the world .
To date , not one of the industrial powers - the United States , Japan , Australia - has sent a specific proposal , with specific figures , giving details of aid for developing countries in their efforts to limit CO2 emissions and of support for the development of energy-efficient technologies based on renewable energy sources .
Europe will only be a credible partner in negotiations if it presents realistic , achievable and common-sense proposals , which will be a starting point for reaching international consensus and understanding .
Now Europe needs allies , and support for its existing proposals .
Therefore , we should also be careful about increasing pledges on reduction from 20 % to 30 % , since other industrialised countries are not showing the will to set themselves such ambitious goals , while financial support for developing countries should also be a realistic undertaking .
This must not just be a wish list .
It should be a system of giving aid which complies with the principle of sustainable development , and which should make it possible for the beneficiaries to plan what they do .
There is one more thing , which is significant from the point of view of the citizens of Europe .
We should not forget that the summit in Copenhagen , our resolutions , and the preparations of Parliament for the summit should be accompanied by a clearly defined system of communication with the citizens , with society .
We do not want a barrier or a gap to be created between society and the EU institutions in the system of communicating information about global warming .
Madam President , I will keep my CO2 emissions down and I will be brief .
Commissioner , it is good to see you in place .
Presidency , it is good to see you here .
Talk of 2020 or 2050 is not good enough .
We need agreement and achievement now because climate change is placing poverty reduction at risk .
We are seeing the diversion of ODA budgets away from development .
That is unacceptable and puts at risk the Millennium Development Goals , which must be achieved .
At Copenhagen , we will see 27 countries acting as one to achieve ambitious targets .
We have heard the climate change deniers here in this House .
Let me just say this : there is talk of plants and CO2 ; there is deforestation and desertification .
This means that in some places there is no water .
There are no trees .
Climate change kills .
It is as simple as that .
Let us be clear - Member States should maintain their 0.7 % of GNI for development and cap any use of that GNI at 10 % maximum , and then bring in the additional funds needed to combat and defeat climate change .
Madam President , I am concerned that the Commission 's calculations on international climate finance are just smoke and mirrors .
First , it has claimed that 90 % of energy efficiency measures can be financed by developing countries themselves .
That is EUR 30 billion per annum .
In the EU , the biggest obstacle to introducing energy efficiency measures for both governments and for individual citizens is the lack of upfront financing .
Why does the Commission believe that developing countries can finance efficiency measures without upfront funding when EU Member States themselves have struggled to do so ?
Also , the idea that the international carbon market can fund EUR 38 billion a year is unrealistic .
We have seen how slow the EU ETS carbon market has been to get off the ground and how badly the carbon price has been thrown off course by the economic crisis .
It is likely to be many decades before there is a properly functioning international carbon market , so we need a new and additional financing measure now .
( FR ) Madam President , climate change , as we having been saying since this morning , is quite simply an increase in desertification and drought ; it is deforestation , it is natural disasters , it is the spread of famine and of poverty , mainly in the countries of the South , and it is migratory flows .
The Copenhagen Summit must have the commitment of the world 's nations to find a balance between four important objectives , the first being , of course , to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , but it is also a question of not holding back our economy , of preventing environmental dumping and of promoting Europe 's new technologies .
Therefore , on this subject , since we must take account of the poorest countries , I should like to draw your attention to developing countries , in particular , to the most advanced developing countries .
This notion does not appear in the international texts , and these countries fall into the category of developing countries .
Thus , they are not regarded as countries that are obliged to contribute to the effort to reduce greenhouse gases , even though they are some of the biggest consumers of carbon .
I am , of course , thinking of China , India and Brazil , which absolutely must make a commitment in Copenhagen to achieve similar targets to those of the industrialised countries since , strictly speaking , they are nothing like most of the other developing countries .
The efforts to reduce CO2 must be shared under the fairest of conditions .
We must prevent all distortions of competition .
The negotiations must also be an opportunity to stimulate the deployment of our new technologies and to enable substantial investment to be made in research and development .
In Copenhagen we will have to - and this is a necessity - create the conditions for sustainable trade among countries , on the basis of mutual interests .
Success will consist in promoting the dissemination of technologies in the least developed countries in return for the recognition of intellectual property rights and the opening up of their markets to these technologies .

( ES ) Madam President , the two most serious crises in the world are poverty and the effects of climate change : two crises that will be even more closely linked to each other in the future , two crises that become more devastating as each day goes by .
There are now many more poor people than there were a year ago , tens of millions more .
Today , the effects of climate change are more serious and more intense than they have ever been .
We are a month and a half away from Copenhagen , just a few weeks away .
In Copenhagen , we need to make a big effort .
We need to focus more effort on combating climate change , but not using the resources that we are currently using for development aid , not with the resources that we are currently using for education or health .
Developing countries need both types of resource .
We therefore need to go beyond 0.7 % of GNP .
This was the message from various leaders at the recent United Nations meeting .
This was the message from the President of the Spanish Government .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a gathering involving the Health Commissioner , Mrs Vassiliou , and medical experts from across Europe a few days ago in Brussels discussed the subject of ' Health and climate change ' .
It was a very informative event entitled ' Prescription for a healthy planet ' .
The President of the Standing Committee of European Doctors ( CPME ) used a very good image - the patient planet Earth is like a person suffering from a serious illness .
The later you intervene , the more painful is the treatment and there comes a point when it is even too late for treatment .
At that point , the patient is damaged beyond recovery .
That is why we need to act quickly and determinedly for patient planet Earth .
I hope that we all agree on that .
It is equally as true that climate change affects everyone - every country on earth and every sector of the European economy .
I see an imbalance - we put very heavy burdens on the traditional participants in European emissions trading , yet they represent less than 50 % of the European Union 's emissions .
We therefore need more shoulders to bear the burden - we decided that last night .
We also adopted Amendments 198 to 202 on the inclusion of aviation - as mentioned by Mr Groote - and marine transport .
Perhaps this needs to be better worked out and differentiated , but it is a move in the right direction .
The Commission and the Council must finally get more involved in this regard .
At the EU summit in the run-up to Pittsburgh , and in Pittsburgh itself , no progress at all was made on this .
The Council and the Commission must do more in this connection .
I have one final word to add .
Other regions in the world , too , must do more .
I am pleased that Barack Obama has won the Nobel Peace Prize , but if he does not come to Copenhagen and if he does not put forward a decent proposal , then he will be frittering away his credibility and , for that reason , he must deliver something at Copenhagen .
( EL ) Madam President , developing countries have contributed less than anyone to climate change .
At the same time , however , they experience the very worst repercussions .
In Africa , millions of people need to travel further and further year on year in order to find water , wood for cooking and food .
These are people who depend on the services provided to them by natural ecosystems and people who have contributed nothing to climate change .
These natural ecosystems , such as the forests of Africa , store three times more carbon than they have emitted into the atmosphere , three times more carbon than exists in the atmosphere at present , while they absorb 50 % of the carbon that we emit into the atmosphere every year .
That is why protecting and extending forests , on the basis of natural processes and without commercial intentions , should be the top priority of our policy , both in order to combat and to adapt developing and developed countries to climate change .
( EL ) Madam President , I should like to take a position on the specific but very important matter of shipping in connection with Copenhagen and the developing countries .
I have two comments : it would be a huge mistake to deal with shipping and aviation as if they were one and the same thing .
Shipping is the most efficient and environmentally-friendly mode of transport , while aviation is more or less the worst .
Targets therefore need to be set in shipping , but they must be fair in relation - in particular - to road transport , which competes with shipping and is much more polluting .
By striking disproportionately at shipping in comparison with road transport , we are striking disproportionately at the core of the economies of developing countries , because developing countries are based predominantly on raw materials , agricultural products and industry which basically use shipping , whereas our economies are mainly service economies .
Will we , I wonder , be able to persuade developing countries of our good intentions by proposing that we finance the climate change endeavour from money that we shall take , to a disproportionate degree , from shipping and which , as a percentage of GDP , will encumber developing countries more than developed countries ?
I also wonder , having been informed that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance refused yesterday to back a debate on the correlation of targets for shipping with targets for land transport , if driving along a European motorway in a luxury car at 180 kilometres an hour is more ecologically friendly than carrying food and raw materials for the planet 's economy .

( FR ) Madam President , Mr Carlgren , Mr President of the Commission , we are facing a challenge for humanity , a challenge for the future generations .
In order to take up the gauntlet , Copenhagen must provide the conditions for a global agreement , a single agreement , because , as the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , Mr Leinen , was saying earlier , a universal alliance , involving industrialised countries and emerging countries alike , is necessary .
Today , with our debate , but also with the drafting of a resolution by Parliament , we are once again calling on the European Union to maintain its leading role in this necessary policy to combat climate change .
Let us remember that we must speak with one voice if we are to maintain our credibility .
Yes , we must come to an agreement in Copenhagen to limit the increase in the global mean temperature so that it does not exceed the pre-industrial levels by more than 2 degrees .
Yes , we must sign an agreement in Copenhagen in order collectively to ensure that , by 2020 , there are 30 % fewer greenhouse gas emissions than there were in 1990 .
That will not be enough , however .
Not only is it necessary for developed countries to substantially reduce their emissions , but developing countries must help achieve the targets too .
It follows that the industrialised countries must provide developing countries with adequate , long-term and predictable financial and technical support to encourage them to make a commitment to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions .
Copenhagen must also enable developing countries to move in the direction of low-carbon models .
Thus , allow me to address two areas that I feel are necessary for our future .
Firstly , the introduction , at international level , of funding to combat global warming , based on the taxation of financial transactions .
Secondly , I feel it is necessary to introduce a tax adjustment at Europe 's borders that would hit imports of goods manufactured without the slightest concern for environmental protection , a tax adjustment linked to the contractually stipulated repayment to the countries of the South of the carbon tax collected in this way at Europe 's borders , and which would be used to finance investment in the equipment they need to combat global warming .
( FR ) Madam President , following the example of the recent G20 , which was an opportunity for Europe to play a leading role in the definition of a new world economic order , at the Copenhagen conference in December , Europe will again have a responsibility but , above all , an obligation , to show its international partners the path to pursue .
Contrary to what was said just now , particularly by some of my fellow Members from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , Europe has begun to assume its responsibilities in terms of environmental protection , since in December 2008 , the energy and climate change package was adopted .
With this package , Europe will have all the legitimacy it needs to guide the negotiations towards the definition of an ambitious , practical and global response to the challenges of climate change .
The agreement that must be reached in Copenhagen will have to be based on a principle of shared responsibility , but also of differentiated responsibility .
In concrete terms , as Mrs Grossetête just said , it is up to us , as industrialised countries , to ensure that our partners , the developing countries , have the means to follow us as we take the ambitious step of combating climate change .
We also need to set an example , not least by committing ourselves to an ambitious programme aimed at an 80 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 .
I heard it said just now that this is not enough , but it is already a good start .
At the same time , we must also create the conditions to ensure that developing countries can participate alongside us in this global effort .
We have a responsibility , but we also have duties towards these countries .
The simple fact is that we have a common challenge to overcome that requires everyone 's involvement .
However , as we know , we do not all have the same capabilities and we do not all have the same history .
Copenhagen must therefore be a success , but a success achieved by means of a genuine contribution that goes beyond a mere commitment .
The European Union will be judged on this contribution and on this commitment .
Should Copenhagen not result in our international partners making firm , shared commitments to take concrete action , then , as the last speaker just said , we in Europe will have to impose a carbon tax at our borders .
This will be the only way of making ourselves heard and of ensuring that our virtuous commitment has meaning .
It is up to Europe to ensure that this message is clearly heard .
( EL ) Madam President , the basic challenge which we have before us seven weeks before the Copenhagen Summit is whether or not we shall manage to reach agreement in terms of taking responsibility for the global financing of policies for the moderation of climate change on the part of developing countries .
Europe has made important steps by defining sources of financing and ways of organising it , but now the time has come for us to persuade other developed countries to take their share of responsibility , bearing in mind that support for efforts by developing countries to combat climate change also affords an opportunity to combat global inequalities and to narrow the divide between developed and developing countries .
There is something else which we must not forget , especially here in the European Union .
We are on the point of creating a new order of refugees , climate refugees who are not protected today under any international convention , and , as a result , they have no rights .
Closing this legal loophole and substantially supporting climate refugees is a basic obligation of the international community in which the European Union must take a leading role .


( PT ) Madam President , Mr Carlgren , Mr De Gucht , the European Union should continue to play a leading role in the international negotiations to achieve an ambitious agreement in Copenhagen .
This agreement should be based on the principle of shared yet differentiated responsibility .
This principle should be applied equally to developing countries , but each one requires measures tailored to its individual situation , as they are at different stages and have different circumstances .
All developing countries , with the exception of the least developed , should adopt national low-carbon development strategies .
Developing countries will be faced with a cost of about EUR 100 billion to reduce their emissions and adapt to the effects of climate change .
Some of the funding will come from the private sector , but international public funding will also be necessary , in addition to official development aid .
It is paramount that we define how this funding system will be structured , along with the source and the amount of funding , so as to secure an agreement in Copenhagen .
On the other hand , the clean development mechanism under the Kyoto Protocol should be reformed so that credits are only given to projects that allow supplementary reductions to be achieved .
The economically more advanced developing countries and economically more competitive sectors should be gradually excluded from this mechanism , so that it can focus mainly on the poorest countries , especially those in Africa .
( LT ) The European Union is setting an example for other continents by tackling threats hovering over our planet .
This also strengthens the fight against climate change .
The European Union is ready to be the leader in the future as well , but all the countries participating in the Copenhagen conference must join this fight .
Additional aid is required for developing countries .
Their economic growth , like that of the BRIC countries , must be based on ' green technologies ' .
More attention must be paid to sharing the most advanced technologies and knowledge .
The EU should show an appealing example , not just by making commitments to reduce emissions , but also by promoting renewable energy and increasing energy efficiency .
Let us not forget that in the European Union too , there is a considerable gap between those countries successfully implementing new technologies and saving energy and those that are straggling behind .
There must be a joint effort to eliminate that gap , and that would again be a good example to everyone .
( FI ) Madam President , certain facts need to be acknowledged .
Firstly , our efforts with regard to climate so far have brought us no benefits .
The strategy has proven ineffective because emissions have increased in absolute as well as in relative terms .
Contrary to expectations , global carbon intensity has only increased at exactly the same time as there has been actual international investment in the area .
Emissions per tonne of production in the countries that ratified the agreement have not fallen with any greater degree of success than in the countries that have remained outside the Kyoto Protocol .
It is a poor agreement that we have , and it has to be replaced with a better , more comprehensive , more effective and more ambitious one .
Secondly , it has to be said that we know less than we thought we did some time ago .
Although emissions have increased more than was predicted , the temperature is not now logically following the rise in emissions .
Now it has stopped increasing , and global cooling is predicted to continue over the years to come .
Nevertheless , the time series is too short to draw any conclusions or to allow us to forget all about the earlier warming pattern .
This information , which is confusing to the general public , does not therefore mean that we no longer have to worry about climate change , but it does mean that we need more research .
Consequently , emissions have to be at a reasonable level in all circumstances , irrespective of whether there is rapid warming or not .
The starting point for this should be the ideas on sustainable development in the UN 's Millennium Development Goals Report .
It does not merely scrutinise the carbon issue , but is also a comprehensive policy on climate .
Thirdly , we are living through an economic crisis , and as a result we have a responsibility to our citizens .
What we do must be wise and effective .
The world can no longer afford a poor agreement on climate .
The mistakes of Kyoto cannot be allowed to continue , and we do not need the sort of agreement that is content with simply moving emissions around from one place to another without actually reducing them .
As the criteria underlying climate policy are currently about emissions from production and not consumption , the cause of the problem can be shifted elsewhere .
Given the carbon leak that results from this , it is even possible that as local emissions fall , global emissions will rise .
Instead , we need a huge investment in decarbonisation and in technology that reduces emissions .
Dirty production must not be possible anywhere .
We cannot create loopholes , though emissions trading in the EU is a model example of how to do that !
( ET ) Mr President , the ambitious climate measures would help to solve the current economic crisis through the creation of new jobs and an increase in economic activity .
The International Energy Agency regards it as necessary to come to an agreement in Copenhagen in order to direct the investments which were delayed due to the crisis into investments in the environmentally sustainable energy sector .
I can see opportunities for my home country of Estonia here as well .
We need an extensive energy savings programme , and also an ambitious and long-term approach in the area of renewable energy .
However , we cannot limit ourselves to this .
We should review our own transport and logistical regulation , make use of environmentally-friendly building materials and technologies , reduce the use of materials and chemicals in industry , reform the packaging methods used in retail , and develop organic farming .
These and many other solutions will be the essential growth sectors of the future .
Many of these new solutions require the efforts of our scientists ; some can only be created by our own efforts .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have noticed that the vote which took place yesterday in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has been mentioned several times .
I would , however , like to make it clear that not everything can be put down to one single extremist ideological position .
We have heard many positions of our fellow Members which are very diverse , much more nuanced , based much more on common sense and therefore , given that they reflect reality more closely , I think that they are more likely to provide real solutions .
Science is not a totem .
When the mistake was made to pick out one issue in such an ideological way , solutions were not provided but it led to disaster .
Europe should be an expert at this , at not repeating the same mistakes , albeit when they take different forms and have labels which appear , on the surface , much friendlier .
I must point out that the emissions trading directive itself stipulates precisely that the virtuous path followed by the European Union must be assessed by the Commission , according to the outcome of the conference .
We must go to the conference with strong positions and clear ideas certainly , but also with the absolute aim of sharing our efforts fairly among , first and foremost , all the industrialised countries , which must accept equivalent emissions reduction targets .
We must also keep in mind what Mrs Grossetête expressed very well , namely that we can no longer fail to differentiate between developing countries : some countries truly are developing and some are newly emerged economies , such as India , China and Brazil .
These , too , are countries which must shoulder commitments of their own .
Well , if a balanced outcome is not achieved in Copenhagen , I , on the other hand , strongly urge the European Union to continue to ensure that allowances are allocated free of charge to sectors at risk , in accordance with Directive 2003 / 87 / EC .
These are key points .
We want the Kyoto Protocol itself to retain its importance for the environment and , above all , we want to avoid creating a financial bubble at the expense of European businesses .
( FR ) Madam President , as our fellow Members have said repeatedly this morning , the problem of financing the developing countries ' fight against global warming may cause the Copenhagen Summit to fail , when we were all hoping it would be a success .
As we know , however , these countries are often the main victims of global warming , but they are not responsible for it .
The industrialised countries have provided a substantial financial aid package .
It is insufficient today , and even the declared amounts are not actually being honoured .
This is what obliges us and will oblige us to find new sources of finance .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , following the lead of the Committee on Development , has acknowledged that there is now a need to consider the introduction of a tax on financial transactions of the Tobin tax kind .
This 0.01 % tax on speculative transactions would bring in USD 100 billion per year ; in other words , the amount that it is estimated will be required by 2020 to combat global warming in developing countries .
Therefore , Parliament , in following the lead of certain national political leaders , is assuming its responsibilities .
I should like to know the position of the Council and the Commission and whether they will support us on this point .
( SV ) Madam President , the world is currently facing three major crises : the financial crisis , the employment crisis and the climate crisis .
The solutions that we come up with together must help to solve all three of these crises .
Our businesses face major challenges , but there are also great opportunities for new jobs and for dealing with a number of social crises .
Applied in the right way , with the right decisions and with sufficiently tough decisions from those leading these negotiations , we could see a renewal and a new environmentally sustainable economy in the world .
People all over the world expect the Copenhagen conference to come up with vigorous measures .
We must be aware that the US will want market-based solutions , Europe will want solutions based on legislation and China will want to solve its own domestic social problems .
There are also differences in approach within Europe .
In the European Parliament , there are Members who want the thresholds set so high that it will be impossible to achieve a solution in Copenhagen , while others want to insist on only voluntary solutions .
The future lies in a green , liberal market economy .
We must ensure that consumers are given the opportunity to use their power in the market through knowledge and transparency .
( RO ) Deforestation , a phenomenon often alluded to during this debate , is certainly something which affects developing countries in particular .
However , before laying the blame on these countries , we need to realise that deforestation meets certain needs for survival .
I would like to mention in today 's debate the conclusions from a study carried out recently which highlight that almost half of the agricultural area in the world has at least 10 % forest cover .
This agricultural area covered by forest vegetation amounts to double the area of the Amazon Rainforest .
I believe that this prompts us to realise the value of this vegetation .
It goes without saying that farmers would make greater efforts to protect this vegetation if they were given sufficient finances to do so .
Another aspect which could also be taken into consideration would be to encourage stratified agri-forestry systems which combine the growing of crops with trees .
Crops of this type , which are less viable than monocultures , are often abandoned .
I believe that any solution aimed at avoiding deforestation must also take into account systems for compensating farmers , including those farmers in Europe who grow these types of stratified crops .
Madam President , ' success or failure , that is the question ' .
All types of crises have already been mentioned , but one has been forgotten next to global warming , which is the crisis of public confidence in politics .
I agree with Mr Carlgren .
Let us not make this a beauty contest about who is more or less ambitious , more realistic or less realistic or more or less willing to pay .
We need four clarities , because too much is at stake : we need a clear and ambitious political stance ; we need a clear commitment ; we need a clear path and clear deadlines ; and last but not least , we need clarity on financial support .
If Copenhagen is not a complete success , let us not cry wolf and start naming and shaming , but let us set out a clear process and time path in order to come to a result .
Let us show we are reliable and responsible , both in target setting and in a fair financial perspective .
Madam President , we talk a lot about the melting of the ice caps , but as well as the Arctic and the Antarctic , there is also the ' third pole ' : the Himalayan ice cap and its glaciers which give water to some two billion people - almost a third of the world 's population - in China , India and elsewhere on the subcontinent .
These glaciers are retreating fast because of black carbon coming largely from industrialisation , but also from fossil fuel-powered generators in use in agriculture , and will deprive billions of people of water for both drinking and irrigation .
The European Union needs to recognise that help is going to be needed to improve the quality of the machinery that is being used , and to cut down its polluting impact .
I believe this should be put on the agenda for Copenhagen , but it should also be put on the agenda for the forthcoming European Union summit with India and other summits with the countries affected .
Unless we help them , we will not be able to prevent the melting of the Himalayan glaciers or serious water provision problems for a third of humankind .
( RO ) We live on a planet with a diverse climate .
However , there is a single factor that affects all this : climate change .
Reality shows us that the effects of this change do not respect borders or geographical areas .
Each and every one of us is affected in different ways , whether in the form of flooding , drought , fire or powerful storms .
The main cause of these disasters is obviously the rampant development of certain groups of activities resulting in a rise in carbon dioxide emissions and global warming .
According to current statistics , the ratio of carbon dioxide emissions per capita may be hundreds of times higher for developed countries compared to developing countries .
Given the current situation , I feel duty bound to ask the following rhetorical question : is it our duty or not to support developing countries with initiatives and technologies in order to keep our planet clean ?
I think the answer to this is obvious .
We cannot therefore procrastinate in any way in adopting specific measures for our own sake and the sake of future generations .
( FI ) Madam President , it is very important to make the switch to a low-carbon world fairly and to have a viable policy system , because the market never has any time for fairness .
That is why the Copenhagen meeting is important .
I would have liked Minister Carlgren to have prioritised things more .
You made everything a priority and so , in fact , nothing took priority .
I believe that climate policy must also have a prominent part to play in income distribution effects .
How can we also make it easier for households on a low income in Europe to adapt ?
Has no country in Europe given consideration to this yet ?
For example , more flexible use of the Structural Funds could be made to promote green structural change .
It is not enough to save the world : we also have to save the people in it .
( HU ) Madam President , one of the key topics at the forthcoming Copenhagen climate summit may be forest management .
It is no coincidence , in fact , that more harmful gases accumulate in the air as a result of deforestation than can be attributed to transport , for instance .
The inability to resolve this situation is highlighted by the fact that according to estimates , almost 40 % of the logging in the world is carried out illegally .
When we talk about logging , we first of all think about tropical forests , but we do not have to look so far from home .
According to a study recently published , one third of the timber used in Hungary is felled illegally .
Due to the lack of sanctions in this area , the ground apparently gained by renewable energy sources actually conceals the partially illegal burning and felling of trees .
Based on what I have described , we must tighten the regulations governing sustainable forest management .
The Copenhagen climate summit may provide the opportunity for forest management to become an integral part of climate protection systems .
Madam President , the issue of food security needs to be mentioned in this debate on climate change , for the developing world in particular .
It is very difficult to ask people to look at climate change mitigation if their basic needs for food are not met .
We need to allow them to use the best available technology to produce , in a sustainable way , food which does not harm the environment , and to tackle the issue of climate change .
I have a concern in relation to the World Trade Organisation and a deal on agriculture which does not take into account the impact , for example , of deforestation in Brazil as it supplies beef to the European Union .
These are very complex issues .
We might solve a problem in one place and create another elsewhere .
We obviously need a global agreement which tackles climate change but we also need to recognise the very serious issue of food security .

Madam President , the evidence is not that rising levels of CO2 lead to temperature rises , but that the causal connection is the other way round ; but , of course , we must not let facts get in the way of a good story .
However , let us accept for the moment that man-made emissions are a bad thing for various reasons . Why , then , does the British Labour Party support aggressive and illegal wars that not only kill British soldiers , Iraqis , Afghans and , in the future , Iranians , but also produce vast increases in global emissions ?
( PT ) Copenhagen is a great opportunity for a global agreement to be reached before it is too late .
For the first time , the United States has an administration committed to building solutions , and there are also positive signals from other countries , such as Japan .
However , we need a new approach to climate change that takes its impact on security , economic recovery , immigration and even combating terrorism into account .
Nor must we forget that climate change will require the contribution of science , technology and economics .
The major obstacle to an agreement in Copenhagen is the question of funding .
There cannot be an agreement unless there is funding tailored to developing countries .
Moreover , Commissioner , it must be stressed that the funding currently in place is not sufficient .
Developed countries must lead by example , by setting ambitious emission reduction targets of at least 30 % , and helping developing countries by providing funding and technology .
( SL ) Good afternoon , Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Carlgren , ladies and gentlemen and visitors , including those of you who have come from Slovenia .
Allow me to briefly remind you of one thing : Copenhagen is happening at what may be a bad time .
We are living in a time of crisis , which makes it difficult to make the kind of decisions on weighty and important issues which we will have to make in December in Copenhagen .
Nonetheless , let me stress that Copenhagen will only be a success story if it upholds both the environmental and the social dimension , that is , if we succeed in reducing , or agreeing to reduce , emissions .
On this score , the Council and the Commission are yet to reach an agreement on the targets to be attained by 2020 .
In addition , Copenhagen will only be a success story if it ensures sustainable development , if it also includes a social dimension and , in particular , if we , the developed part of the world , succeed in financing developing countries .
If that does not happen , I think that this generation will have missed an exceptional historic opportunity .
( PL ) Madam President , in the context of our debate , I should like to draw attention to two issues .
Firstly , when submitting a proposal regarding the limitation of CO2 emissions and the means allocated for developing countries , we must not forget the present economic and financial situation brought about by the world crisis , because setting ambitious goals is very important , but I think that achieving them is even more so .
Secondly , we should pay attention to the question of the awareness of citizens and the necessity of change in the area of ecological issues .
Research carried out at the time of the Climate Conference in Poznań last year showed that society does regard climate change as a serious problem , but thinks that solving this problem is a matter exclusively for the authorities .
An appeal is therefore needed , an information campaign which will change attitudes and promote models of behaviour aimed at increasing the effectiveness or reducing the consumption of energy in homes .
We need a campaign to make people aware that the way we live , and the way we work , has an economic and an ecological price attached .
( RO ) Development and cooperation mechanisms and the allocation of considerable resources to developing countries for tackling climate change are important measures in terms of concluding an international post-Kyoto agreement .
However , the best argument for persuading other states to comply with a post-Kyoto agreement is provided by the measures which the European Union is adopting in order to fulfil the commitments that it has already undertaken .
In the case of non-ETS sectors , the measures considered may include the following : renovating buildings with poor energy efficiency , creating an energy efficiency fund in each Member State ; and increasing considerably the ERDF rate which can be used to boost energy efficiency in buildings and develop public transport .
These measures will allow us to create around 7 million jobs across Europe by 2020 .
In the case of ETS sectors , financing mechanisms are required for the low-carbon economy .
Modernising the technology used by European companies operating in the energy production or metallurgy sectors will enable them to use an environmentally-friendly method of production .
Madam President , deforestation has been mentioned by many speakers and absolutely correctly so - both industrialised deforestation and individual deforestation .
I myself noticed that , when I worked on a voluntary basis in Africa , day in day out , I saw people climbing up the mountain , spending the whole day with their little axe cutting down timber , and coming down in the afternoon carrying their little bundle of timber on their head or on their bicycle .
It is quite obvious that this cannot be tackled without dealing with the whole question of global poverty , because individuals are not going to stop chopping down wood for the greater good of society if it means they themselves are going to starve .
So climate change and global poverty will have to be tackled hand in hand .
Madam President , there has been much talk in this Chamber this morning about developing countries playing their part in tackling climate change , and that is indeed true .
Like many others , I would draw attention to the fact that , in order for this to happen in regions of great poverty , this House , the Council and the Commission will have to take cognisance of the cost involved and there will have to be a strategy in order to tackle this .
However , I would not like to leave this House without saying that , in areas like my own in Northern Ireland , areas of high energy costs , there also needs to be some work done to take account of those who are disadvantaged - where there are high levels of fuel poverty amongst disadvantaged people , where we have an economic base which relies on small business - when considering the costs of tackling climate change .
( SL ) I would like to express my agreement with the fundamental objectives of our strategy , i.e. preventing the climate from increasing more than two degrees in temperature , on average .
This is a strategy which is primarily based on limitation : the smaller the emissions of greenhouse gases , the smaller the increase in temperature .
However , I would like to point out another dimension and here , I refer to the technological breakthroughs that are necessary .
I , for one , am a believer in technology .
Limitation alone will not help us attain our targets .
We need greater investment in technological advancement and , above all , investment in the artificial reduction of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and in the development of a fusion reactor .
Therefore , I would urge the Commission to make as effective and rapid moves as possible to put such investment on its agenda .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Members of Parliament for their commitment to this debate and their far-sighted contributions .
Naturally , the broad political support of the European Parliament plays a very important part in deciding Europe 's position in the negotiations .
I also genuinely welcome the resolution on climate change prepared by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
Parliament 's commitment is very important for the 48 days remaining before the conference in Copenhagen .
We really must use these days in the best way possible .
That means that we must go out into the rest of the world and put pressure on other countries .
A global threat calls for a global response .
There has been mention in the debate of global partnership - I agree with that .
There has been mention of the need to globally achieve low-carbon development - I agree with that .
There has been mention of the need for new green technology - and I also agree with that .
I would also like to say that we need a global solidarity pact .
I am now off to the Luxembourg Council meeting on the environment , at which we will also set out the EU 's mandate for the Copenhagen conference .
We are talking here about the long-term objectives of the EU , which must be to reduce emissions by more than 80 % by the year 2050 .
We are talking about how to encourage other countries to increase their emissions reductions , so that we also achieve our 30 % reduction in emissions .
Not least , it concerns what has been raised in the debate here - namely , measures to combat deforestation and towards sustainable forestry , financing that Ecofin is to decide on .
Finally , it is about having a mandate that has been adopted by the European Council .
I would like to thank Parliament for its support .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , very briefly a couple of points .
I think that after this debate , after what the Council has said , we can say that we are ready for this Copenhagen conference .
I have noticed very broad support for our proposals , and that goes for the targets that we have put on the table , the financial commitments we have been making .
Very important also is the common understanding we have with the developing world - the commitments we have been making towards them and , maybe foremost , it is very important that we have also agreed on an internal redistribution of the efforts that have to be made by the European Union , because if you make commitments and promises but do not reach agreement among yourselves you will not be very effective in these kinds of things .
We can move forward , provided that the European Council later this month gives support to these proposals . I have no doubt about that .
We also expect the others to come forward .
Then we will speak about the United States ; we will also speak about the BRIC countries .
They have to come forward .
I think we need a frank and open discussion in Copenhagen .
It will certainly not be easy , that is the least one can say , but I think we really will be discussing our common future there .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
We must not regard the costs involved in the transition to clean energy sources as an economic burden that will increase companies ' production costs and public expenditure as part of national budgets , but as an investment that will bring tangible benefits in terms of creating new jobs , technical innovation and a clean infrastructure which will support the sustainable development of our respective countries .
Climate change poses a threat to the environmental balance and our habitat .
Europe must show courage and adopt a consistent stance in leading the effort to combat global warming .
Based on considerations of fairness and historical responsibility , poor countries must be helped not only to consolidate and adapt their economies to the new challenges , but also to protect themselves from the effects of global warming to which they are the most susceptible .
I hope that those attending the conference in December will realise that there is no alternative to cutting polluting emissions and that postponing any decision in Copenhagen on the mandatory objectives will mean failure not only for the conference , but also for the multilateral dialogue on global topics that affect the future of every one of us .
in writing . - Negotiations for a new global climate agreement are now on a knife edge .
The US seems unable to pass legislation to curb its excessive CO2 emissions .
China seems unwilling to accept binding targets .
Developing countries claim correctly they did not cause this crisis .
Europeans have an historic responsibility to clean up the climate mess we helped create .
It is actually our reckless abandon of the environment that has led to this dangerous changing of our climate .
This is not only an environmental issue and it is not just an economic issue , but also an issue of international social justice .
I join my colleagues in supporting calls for Europe to make a real offer of financing to the developing world to help it fight climate change in order to break the deadlock in the current negotiations .
This financing must be new and additional ( the existing promises of 0.7 % should not be touched ) and it must be adequate enough to allow developing countries to fight climate change , with the necessary mitigation and adaptation measures .
Some say we cannot afford such new financing .
However , when the banks came begging , most governments , including the Irish Government , were only too quick to provide them with billions in taxpayers ' money .
Our economies will recover , but our environment will not ...
Climate change poses one of the most serious threats not only to the environment , but to the economy and society as well .
Crop yields fluctuate from one year to the next , heavily influenced by the variation in extreme climate conditions .
This has an impact on every sector of the economy , but agriculture remains the most vulnerable .
I believe that this problem must be dealt with in two ways :
an action plan is needed for the most affected areas , which includes : using certain plant varieties which are resistant to the new climate conditions , adapting the calendar of farming activities to the new conditions , forestation , building greenhouses , managing water resources from agriculture and making polluted land more environmentally friendly ;
the other measure must be a plan for the future aimed at eliminating the causes of climate change by promoting a global economy based on reduced carbon emissions , combined with the promotion of energy security .
I also think it is important to devise strategies for preventing and managing natural disasters as droughts and flooding have occurred frequently over the last 10 years , exerting an adverse impact on both agricultural production and flora and fauna .
I strongly support the European Union in having to maintain its leading position in the battle against climate change .
It must not slip to number two as a result of the current economic difficulties .
For five years , I have been witness to how , here , in the European Parliament , a specific group of people , recruited from all political groups , but mainly from the Greens and the Socialists , have been whipping up unprecedented hysteria about the climate .
This hysteria is cleverly maintained through the speeches by the President of the Commission , and also by the former President of Parliament , presenting us with the unimaginable cataclysms which they claim will result from climate change .
People who think rationally on this matter are accused of lacking moral principles , and simply - as was the case with me today - they are not given the opportunity to speak in a ' democratic ' way .
The economic decisions contained in the Climate and Energy Package , which were made on the grounds of a not-very-credible hypothesis of the cause of climate change , are not only a cynical gibe at common sense , but are also a portent of future economic catastrophe and the upheaval of civilisation .
We should demand to hear honest discussion , based on the opinions of the entire objective world of science , on the subject of current climate change and its causes and , above all , on methods of tackling its effects .
In order to ensure success in the battle against climate change , an ambitious , comprehensive global agreement must be reached in Copenhagen .
The issue of funding has become the keystone of the agreement in Copenhagen .
Every country must make its contribution to funding the battle against climate change , according to its resources and economic potential .
The European Union plays an important role in , and assumes a commitment to , funding the climate programme .
According to estimates for providing support to developing countries and based on calculations for the 2010-2012 period , the EUR 5-7 billion required in funding every year will place a significant burden on both EU and national budgets .
However , on the last point , I feel it is important that when the European Union is considering how to distribute the financial burden deriving from its future international climate funding commitments , it will take into account individual Member States ' economic potential and the limits of their productive capacity .
I also believe that every European citizen must participate in the battle against climate change , and comprehensive energy-saving campaigns are required to achieve this .
It is already clear to us nowadays that among the dangers threatening the Earth , the biggest predicament by far is caused by greenhouse gases , primarily the emission of carbon dioxide .
While this may currently seem in ruling political circles to be an ideological debate , this issue defines the limits for economic opportunities and development , determining future investment in these areas .
When we talk in the European Parliament about climate change and preparations for the Copenhagen conference , we must not forget that our approval of the energy and climate package laid the foundations for a European energy policy that favours not only increasing competitiveness and strengthening supply security , but also energy efficiency , environmentally-friendly energy production and the assertion of consumer interests .
The third energy package created the opportunity from a market perspective , and the climate package from a regulatory perspective , for newer investors and operators to enter the European energy market .
This is the key to Europe 's climate change policy and its Copenhagen objectives .
We need new investment in energy , new innovative technologies and new operators .
After all , we can only achieve a significant reduction in carbon dioxide emissions both at a European and global level if we develop and implement new technologies .
The European decisions made recently facilitate this .
We must progress further along this road .
Achieving an agreement in Copenhagen will give the necessary impetus for coordination at global level of the actions to be taken against climate change .
The climate crisis must be inextricably linked to the economic crisis .
This provides an opportunity to move from an unsustainable economy based on limited natural resources to a sustainable one .
In addition to promoting the strategy for energy supply security and energy efficiency , Europe must devise a plan for investing in new energy technologies .
The promotion of green technologies at Community level does not only involve finding an alternative solution to the energy crisis , but also boosting economic growth and creating new jobs .
On the other hand , reaching agreement in Copenhagen offers an opportunity to promote the future links between the EU 's system for trading emission allowances and the regional or federal trading systems in the US and other countries which operate this kind of system or similar systems .
Last but not least , the EU must adopt a uniform position for maintaining its leading role in negotiations .
It must also be actively involved in strengthening existing partnerships in the climate sector with developing countries , as well as in establishing new partnerships where they do not yet exist .
A month and a half before the summit in Copenhagen , and in view of unavoidable climate change , the world expects us to take specific action - action which demonstrates responsibility and careful thought in relation to working together on behalf of people and their safety .
We are all familiar with the reports of the International Panel on Climate Change , which clearly state that most of the warming observed over the last 50 years is the result of human activity .
Climate issues have become the geopolitical and economic priority of the 21st century , a priority which requires decisions that are both bold and based on long-term measures .
To achieve world consensus , it is necessary to define climate treaties which will build new models for the reduction of greenhouse gases after 2012 .
The Kyoto Protocol was the first step to changing the mentality of world governments on the question of environmental protection .
We should continue with this way of thinking .
The point is , however , that we cannot confine ourselves to reducing the greenhouse gas emissions of developed countries such as the USA and China .
It is essential to support smaller , poorer countries , which have problems with the introduction of alternative , green energy sources .
This is not only a matter of financial support , but also of education and sharing experience in the creation of green economies .
When making decisions , we should also think of the citizens .
We should inform and educate them , and persuade them to invest in protecting the environment .
As with every political measure in the area of safety , the support and cooperation of the citizens is indispensable .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , new results from research into the progress of climate change are obtained daily , and they suggest that the change is advancing all the time , and faster than was previously predicted .
If we are to preserve the earth in the state that life here has adapted to , we will have to establish a carbon-neutral economy by the year 2050 .
In the light of these studies , the EU 's climate targets cannot be called too ambitious .
Everyone knows how serious the problem is .
Nevertheless , time is still spent debating whether we are a hundred per cent certain that humans are causing climate change or not .
This unwillingness to take the right action is incomprehensible , especially as , for a long time now , we have known how to implement change and we have been familiar with the technologies required to do so , at the same time improving the quality of life using new technology .
There is a psychological explanation for this inertia .
Some of our behavioural models are doggedly opposed to change , while the rest only change slowly .
The only problem is that we have no time left .
One of the biggest issues at the end of this year is the EU 's readiness to work with determination to ensure that the agreement reached at Copenhagen measures up to the climate challenge .
The Union must clearly commit to a 30 % cut in emissions by 2020 and an 80 % cut by 2050 .
Part of the agreement will be a credible promise given by the EU to help the developing countries with information and technology transfers and adequate sums of money in assistance .
in writing . - ( RO ) Over the next 50 years , climate change will have a significant impact on important economic sectors such as agriculture , energy , transport , ecosystems , tourism and health .
Climate change will also affect households , companies and certain sections of society , especially the elderly , people with disabilities and low income families .
The EU is determined to take prompt action to cut greenhouse gas emissions .
However , it is not enough to cut greenhouse gas emissions to alleviate the impact of climate change .
Additional action is required to alleviate this problem in the short term .
The effects of climate change are expected to be more significant than was envisaged and they will appear , regardless of the measures implemented to alleviate them .
Consequently , measures are required to strengthen the resistance of natural and human systems in standing up to the impact of climate change , in other words , adaptation policies .
These policies are being applied in the EU , but policies are also required at a global level .
This is why the Copenhagen conference must be an international success .
We need to have a global solidarity pact for developing green economies by promoting certain clean technologies which will guarantee jobs , as well as protect the environment and the population 's health .
The EU is a world leader in the fight against climate change .
This position clearly gives us a responsibility to help the developing countries .
When we provide assistance , we must be responsible to a high degree for its consequences .
If developing countries are to be given EUR 30 billion a year for their efforts to alleviate the effects of climate change , then the aim of this measure must be climate justice and solidarity .
We cannot permit an aim or an outcome that would ignite new tension through new distortions in social and political development .
The links between developing countries and the developed world are complex .
When handing over resources , we need to look at all of the potential impacts of the development aid , including political and population-related consequences .
The greatest proportion of the resources should be targeted on supporting education and the information society .
Even in the European Parliament , not everyone is convinced that climate change is a real threat .
If there is no understanding of the reality of climate change and its consequences in the target countries , our assistance will amount to nothing more than a bribe paid out for our prosperity to the governments of those countries whose inhabitants lack such prosperity .
If the ambitious goals of the EU are not appropriately reflected by the other major parties - the USA , China , India and the countries of South and Central America - it will be necessary for the EU to concentrate on strengthening its internal adaptation measures and mechanisms , especially in relation to the health and security of EU inhabitants .
in writing . - The negotiations in Copenhagen on financing to developing countries will be crucial if this summit is to be successful .
Already , some African countries have said they will not be able to commit to the kind of deal we need at Copenhagen if it does not contain suitable measures for financing of mitigation and adaptation in developing countries .
There are two key points here - the first is that the public money given to these developing countries must be new , additional money and should not come from existing aid budgets .
The second point is that it is not just public money which can be used in this context ; in addition to providing aid directly , steps can be taken to encourage private sector investment in low-carbon economies .
The extent to which the private sector is prepared to invest in developing countries will depend on international agreements on Emission Trading Schemes .
Agreements on this issue will provide the policy coherence and stability which give the private sector the confidence to invest properly in developing countries .
The negotiations must therefore aim for both comprehensive commitments regarding public financing and concrete measures to secure private sector investment .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

Corrigendum ( Rule 216 ) : see Minutes
1 .
International Renewable Energy Agency ( IRENA ) Statute (
2 .
Obsolete Council acts in the field of the common agricultural policy (
3 .
Delegation of the tasks of laboratory testing (
4 .
Reduced rates of excise duty in Madeira and the Azores (
5 .
Conservation of wild birds ( codified version ) (
6 .
Appliances burning gaseous fuels ( codified version ) (
7 .
Provision of audiovisual media services ( codified version ) (
8 .
Protection of workers against asbestos ( codified version ) (
9 .
Veterinary checks on animals entering the Community from third countries ( codified version ) (
10 .
Collection network for accountancy data on agricultural holdings ( codified version ) (
11 .
Animal health conditions on intra-Community trade in and imports of poultry and eggs ( codified version ) (
12 .
Pure-bred breeding animals of the bovine species ( codified version ) (
13 .
Agreement between the EC and Mauritius on the short-stay visa waiver (
14 .
Agreement between the EC and Seychelles on the short-stay visa waiver (
15 .
Agreement between the EC and Barbados on the short-stay visa waiver (
16 .
Agreement between the EC and Saint Kitts and Nevis on the short-stay visa waiver (
17 .
Agreement between the EC and Antigua and Barbuda on the short-stay visa waiver (
18 .
Agreement between the EC and The Bahamas on the short-stay visa waiver (
19 .
Draft amending budget 9 / 2009 : earthquake in Italy (
20 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( Germany ) (
21 .
Request for waiver of the immunity of Mr Marek Siwiec (
22 .
Evaluation mechanism to monitor the application of the Schengen acquis (

Mr President , yesterday , my colleague , the Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Barrot , stressed that the aim of the proposals is to communitise the evaluation mechanism and to make it more effective , while maintaining mutual confidence among the Member States .
The Commission is convinced that Parliament should be involved in the Schengen evaluation , which is not the case at present .
The citizens must have access to the results of these evaluations .
However , in accordance with the treaties in force , it is not possible to involve Parliament by way of codecision .
The Commission therefore stands by its proposals on the basis of the treaties in force .
Nevertheless , once the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , the matter will be reopened and the Commission will decide , when the time comes , what it considers to be the most appropriate legal basis for the proposed mechanism , and will involve the European Parliament as fully as possible .
The Commission could therefore submit amended or new proposals depending on the situation .
I appreciate the clarifications given by the European Commission , but would like to remind the House that , as was made clear during the debate , although the Legal Service of the European Parliament recognised the legitimacy of the legal basis of the Commission 's initiative , it also said that , based on the Treaty in force , the European Commission could have taken the same initiative based on a legal formula according the European Parliament the power of codecision .
As this was not the case , I propose that the initiative should be returned to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs so that the Commission can rethink its initiative .
Then , within the term set out in Rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure , we in Parliament can expect to receive an initiative from the Commission that respects codecision and gives this European Parliament the power it deserves to intervene in upholding greater security within the Schengen Area .
Thank you , Mr Coelho .
There is no need to vote on this request because , once the Commission has decided to maintain its proposal , that proposal is automatically referred back to committee , as Mr Coelho asked .
23 .
Evaluation mechanism to verify the application of the Schengen acquis (
Mr President , the scenario is the same .
Therefore , the Commission 's position is identical .
Well then , I think that obviously this second report will also be referred back to committee , as the European Commission has decided to maintain its proposal .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( ES ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the reports on The Bahamas , Barbados , Saint Kitts and Nevis and Seychelles .
In these reports , I like the elements of overcoming the bureaucratic processes of agreements , freedom of movement of citizens and the reciprocal nature that all of these actions must have .
However , with the utmost respect for all of these sovereign countries that are our friends , I would like to take advantage of the good relationships that are demonstrated by these agreements to help all of these countries which , I repeat , are sovereign and our friends , to immunise themselves against a pandemic that is even more deadly than the flu : tax havens .
This has already been debated in the G20 and many other forums .
Tax havens have contributed very significantly and unfortunately to the economic crisis that we are experiencing .
Something is being done , perhaps not much yet , to eradicate the most active tax havens , but let us not be naïve .
Others could start up .
In Spain , the Gürtel case is in the news : not only a huge network of corruption but also one of flight of capital .
Therefore , representatives of the Commission and the Council , let us take advantage of these agreements to insist on this immunisation which we have to demand sooner or later in order to have a broader and more radical policy against tax havens .
( PL ) Mr President , the Schengen Treaty resulted in a qualitative change across the territory of the majority of countries in the European Union .
Even though such a short time has passed since it came into force , we often forget what Europe was like when it had borders and the difficulties associated with moving from one Member State to another .
The Schengen agreement is another success of our integration but it also bears a great responsibility .
Responsibility for a significant part of our land borders has been assumed by the new Member States .
As well as the positive aspects , there are also negative ones , because excessive restrictions have been introduced on the movement of the residents of countries which share a border with the EU , and this means mainly the new countries , such as Poland and Latvia .
As a result of these difficulties , there are , among others , serious restrictions on movement across our eastern borders .
A new division has arisen , a kind of barrier between countries which had and have close relations resulting from a shared history , family connections and , above all , because they are neighbours .
In accordance with the provisions of Schengen , a common system of internal control has been introduced , and is being applied by the appropriate services in the countries of the European Union which are signatories to the agreement .
It would appear , however , that this system of control is being applied with undue severity , which does not help to build a positive image of the unity of the European Union .
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of this report .
I fully support the conclusion of the Statute of the International Renewable Energy Agency ( IRENA ) by the European Community .
This body 's main objective is to promote good practices in the renewable energy sector , both within the European Union and globally .
The agency 's Statute stipulates that it will promote and support the use of renewable resources throughout the world .
The Community 's conclusion of the Statute of this agency will enable it to enjoy better , direct access to information about the activities going on in the renewable energy sector , both at European and global level .
At the same time , its status as a member of the agency will allow it to reinforce the monitoring of the progress being made by Member States towards fulfilling the mandatory renewable energy objective by 2020 .
in writing . - I have voted for this report .
Currently , there is no coordinated renewable energy strategy on both a European and world scale .
For this reason , there is a big gap between the countries which have achieved major progress and success in renewable energy and countries which are still lagging behind in this area .
If we want to accelerate the process of increasing the share of renewable energy sources , different countries should act in a coordinated way and leading countries should share their best practice .
This agency , I think , would embark upon those goals and would give a new impetus and direction to renewable energy in general .
I welcome the fact that the European Community is now represented in the International Renewable Energy Agency ( IRENA ) .
The International Renewable Energy Agency aims to promote the adoption and the sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy , taking into account their contribution to the conservation of the environment , climate protection , economic growth and social cohesion ( especially poverty reduction and sustainable development ) , the accessibility and security of energy supply , regional development and intergenerational responsibility .
The agency also aims to provide technical , financial and political advice to the governments of developing countries , thus contributing to their process of transition to a low-carbon society .
The use of renewable energy is one of the key objectives of the EU 's climate and energy package .
This agency will contribute to implementing the package 's objectives , especially the aim of increasing the proportion of renewable energy used to 20 % of total energy consumption by 2020 .
in writing . - IRENA was officially established on 26 January 2009 .
The purpose of this organisation is to become the headquarters for promoting a rapid transition towards the use of sustainable energy .
The Statute of this organisation has been concluded .
It is vital that this organisation starts to function as quickly as possible .
I am in favour of the adoption of the Statute that has been presented and , hence , voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - I support the conclusion of the Statute of the International Renewable Energy Agency by the European Community .
The International Renewable Energy Agency aims to become a centre of excellence for renewable energy , which will enable it to help governments harness renewable energy sources , to disseminate know-how and best practice , and to provide training in this field .
It is thus desirable for the Community to be represented in an institution whose goals coincide with an area of its competence , and whose Statute has already been signed by 20 Member States .
Portugal is the sixth most energy-dependent country in the EU 27 , so investment in ' clean tech ' is of prime importance .
I advocate a national renewable energy plan , with particular emphasis on wind power , wave energy ( given the exceptional conditions offered by the Portuguese coast ) , solar-thermal and photovoltaic energy and microgeneration .
I am also in favour of researching and developing methods , technologies and strategies for the storage of surplus renewable energy .
I advocate an energy policy that takes account of economic challenges and social needs , while promoting sustainable development , without generating an environmental cost to be borne by future generations .
My abiding concern has always been to limit our energy dependence , and I am sure that the way forward is to support and develop renewable energy , so I welcome the fact that Portugal is a founding member of the International Renewable Energy Agency ( IRENA ) .
That is also why I support the European Community 's endorsement of the Statute of the International Renewable Energy Agency ( IRENA ) .
In voting for this report , I want to emphasise the importance of creating this international organisation which will promote and support the use of renewable resources throughout the world , bearing in mind the benefits which can be derived from their contribution to protecting the environment and climate , economic growth and social cohesion , including reducing poverty , as well as to guaranteeing energy supply security and regional development .
At the Bonn Conference in January 2009 , Romania , which was the first country to sign up , was appointed vice-chair of this first session .
It was also invited to join IRENA 's administrative committee , the core element which is acting temporarily as the Agency 's secretariat until it begins to operate properly .
At the moment , 137 states have signed the Statute , including 24 EU Member States .
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a Council regulation repealing certain obsolete Council acts in the field of the common agricultural policy , as it is necessary to eliminate acts that are no longer relevant from the acquis communautaire in order to improve the transparency and legal certainty of the Community 's legislation , in view of the Interinstitutional Agreement on Better Law-Making by the European Parliament , Council and Commission .
This was recently reaffirmed in the Commission 's communication entitled ' A simplified CAP for Europe - a success for all ' ; I am responsible for the European Parliament report on this communication , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
Within the scope of this strategy , therefore , it is worth removing acts that no longer have any real effect from the legislation in force .
in writing . - Due to the vast quantity of European legislation , it becomes essential that any defunct material is efficiently repealed .
In view of this , I have voted in favour of this report .
I believe it is essential that all stakeholders in the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) should be aware of the legal framework in place and the rules that apply at any particular time .
I accept that legal certainty requires that obsolete acts do not remain in force indefinitely in the Community 's legal system .
Given the fundamental importance of the CAP for the governments and citizens of the Union , I argue that it should be as simple and clear as possible in terms of its implementation and the rules in force .
The CAP is central to the life of the Union , is of enormous practical importance , and cannot be a tangle of rules , regulations , acts and decisions that no longer apply , or it will not be effective .
In view of all the above , I support the Commission 's proposal to repeal obsolete acts in the field of the common agricultural policy .
in writing . - The issue voted on refers to the need of the European Institutions to repeal Council Acts which have , through the passage of time and the development of technology , become obsolete and irrelevant to the correct functioning of the Union .
This vote refers to certain Council Acts in the field of the Common Agricultural Policy .
I believe that certain aspects of the CAP have long been in need of review .
If the policy is to be correctly implemented and used for the benefit of European citizens , the Acts which it has created must be relevant to the world of agriculture as it is today .
It is also my firm belief that something must be done to rid the Union of its red-tape image amongst the people of Europe .
Acts such as these serve simply to confuse , without serving any real purpose .
Aspects of EU policy such as this tarnish the image of the Union amongst its citizens and discourage people from interacting with it .
In conclusion , it is my firm belief that if the Union wishes to remain relevant , then modernisation of its laws and policies must always be voted in favour of .
It was with great pleasure that I voted in favour of adoption of the resolution on a regulation repealing certain obsolete acts in the field of the CAP , because we keep hearing that we have too much regulation in the EU , with negative consequences for the correct functioning of the market economy .
This is particularly true of the CAP , in which , despite the introduction of many simplifications and the elimination of a host of regulations , many unnecessary acts remain in force .
Many of these acts no longer produce any legal effects , while the content of others has been embodied in subsequent documents .
This creates a huge burden of time and cost for our farmers , and requires extensive administration .
Therefore , I think that further updating , consolidation and simplification of EU law is essential , as is the repeal of a great many unnecessary legal acts , so that the provisions which are in force are simple , clear and understandable .
This will bring the European Union closer to its citizens .
I would like to explain my vote on the draft Council Regulation repealing a number of obsolete Council Acts relating to the Common Agricultural Policy .
During the process of European integration , many acts were passed in the European Parliament and the Council .
At the time of our accession to the EU , the acquis communautaire numbered almost 80 000 pages of text , half of which related to agriculture .
It is therefore a good thing that EU bodies have agreed on an interinstitutional basis that Community law must be updated and condensed .
Laws that have no lasting significance should be eliminated from the acquis communautaire in order to improve the transparency and certainty of Community law .
The Commission lately declared 250 agricultural laws obsolete .
We are now talking about 28 acts that have no use from a practical perspective but which still formally exist , and six acts that are obsolete .
Although I supported this draft , I strongly believe that there are still further opportunities for slimming down European law and cutting back the Brussels bureaucracy and I am therefore asking the Commission to continue its work on the simplification of European law .
in writing . - Laboratory tests must be carried out in order to identify harmful organisms that are not present within the EU .
The regulations currently in place do not allow for certain laboratories to which such work can be delegated to take on this work due to the fact that they fall short of Article 2 ( 1 ) ( g ) ( ii ) of Directive 2000 / 29 / EC .
I am in favour of allowing such laboratories to conduct this kind of work so long as certain conditions are complied with .
Therefore , I have voted in favour of this report .
I voted in favour of the report which authorises Portugal to apply reduced rates of excise duty in the Azores and Madeira on locally produced and consumed liqueurs , eaux-de-vie and rum , because I see this as an important way of supporting the subsistence of the small industries in the sector involved in producing such goods , which are in a very unfavourable competitive position , faced with the liberalisation of markets and the growing sales of spirits in these regions .
The reduction of this tax will also contribute to a greater economic and social balance in these regions , thus ensuring the sustainability and even the creation of jobs , which are crucial for safeguarding the local economies .
in writing . - The Government of Malta should follow similar initiatives for the island of Gozo .
All EU Member States which have island regions have applied for similar measures and have been given the opportunity by the EU to take such special measures .
The measures themselves differ from island region to island region .
They have , however , one thing in common : that is , to provide economic comfort to balance the negative aspects of island regions .
The island of Gozo suffers from severe handicaps including double insularity , remoteness , small size and difficult topography .
Countries much larger than Malta , such as Portugal , Italy and Greece , have been able to obtain special measures so as to provide attractive incentives to island regions .
The smaller islands of the Maltese archipelago are particularly vulnerable .
The island of Gozo needs the assistance through the introduction of similar special measures .
It is the duty of the Maltese Government to identify which special measures would be best suited and , subsequently , to apply to the EU to adopt such measures .
It is up to the Government of Malta to reduce the hardships especially prevalent on the island of Gozo .
in writing . - This is an extension of the 2002 tax derogation given to Portugal in respect of certain autonomous regions .
I am in favour of such extension and have therefore voted in favour of this report .
I voted in favour of the Hübner report on the proposal for a Council decision authorising Portugal to apply reduced rates of excise duty in the autonomous region of Madeira on locally produced and consumed rum and liqueurs and in the autonomous region of the Azores on locally produced and consumed liqueurs and eaux-de-vie .
Bearing in mind the specific features of these outermost regions , I believe that this extension is vital for the survival of the local industry in these products and for the protection of employment in this sector .
In view of the importance to agriculture and , consequently , the economy and employment in the Portuguese Autonomous Regions of Madeira and the Azores , of the production of rum and eaux-de-vie respectively , as well as liqueurs in both regions , it is essential that the reduced rates of excise duty on these goods should continue to apply , as this will not lead to a situation of unfair competition within the internal market .
The increase in retail price brought about by elimination of these rates of excise duty would make these products even less competitive compared with similar products imported from the rest of the EU and would therefore threaten the subsistence of the traditional products .
It would have a disastrous effect on local industry and the regional economy at a socio-economic level , due to the impact that it would have on the family-run farms in those regions .
The proposal approved in today 's plenary sitting by an overwhelming majority allows for an extension to the concession granted in 2002 authorising Portugal to apply reduced rates of excise duty in Madeira on locally produced and consumed rum and liqueurs and in the Azores on locally produced and consumed liqueurs and eaux-de-vie .
Since the beginning of this process , I have done everything possible to ensure that this measure , which had expired at the end of 2008 , would be renewed as a matter of urgency .
Having secured the unanimous support of the Committee on Regional Development , this result was confirmed by today 's vote , which maintains the tax reduction with effect from January 2009 until 2013 .
Madeira 's rum and liqueur producers face permanent obstacles related to their outermost geographical position , insularity , difficult terrain and climate , and the smallness of their farms .
If they ceased to benefit from this concession , they would be forced to raise their prices , which would impact on their activity and the employment that it generates , with dire consequences for the region .
in writing . - This consists of a simple codification of texts without any change to their substance .
I am in favour of such codification and have therefore voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - This is once again a codification without any alteration of substance , of which I am in favour , and I have therefore voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - This consists of a simple codification of already existing texts and I have therefore voted in favour .
The coordination of certain provisions laid down by law , regulation or administrative action in Member States concerning the broadcasting of television programmes is vital for the creation of a media space where the main theme is unity in diversity .
It is just as important for us to be able to make European legislation as accessible as possible to all citizens .
The report on the proposal for the Audiovisual Media Services Directive in its codified form , tabled before the plenary session , is purely a technical and legal measure whose benefits are , however , unquestionable .
Codifying legislation which is constantly changing is a measure that gives Community law greater clarity and transparency , making it easier for EU citizens to understand .
In this case , the codification proposal involves replacing the old 1989 directive with a new directive ( without modifying the content ) to which the acts that have supplemented it over the years have been added .
I supported this initiative because , apart from its technical nature , we cannot overlook its value in supporting the proper operation of audiovisual media services , not to mention in terms of transparency as well .
I concur with the text of this report since pluralism of information ought to be a fundamental principle of the European Union .
Diversification of mass media leads to a proliferation of points of view , which is an essential feature in a democratic society .
This argument also has an economic element .
Conventional audiovisual media services ( such as television ) and those which have recently emerged ( for example , video on demand ) offer major employment opportunities in Europe , particularly through small- and medium-sized enterprises which will , in turn , boost economic growth and investment .
in writing . - This concerns the codification of legislation concerning the protection of workers from exposure to asbestos .
I am in favour of such codification and have hence voted in favour .
Like the majority of my fellow Members , I voted in favour of making Community legislation clearer and more transparent .
Indeed , by adopting this resolution , the European Parliament has supported the European Commission 's desire to ' clean up ' the texts by codifying the legislation on the protection of workers against asbestos .
This resolution will mean that these rules , which are necessary for workers , can be applied better .
in writing . - This concerns the codification of legislation concerning veterinary checks on animals entering the EU , and I have therefore voted in favour .
Ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the approval of the report by Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg concerning the draft Council Directive establishing principles for the organisation of veterinary checks on animals entering the EU from third countries .
The new directive will clearly contribute towards the clarification and better understanding of the extensive current legal arrangements in this area .
The directive concentrates on codifying laws without amending their actual content .
From the perspective of Europe 's citizens , a simplification and clarification of Community law contributes to greater legal certainty and , in my opinion , the codification carried out in the directive is therefore a step in the right direction , leading to the effective application of positive law .
At the same time , I agree that a harmonisation of principles at the Community level will contribute not only towards guaranteeing security of supply , but also towards the stabilisation of an internal market where internal border controls have been removed and towards protecting animals entering the Community .
Under the current regulations , where a shipment that violates animal protection laws is discovered , the authorities must , following a ' seizure ' for animal protection reasons , hand back to the owner any unvaccinated animal young that have been separated from their mothers much too early once the problem has been rectified .
In practice , of course , this situation is shamelessly exploited .
This codification would be a good opportunity to amend the EU Transport Regulation so that pups could be seized on a permanent basis in the case of shipments that are not in accordance with the rules , thereby closing this back door .
Unfortunately , we have allowed this opportunity to be missed .
All the same , the codification overall does seem to effect an improvement of the regulations on animal protection , for which reason I voted in favour of the report .
Given that nutrition is a significant factor in the health of the population and that animals are among the essential food products , it is particularly important that comprehensive protection is provided in this regard , and this should be effected , amongst other things , by means of veterinary checks .
These veterinary checks are particularly important at the external borders of the Community , especially given that the standards in this regard in these third countries are often not as high as the European level .
This requires more purposeful , more uniform and clearer regulations in order to ensure that comparable import checks are carried out at all the external borders .
The current Commission proposal for a codified version of the Council Directive laying down the principles governing the organisation of veterinary checks on animals entering the Community from third countries is a step in this direction and therefore has my backing .
in writing . - This is a codification without any substantial changes and therefore I have voted in favour .
Like the majority of my fellow Members , I voted in favour of making the legislation on a network for the collection of accountancy data on the incomes and business operations of agricultural holdings clearer and more transparent in order to improve this legislation and , above all , to make the text more readable .
in writing . - This report consists of a simple codification of legislation on animal health conditions in the sphere of intra-Community trade .
I am in favour of such codification and have voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( DE ) Rearing poultry , for one thing , forms a significant part of economic activities in the agricultural sector , where it represents a source of income for some of the agricultural workforce .
For another , eggs and poultry are amongst the commonest foodstuffs .
For these reasons , trade involving these goods should also be clearly and uniformly regulated , amongst other things , in order to protect the health of the citizens .
The current Commission proposal for a codified version of the Council Directive on animal health conditions governing intra-Community trade in , and imports from third countries of , poultry and eggs for hatching is in the interests of those working in agriculture and those trading in this field , as well as of the citizens of the EU as consumers , for which reason I support it .
in writing . - This is a codification without any substantial change and therefore I have voted in favour .
in writing . - This provides for visa-free travel between Mauritius and Member States of the EU .
I am in favour of such an agreement and have therefore voted in favour of the report .
I support this agreement negotiated between the European Community and the Republic of Mauritius , establishing a visa exemption for entry and short stays in order to facilitate the movement of their citizens .
EU citizens and Mauritian nationals who travel to the territory of the other contracting party for a maximum period of three months within a six-month period will be exempt from visa requirements .
The exceptions are the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland , which are not bound by this agreement , and a territorial restriction with respect to France and the Netherlands , for which this agreement only relates to those countries ' European territories .
I would point out that anyone who travels with the aim of carrying out a paid activity during a short stay cannot benefit from this agreement , and continues to be subject to the applicable rules of the Community and of each Member State in relation to the visa requirement or waiver and also access to employment .
The agreement may be suspended or repealed , but that decision can only be made in relation to all the Member States .
I also support the provisional implementation of the agreement pending its entry into force .
This agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Mauritius envisages visa-free travel where citizens of the Contracting Parties travel to the territory of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of three months during a six-month period .
I am voting against the conclusion of this agreement as the retention of the requirement for a visa represents a certain check on unwanted immigration , whereas a lifting of the visa requirement for stays of up to three months would provide sufficient time for those who , in reality , plan to stay for a prolonged period to build up social networks .
in writing . - This provides for visa-free travel between the Seychelles and Member States of the EU .
I am in favour of such an agreement and have therefore voted in favour of the report .
I support this agreement negotiated between the European Community and the Republic of the Seychelles , establishing a visa exemption for entry and short stays in order to facilitate the movement of their citizens .
EU citizens and Seychelles nationals who travel to the territory of the other contracting party for a maximum period of three months within a six-month period will be exempt from visa requirements .
The exceptions are the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland , which are not bound by this agreement , and a territorial restriction with respect to France and the Netherlands , for which this agreement only relates to those countries ' European territories .
I would point out that anyone who travels with the aim of carrying out a paid activity during a short stay cannot benefit from this agreement , and continues to be subject to the applicable rules of the Community and of each Member State in relation to the visa requirement or waiver and also access to employment .
The agreement may be suspended or repealed , but that decision can only be made in relation to all the Member States .
I also support the provisional implementation of the agreement pending its entry into force .
in writing . - This provides for visa-free travel between Barbados and Member States of the EU .
I am in favour of such an agreement and have therefore voted in favour of the report .
I support this agreement negotiated between the European Community and Barbados , establishing a visa exemption for entry and short stays in order to facilitate the movement of their citizens .
EU citizens and nationals of Barbados who travel to the territory of the other contracting party for a maximum period of three months within a six-month period will be exempt from visa requirements .
The exceptions are the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland , which are not bound by this agreement , and a territorial restriction with respect to France and the Netherlands , for which this agreement only relates to those countries ' European territories .
I would point out that anyone who travels with the aim of carrying out a paid activity during a short stay cannot benefit from this agreement , and continues to be subject to the applicable rules of the Community and of each Member State in relation to the visa requirement or waiver and also access to employment .
The agreement may be suspended or repealed , but that decision can only be made in relation to all the Member States .
I also support the provisional implementation of the agreement pending its entry into force .
The reports before us in connection with the agreements between the European Community and numerous small island nations such as Mauritius and Barbados envisage a visa waiver where citizens of the Contracting Parties travel to the territory of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of three months during a six-month period .
I reject these relaxations of entry requirements and therefore voted against the conclusion of these agreements as the retention of the requirement for a visa certainly represents an obstacle to criminality and thus severely restricts unwanted immigration .
It is , furthermore , to be assumed that those who stay in the EU for three months on the basis of such visa waivers would make numerous contacts which they could then potentially use to descend into illegality .
A rise in illegal criminal activity must be avoided at all costs .
I support this agreement negotiated between the European Community and the Federation of St Kitts and Nevis , establishing a visa exemption for entry and short stays in order to facilitate the movement of their citizens .
EU citizens and the nationals of the Federation who travel to the territory of the other contracting party for a maximum period of three months within a six-month period will be exempt from visa requirements .
The exceptions are the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland , which are not bound by this agreement , and a territorial restriction with respect to France and the Netherlands , for which this agreement only relates to those countries ' European territories .
I would point out that anyone who travels with the aim of carrying out a paid activity during a short stay cannot benefit from this agreement , and continues to be subject to the applicable rules of the Community and of each Member State in relation to the visa requirement or waiver and also access to employment .
The agreement may be suspended or repealed , but that decision can only be made in relation to all the Member States .
I also support the provisional implementation of the agreement pending its entry into force .
I support this agreement negotiated between the European Community and Antigua and Barbuda , establishing a visa exemption for entry and short stays in order to facilitate the movement of their citizens .
EU citizens and nationals of Antigua and Barbuda who travel to the territory of the other contracting party for a maximum period of three months within a six- month period will be exempt from visa requirements .
The exceptions are the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland , which are not bound by this agreement , and a territorial restriction with respect to France and the Netherlands , for which this agreement only relates to those countries ' European territories .
I would point out that anyone who travels with the aim of carrying out a paid activity during a short stay cannot benefit from this agreement , and continues to be subject to the applicable rules of the Community and of each Member State in relation to the visa requirement or waiver and also access to employment .
The agreement may be suspended or repealed , but that decision can only be made in relation to all the Member States .
I also support the provisional implementation of the agreement pending its entry into force .
in writing . - This provides for visa-free travel between the Bahamas and Member States of the EU .
I am in favour of such an agreement and have therefore voted in favour of the report .
I support this agreement negotiated between the European Community and the Commonwealth of the Bahamas , establishing a visa exemption for entry and short stays in order to facilitate the movement of their citizens .
EU citizens and nationals of the Bahamas who travel to the territory of the other contracting party for a maximum period of three months within a six-month period will be exempt from visa requirements .
The exceptions are the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland , which are not bound by this agreement , and a territorial restriction with respect to France and the Netherlands , for which this agreement only relates to those countries ' European territories .
I would point out that anyone who travels with the aim of carrying out a paid activity during a short stay cannot benefit from this agreement , and continues to be subject to the applicable rules of the Community and of each Member State in relation to the visa requirement or waiver and also access to employment .
The agreement may be suspended or repealed , but that decision can only be made in relation to all Member States .
I also support the provisional implementation of the agreement pending its entry into force .
in writing . - UKIP MEPs abstained because we do not believe that the European Union should be responsible for sending taxpayers ' money to the victims of the Italian earthquake .
We have every sympathy with those victims and believe that such donations should come from national governments or charities .
As I pointed out earlier with regard to Reimer Böge 's report about the earthquake in the Abruzzi , I believe that solidarity between Member States of the European Union and European support for States that are the victims of disasters provide a clear signal that the European Union , in adopting instruments of special aid like the European Union Solidarity Fund , shows itself capable of remaining united in adversity , and this is something of which we can indeed feel proud .
Thus , in view of the possibility that the Commission may submit amending budgets in the case of ' unavoidable , exceptional or unforeseen circumstances ' , which include the earthquake in Italy , I voted in favour of this report on the amendment to the European Union budget , so that the residents of the affected region will see the damage caused by the earthquake repaired more quickly , and a swift return to normal living conditions effected through the mobilisation of EUR 493.78 million from the EU Solidarity Fund .

Since the mobilisation of EUR 493 771 159 from the European Union Solidarity Fund has been approved in favour of Italy , and since this fund does not have its own budget , it is necessary to amend the Community budget to ensure that the amount agreed is made available .
Although we agree upon the need to provide the funds as quickly as possible , we regret that the proposal presented by the European Commission implies , among other budget headings , a reduction in funding for important community programmes compared with the previous and current multiannual financial framework .
Examples of this include the projected reductions in the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund , the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance - Community programmes from the previous Community framework , 2002-2006 - or LIFE + , the Financial Instrument for the Environment .
In our view , beyond the necessary adjustments to the Solidarity Fund to give it a budget heading with its own resources , it should not receive funding at the cost of the aforementioned Community programmes while , at the same time , there is an insistence on increasing expenditure for military and propaganda purposes .
The funds now being allocated to the Solidarity Fund could preferably have been taken from those headings instead .
The Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) is in favour of emergency assistance , but it is up to the individual Member States , not the European Union , to provide such assistance .
I agree that there should be additional support for workers who suffer from the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns and to assist them with their reintegration into the labour market .
It is essential that financial assistance to workers made redundant is made available as quickly as possible , and that European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) money , vital for the reintegration of redundant workers into the labour market , is used more effectively .
I would like to underline that Member States should provide more detailed information on the implementation of important gender equality and non-discrimination objectives by means of EGF-financed measures .
in writing . - This report is in favour of the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I agree that the mobilisation of this fund is necessary in this case and have therefore voted in favour of this report .
We are well aware of the negative effects of the economic crisis on the labour market and on society as a whole .
We strongly sympathise with all those affected by the crisis and are pleased to see measures such as training that will help individuals overcome this .
However , we are convinced that free trade is basically a force for good that benefits the development of Europe as a whole .
We would therefore like to see the financial crisis being dealt with primarily by market-based means that promote free and fair trade .
Unemployment is one of the main problems affecting the European Economic Area .
Even before the emergence of the current financial crisis , which has increased and aggravated some of the earlier symptoms , the serious impact of globalisation and the resulting relocation of businesses on many people 's lives were clear to see .
The particular difficulties of the times in which we are living are obvious when we add to these problems the present lack of confidence in the markets and the shrinking of investment .
In that respect , although I am in favour of internal market regulation , I believe that the exceptional nature of the crisis justifies exceptional countermeasures .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is one of the tools that the European Union has at its disposal for helping unemployed workers under these circumstances .
I believe that the case of the workers from Nokia GmbH , in the German region of Bochum , justifies European aid , as was previously given in Portugal .
Aside from this aid , which is undeniably useful , the European Union must also take steps to promote a more robust and creative European market that will generate investment and jobs .
That is the only way to tackle this problem effectively , seriously and sustainably .
This case was about responding to a request for assistance from Germany for redundancies in the telecommunications sector , especially among Nokia GmbH workers , which fulfilled the eligibility criteria set out in the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund regulation .
In reality , however , the mobilisation of this fund only alleviates some of the serious consequences of the economic and financial crisis .
There needs to be a break with the neoliberal policies that are causing a real economic and social disaster in many countries of the European Union , particularly Portugal .
Although we voted for this report , we cannot fail to notice the insufficiency of its measures , which are mere palliatives , and the real injustice of the regulation , which is more favourable towards countries with higher incomes , particularly those with higher wages und unemployment benefits .
Therefore , we insist on policy change and the need for a real plan to support production and the creation of jobs with rights .
in writing . - Mr President , I voted in favour of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund 's ( EGF ) investment of nearly EUR 5.6 million in Germany 's North Rhine-Westphalia region , which has suffered from mass redundancies since the 1990 's .
As a result of the Finnish telecommunications company Nokia closing its production plant in Bochum in 2008 and relocating to more cost effective market areas , 2 300 more people in the region were made redundant .
Being a Finn , I take a special interest in the plight of the workers who have lost their jobs due to the cessation of Nokia production in Bochum .
The closure of the Nokia plant in Bochum was indeed the latest in a string of events compounding unemployment in the region .
For this reason , I wholeheartedly welcome the investment from EGF in the region as a way of improving employment opportunities for the people of North Rhine-Westphalia .
It was with the Nokia employees and their unfair redundancies in mind that we voted for this text .
We are anxious to stress , however , that we are not satisfied with having to vote for the best of a bad lot : help with job searches in the context of absurd mass redundancies on the part of the world 's leading mobile telephone manufacturer , Nokia , redundancies described here as one of the hazards of a form of globalisation that we should just put up with .
We denounce this idea of globalisation ' adjustment ' , since this is how the European Union refers to social and human tragedies such as this , which see companies that post record profits relocate in order to make more profit , thus ruining the lives of hundreds of workers and an entire region .
This charitable remedy ( the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ) that is being proposed will not make people forget that the European Union is , in fact , directly responsible for the tragedy being suffered by the redundant employees , because of its choice of free and fair competition .
Rather than supporting these ' adjustments ' to all the huge uncertainties of the globalised capitalist economy , the European Union should prohibit such practices and protect European citizens .
This report is in favour of mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) following redundancies in Germany .
I fully approve of mobilising this fund - we need it in this instance - and so , like the majority of my fellow Members , I voted in favour of this report .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is one of the mechanisms that the European Union has available to it to help unemployed workers who have been made redundant as a result of the negative effects of globalisation .
I believe that the case of the Nokia GmbH employees and of the German region of Bochum warrants mobilisation of European aid , just as it has already been mobilised previously for Portugal .
in writing . - Siwiec was accused of insulting the religious beliefs of others during an event that took place a number of years ago .
After reviewing the facts of the case , I believe that immunity should certainly not be waived .
This is also the view of the rapporteur and therefore , I have voted in favour of the report .
In today 's vote , we voted to waive Mr Siwiec 's immunity .
That would mean that it would be possible for him to stand trial in Poland just like any other citizen .
We have a great deal of sympathy for Mr Siwiec and we agree , for what it is worth , that the case that has been launched against him is unfounded and politically motivated .
If , however , we believe that it should be possible for him to be tried in a court of law like everyone else , this is because we must have confidence that Poland respects the basic principles of democracy and the rule of law that are a precondition of being a Member State of the European Union .
For the same reason , we always vote , as a matter of principle , to waive the immunity of Members of this House - irrespective of the actual case in question .
The creation of the Schengen area by waiving internal border controls and the introduction of free movement within the territory of the EU are among the most important achievements of the European Union .
Taking into account border permeability , we need high standards when actually putting the Schengen acquis into practice in order to be able to maintain an increased level of mutual trust between Member States , which also includes in their ability to implement the measures accompanying the abolition of controls at internal borders .
We need to improve the evaluation mechanism for monitoring the application of the Schengen acquis .
The need to maintain a high level of security and trust requires effective cooperation between the governments of Member States and the Commission .
Bearing in mind the importance of this legislative initiative and its relevance in terms of fundamental rights and freedoms , it is regrettable that the European Parliament is playing the role of consultant rather than colegislator , as ought to have been the case .
Consequently , I voted to reject the Commission 's legislative proposal .
I voted for this report , as the rapporteur 's position is in line with the principles of citizens ' freedoms , justice and home affairs .
The establishment of an evaluation mechanism is important for all Member States .
Since the codecision procedure is not being considered , the European Commission 's proposal limits opportunities for cooperation between the Member States .
The proposal drafted recently by the European Commission will have to be amended once the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force .
The creation of a European area without border controls , through the Schengen Agreement , was an important step in constructing an open internal market with free movement of people and goods .
However , if this area is to fulfil its potential , which I recognise , there needs to be a way of effectively evaluating its implementation by the various Member States .
I therefore agree with strengthening the powers for monitoring Schengen , particularly through assessments ( questionnaires and local visits , both arranged beforehand and unannounced ) and post-assessment measures , so as to ensure adequate supervision of the way in which the various Member States operate , work together and control their external borders under the Schengen Agreement .
I am aware that any deficiency or malfunction in the system carries serious risks for the internal security of the Union and jeopardises the Schengen area itself as an area of freedom , yet also security .
I do not , however , agree with strengthening the Community-based nature of this assessment by bolstering the powers of the European Commission to the detriment of the intergovernmental system which has thus far prevailed in the Schengen Evaluation Group .
For this reason , I vote for rejection of the Commission 's proposal .
We dare to speak of a Schengen acquis , but as someone who lives in Calais , I can confirm first-hand that , while the Schengen agreements have benefited the free movement of capital and goods , they still present a number of problems .
Beyond the pleasant utopia of a Europe without borders , we are faced every day with the tragic reality of Schengen : inhumane living conditions for migrants .
The Union and the Member States are doing little or nothing to deal with this tragedy .
France , for its part , is disgracing itself by conducting media and police manhunts , such as the one in the ' jungle ' of Calais .
Therefore , even in terms of strict humanitarian action , the European Union is totally lacking , leaving the local authorities alone to deal with the problems .
Let us stop crying crocodile tears and finally behave like responsible human beings .
The situation unfolding in Calais is a major political problem for the Union .
It will be resolved by neither the fortress Europe of Schengen nor by targeted humanitarian measures .
We must stop free-trade policies , we must stop the free movement of capital , we must encourage food sovereignty , we must declare water and energy global public goods , and we must combat socio-economic inequalities .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Question Hour with the President of the Commission
The next item is the Question Hour with the President of the Commission .
Free questions
Vice-Chairman of the PPE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , President of the Commission , I would like to begin this first debate by congratulating you on this new instrument of political oversight and what it means for the advancement and development of parliamentary democracy in Europe .
The winners in this will be Europe 's citizens , through their representatives .
Bearing in mind the latest developments - the Irish referendum , ratification by Poland and the recent statements by the President of the Czech Republic - I ask what your assessment is of the process for the Treaty of Lisbon to come into force .
Has the President of the Commission been taking any action ?
What is your projected date for the Treaty to come into force and , furthermore , with this provisional date in mind , has the Commission taken any steps as yet towards the transition of the treaties - from the Treaty of Nice to the Treaty of Lisbon - or are we still in a state of expectation , so to speak ; are we waiting to see what will happen ?
Firstly , Mr Rangel , thank you for your greetings .
I am very pleased to find this procedure now in the European Parliament .
We also have it in Portugal , and I was involved in it both as leader of the opposition and as Prime Minister , and so I hope that this will prove to be a good opportunity for discussion with the honourable Members .
In response to the specific question asked , to me the matter is obvious : all the countries have already approved the Treaty of Lisbon in democratic terms .
Ireland did it by referendum , the other countries through parliament .
The process of ratification is still ongoing in the Czech Republic .
We are awaiting the completion of the process in the Constitutional Court , but once that process is finished , we will have completed the ratification process definitively , because there is a general principle of law , European law and international law , and that is the principle of loyal cooperation between the Member States and the institutions , and also the principle of good faith in negotiating international agreements .
Vice-Chairman of the PPE Group . - ( PT ) President of the Commission , having listened to your response , I would like to know the following : during this phase in which everyone is waiting for the formation of the Commission , what essentially is your own perspective on this ?
Will we just have an acting Commission up until the moment when the Czech Republic finally ratifies the Treaty , or will you proceed to appoint the new commissioners ?
The European Council has decided that it can only appoint new commissioners when there is legal clarity on the Treaty , and we have not yet completed this process .
Therefore , the Commission will just handle day-to-day business from November 1 .
Obviously , we hope that this process will be resolved as quickly as possible and we are preparing everything we possibly can for the new Commission , and will continue to do so .
To be honest with you , honourable Members , the thing is that we do not have complete control over the timing ; it does depend on the finalisation of the ratification process in the Czech Republic .
Vice-Chairman of the S & D Group . - Unemployment could rise to 27 million in the European Union next year , turning this financial and economic crisis into a social crisis .
In the light of this , would you now agree that the economic recovery plan agreed last December was not enough in itself ?
In particular , would you agree that there is a need for a further stimulus - the ETUC has suggested 1 % of GDP - aimed at a positive entry strategy into the labour market that would be aimed at protecting viable employment and creating new jobs , in promoting intelligent work sharing ?
What will you do at EU level to promote jobs in the green and youth sectors ?
It has been suggested , for example , that a single strategic platform should be created at a level to bring together all key actors to work together on growth , innovation and jobs in each sector and to coordinate existing instruments such as technology platforms , skills expert panels and joint technology initiatives .
Would you agree that it would be a good idea for that to be implemented at European level ?
President of the Commission . - I think that without our economic recovery plan , the situation would be much , much worse .
In fact , there was a real cushion effect on the measures taken .
We estimated around 5 % of European Union GDP was spent over 2009 and 2010 , that is around EUR 550 billion .
So I think something was , in fact , done .
Let us be realistic about it .
I am in favour of all other efforts in terms of the combined platforms you have suggested to address the problems we face .
Employment remains the most important problem .
As you know , I have stated this several times and have , in fact , asked for a summit on employment .
It was downgraded by some Member States .
Probably you , Mr Hughes , can help us convince some Member States and governments that decided to downgrade that employment summit , because I believe employment is the most important problem that we have to face in the near future .
Vice-Chairman of the S & D Group . - I will indeed work on those Member States .
Just coming back to this idea of the level market entry strategy , would you agree that spending aimed at effectively reducing unemployment should not be seen as an additional burden on public finances but as a way to guarantee sustainability ?
President of the Commission . - And , in fact , that is what we have been doing .
Some of the special measures that have been taken by Member States - look at Kurzarbeit in Germany for instance - have been to increase spending , while reducing productivity to some extent , which I think , from a social point of view , was justified .
I could say the same for the Welsh system which was approved in the United Kingdom .
So there have indeed been good cases where , for social reasons , there has been more flexibility and more social spending , but that was a way of avoiding a further rise in unemployment , which remains my prime concern nowadays .
Chairman of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , my question will come as no surprise to the President of the Commission .
On Friday , Commissioner Kroes announced that there were significant indications that the German aid for Opel contravenes the European rules on State aid and the internal market and that it disadvantages plants in other countries .
Günter Verheugen , on the other hand , could not see a problem ; indeed , he said on the radio that Opel was already on the right track .
Yesterday , a fellow Member from the Christian Democratic Union of Germany ( CDU ) even asked that we blow the whistle on Commissioner Kroes .
He spoke of her as a commissioner who was very controversial , who lacked objectivity , who was anti-German , who could not throw Europe into turmoil two weeks before the end of her term of office .
In my view , Commissioner Kroes is just doing her job , and so my question to you is very simple , Commission President : will you support your commissioner Neelie Kroes , yes or no ?
President of the Commission . - I have always supported my Commissioners , including Neelie Kroes .
It was , of course , after having my consent that she took the decision - namely the contacts she had with the German Government asking for clarification .
We are now waiting for a response from the undertakings involved .
I am grateful that , thanks to good cooperation , we are making very good progress in this case .
I understand that , following the doubts the Commission expressed on the rightfulness of the bidding process , there will be a reassessment by GM and Opel Trust of the offers to buy Opel , based on commercial conditions .
I am confident we can reach a solution that is compatible with European internal market and State aid rules .
I have very often said that we cannot make compromises on the issues of the internal market and competition rules in Europe .
If we do , we will no longer have an internal market or our common European project .
Chairman of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) I have no further questions .
I would only note that the President of the Commission has stated very clearly here that he , too , vouches for the letter sent by Commissioner Kroes , and that it also has the approval of the Commission as a whole .
That is indeed important , as it means that Commissioner Verheugen should choose his words more carefully when he says that there are no problems .
There either are or there are not .
President of the Commission . - Not only did the letter have my support but before Mrs Kroes sent the letter , I told her to send a letter , so my position on those issues is very clear .
Mr Verhofstadt , let us be clear .
We have three people in the Commission who have the right to give an opinion , but the positions of the Commission are the positions expressed by the President on behalf of the college and by the relevant Commissioner .
Co-Chairman of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , with great concern for a possible failure of the climate change negotiations in Copenhagen , this Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety yesterday re-affirmed old demands of the European Council and adopted them with great urgency and very strong support .
The committee proposed that the Council should once again deal with the necessity of laying down a CO2 reduction target of 30 % for the European Union , opening up the possibility of 40 % for the industrialised nations , and it proposed - and this is key to the international negotiations - that Europe should provide EUR 30 billion for the climate fund for the developing countries by 2020 .
What will you do , what can you do , in order to bring these important , necessary and justified demands to the attention of the Council ?
President of the Commission . - As I said publicly at the high-level event in New York , and also in Pittsburgh , I am very worried at the slow pace of negotiations for Copenhagen .
There are three potential stumbling blocks for Copenhagen , relating not just to financing : the clear lack of ambition as regards emission reduction pledges from some developed countries outside the European Union ; the reluctance of major developing countries - the big emerging economies - to come forward with convincing proposals for their mitigation actions ; and also the absence of a solid financial offer by the developed countries on the negotiation table .
These are the three stumbling blocks .
I hope that the European Union keeps its leadership position and that the European Council comes up with a solid financial proposal at the end of this month .
I hope we will have time to discuss this in more detail tomorrow , because climate change will be one of the main topics of discussion at the next European Council .
The Commission will certainly fight for an ambitious programme because , as I have always said , climate change is not only an environmental matter , but also a development matter .
Co-Chairman of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) President of the Commission , in numerous discussions for information purposes , including with high-ranking UN officials , we are told that the European Union 's efforts have now fallen behind those of countries such as China and , as far as its endeavours are concerned , Japan .
How can you still claim that we will be playing a leadership role ?
President of the Commission . - I will be extremely happy the day that happens , but unfortunately it is not true .
So far , the European Union is the only block that has committed to binding targets that are now translated into legislation .
We welcome some positive developments , namely the good political announcement made by the new Prime Minister of Japan - I have personally congratulated him - but so far , it is a political announcement .
We welcome some of the national plans announced by China , but so far China has not agreed to make these binding in the negotiations in Copenhagen .
We welcome other positive developments , but in fact , we are leading the world in this fight against climate change .
I would like to have someone else around us when we are leading , because it is sometimes not very comfortable to be in the lead and to be alone .
But the reality is that others have to match our level of ambition .
Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank you for being living proof that promises made by politicians are fulfilled .
When my wife asks me to do something , and wants to know if I will be sure to do it , I always say , ' Yes - after all , I am a politician . '
You have shown , today , that you keep your word as a politician .
You are with us , and you are answering the questions of the Chamber very well .
Mr President , in your speech to us here , you said that it is extremely important to strengthen the single market , and that strengthening the single market is a prescription for the crisis in Europe .
I should like to ask you , Mr President , on behalf of my group , what you intend to do over the next few months so that the strengthening of the single European market will help to fight the serious economic crisis with which we are faced today .
President of the Commission . - Thank you very much , Mr Kamiński .
In fact , I said in my political guidelines , which I believe were endorsed by the European Parliament with the strong support you gave for my re-election , that the internal market is a priority and we should fight all kinds of economic nationalism .
I have good news for all of you .
Just today , I entrusted Mario Monti with a mission to prepare a report on the future of the single market , containing options and recommendations for an initiative to relaunch the single market .
I am delighted that he has accepted this mission , as it is a way of having some outside expertise , to build support , hopefully together with the European Parliament , so that we can give a new impetus to the internal market , and to see how we can make the internal market fit for the 21st century .
I believe that this is particularly important for consumers and also for small and medium-sized companies , which sometimes feel the pressure and suffer from distorting behaviour in the common market .
Mr President , I would like , finally , to say how very important it is for us , for our group , that in this work to strengthen the single market , in this building of our common Europe , you have not forgotten the differences which exist in Europe .
You have not forgotten that we have countries which have only recently acceded to the European Union , and which are , in a sense , economically handicapped .
We know that you have always acted very fairly towards these new Member States , and I hope that you will continue to do so .
President of the Commission . - I think the internal market is the best way to protect all the Member States , whether they are new or old , big or small , rich or poor .
It is a policy of justice because it is the best way to protect the weaker , namely the consumers who are usually the weaker .
It is also the way to protect small and medium-sized companies with regard to the big monopolies or oligopolies .
So it is this - the inspiration for the internal market - that is such an important acquis of our European Union .
Chairman of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , you are calling for us to leave behind the economic stimulus programmes soon and for the budget deficits in the Member States to be quickly reduced .
Yet even your most recent forecast promises growth in EU GDP of just 0.1 % in the fourth quarter of 2009 .
For 2009 as a whole , that would represent a 4 % decrease .
According to your own forecasts , unemployment rates in the EU will rise to over 11 % in 2010 .
Do you not think that early , drastic cuts in public expenditure could stop the small beginnings of recovery in their tracks ?
Or do you believe that the financial sector , for the moment , has got over the problem and the ordinary people should bear the costs of the crisis ?
Already , you are forcing scandalous conditions for EU emergency credit on the people of Latvia , Hungary and Romania : lower wages , lower pension benefits , fewer public services and higher VAT .
Is that your idea of a social Europe ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , precisely because we are concerned with the figures you have mentioned - and broadly I agree with them - they are indeed our forecasts .
As I have said several times before , we are preparing the exit strategy but we are not recommending that we start implementing the exit strategy now .
So we are saying that we should keep the stimulus programmes .
The finance ministers have been meeting and I think that they have agreed that we should not implement the exit strategy before 2011 .
So we still need to keep the stimulus to our economy , precisely because of our concerns , namely on the social front and unemployment in particular .
But , as you know , this crisis was also provoked by very large imbalances , by high public spending , by financial orgies .
I think that we should not keep an unsustainable model so at a certain moment , we have to come back to sustainability .
This is also a question of solidarity with future generations .
Chairman of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , have I understood you correctly , namely that 2011 could be the date for this ' exit ' ?
President of the Commission . - I cannot confirm that now but I can tell you that , most likely , it will not be before then .
I think that is the consensus between the finance ministers and , by the way , that was also the position that the European Union brought to the G20 .
Now there is also the effort towards global coordination of these policies .
That does not mean that all the regions of the world will take the same decisions at the same time , but during this crisis , we have seen that we are , for better or for worse , connected , and we have to try to articulate these exit strategies globally .
So most likely , it will not be before 2011 but we should continue to monitor the economic situation very closely .
Co-Chairman of the EFD Group . - Mr Barroso , it is very good to see you here .
A chance to hold the executive to account surely must be welcomed .
As you know , I have not always been one of your biggest supporters , but I have to concede you have done very well .
You have managed to ignore the French referendum result , you have managed to ignore the Dutch referendum result and you have managed to bully the Irish into submission the second time around .
So you have almost got your Treaty .
Now , of course , it is time to pick the President - the big global figurehead of the European Union .
Tony Blair is the odds-on favourite with the bookmakers .
I just wondered whether you agree with me that his continued support for Britain to join the euro , his surrender of GBP 2 billion a year of the British rebate and his whole approach towards Britain 's membership of the European Union - his refusal to give the British a referendum - all show that he has sufficient pro-European credentials to become the President ?
Indeed , was this the deal that I predicted back in 2005 ?
Was this agreed all along ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , Mr Farage , do not be so sad about the result in Ireland .
It was not a great result - just 67 % of the people !
When there is a real debate with real ownership , we have shown that there can be strong support for Europe .
In fact , it was a declaration of independence by Ireland from the United Kingdom Independence Party , because you were there campaigning and the Irish said ' no ' to you and to your party .
( Applause )
Now , regarding the future President of the Council , I am not going to comment .
That is a decision for the European Council .
What I would like to tell you very frankly is that there are no hidden agreements and there are no hidden agendas .
If there were , I would already know .
So there are no hidden agreements or secret bargaining .
What I can tell you is the following : we need a President of the Council who is a committed European and who gives consistency all the time , because I do not think it proper to have a Council that changes its agenda completely every six months .
I am a very strong supporter of a strong European Council presence which gives coherence and consistency to the Council and that works , of course , hand in hand with the Commission and is fully committed to the European project and to Community matters .
Co-Chairman of the EFD Group . - Mr Barroso , I am disappointed .
It is Question Time , and a ' yes ' or a ' no ' would have been easier , but never mind .
Whether it is Mr Blair or not , the fact is he will not be democratically elected ; you yourself have not been democratically elected ; in fact , doesn 't this rather sum up the whole EU ?
Isn 't it a rather wonderful organisation for giving retired , clapped-out ex-premiers some real executive power ?
You could have democratised the EU with this Treaty .
You chose not to .
Does national democracy matter , or is the European Union , in your opinion , a greater good ?
President of the Commission . - It is precisely because the European Union is not the kind of integrated state you appear to fear so much that the President of the Council is not directly elected by people but is chosen by the democratically elected Heads of Government of Europe .
That is precisely the logic of it .
I myself was not only supported unanimously by the democratically elected Heads of Government , but also by a strong majority in this Parliament .
So I feel I have strong democratic legitimacy .
( Applause )
In my previous life as a national politician , I was democratically elected to my national parliament at the age of 29 , and I should tell you that it is more difficult to be elected President of the Commission than Prime Minister in most of our countries !
( HU ) Tomorrow at 15.00 , I am holding a press conference about the human rights crisis situation that has persisted since 2006 .
I cordially invite and expect to see Mr President and all my fellow Members .
According to information from the National Legal Aid Service , the huge number of court rulings confirm that in autumn 2006 , acts of brutal police terror took place in Hungary , especially on 23 October , during the 50th anniversary commemoration .
On government orders , the police committed a number of atrocities , including shooting 14 people in the eye thereby blinding many of them , and they held as political prisoners and tortured several hundred innocent people .
Are you aware , Mr President , that Kinga Göncz , Vice-Chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , was a member of the government that sanctioned the shooting ?
I would like to hear your opinion about this and I cordially and respectfully invite you and expect to see you at tomorrow 's press conference .
President of the Commission . - I am following all the developments in the Member States , but let us be clear : the Commission does not have the power to intervene in some internal matters of the Member States , and this is the kind of issue on which we cannot provide an answer here because this is an internal debate that is going on in Hungary .
We have the authority as the Commission to intervene in any issue of fundamental rights when it is the implementation of Community law .
This was not the case in the events referred to by the distinguished Member of Parliament .
So I would ask you not to put questions to me that you can better treat at national parliament level rather than here in the European Parliament .
( HU ) Am I right in understanding then that freedom of assembly , freedom of opinion , human rights and even the European Convention on Human Rights are not , according to what you have said , part of European Union law ?
Are human rights not part of the European Union 's system of values and legal system ?
If not , I have been misinformed .
President of the Commission . - Of course , human rights are part of the European Union but we have a system based on the rule of law and we assume that all Member States , including your country , are countries governed by the rule of law .
So you have the option of putting your questions to your courts , and there are also appeals to the European Court of Human Rights or to the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg .
So we have a system of human rights .
What I cannot do and should not do is enter into national political debates between the different political parties .
Thank you very much , Mr President .
I should like to thank the Chairs of the political groups most sincerely for keeping to time , and for conducting the debate so well .
I would also like to thank Mr Barroso .
We must keep to time if we are to have a lively debate .
So thank you very much , everyone .
Consequences of the financial crisis on employment and social cohesion
( NL ) Mr President , my question concerns the crisis-response measures .
When it comes to emission targets in relation to climate change , Europe is ahead of the United States .
The United States are ahead , however , in terms of private-sector investment in technological innovations and sustainability , which is extremely important for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and for employment .
In fact , it was also a cornerstone of your crisis and recovery plan .
Yet what is your ambition in this regard ?
When are we going to reach the same level as the United States , and what is the Commission doing , and what can it do , to ensure this level is reached ?
Broadly speaking , our SMEs are still running up against a great many barriers and , as a result , are missing out on growth potential .
What are you going to do to complete the internal market ; which , after all , is a major source of growth for our employment ?
President of the Commission . - I have already answered a previous speaker with some ideas on the internal market but , regarding the point you are clearly making on technology , I fully agree .
We are behind the United States and others in terms of investment in new technologies .
That is why , for instance , in this special package , we have approved a European economic recovery plan .
We have put a lot of emphasis on investment in some issues regarding the climate agenda and energy security .
We are linking those two issues .
That is why we have very recently come up with the SET Plan and we are also urging Member States to devote more resources to financing green technologies , in other words , all the technology that can enable us to become a more sustainable , greener economy .
Certainly this is a matter that we should also consider for the next financial perspectives .
As you know , we will put forward our budget review before the end of the year .
There will also be an opportunity to have a good debate about where , in the future , we should place our emphasis in terms of investment .
Colleagues , could I ask you not to ask supplementary questions .
I have a very long list of names here , and it would be much more interesting if more Members could ask questions .
( EL ) Mr President , the Commission quite rightly issued a recommendation in 2008 about integrating more people into the labour market .
I should first of all like to ask if , other than this recommendation and the measures taken by the Member States , you intend , as the European Commission , to take additional measures in order to strengthen the open method of coordination in the social sector ?
I refer to measures which are compatible with viable industrial policies , in order to increase employment .
Secondly , 2010 has been declared - as we all know - to be the European year for combating poverty .
Our objective is to strengthen social cohesion .
The question is very simple , Mr President : will you put all your energy , will you have the courage - you personally - to fight for quantitative targets on the question of poverty ?
I would ask in particular that you do not refer me to the Member States , as you did when briefing the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
( The President cut off the speaker )
President of the Commission . - I have said earlier that my number one concern is unemployment , but to fight unemployment we should not only have a reactive position but a proactive position .
This , I think , could be achieved through the revision of the Lisbon strategy and an integrated vision for 2020 .
We have to base the European Union 's long-term strategy on new sources of sustainable growth , for instance , what we call ' white ' jobs , in social services , where there have been 3.3 million new jobs since 2000 .
That is 16 % of all new jobs .
The market for green products and services is also set to double by 2020 , creating huge opportunities for green jobs , so we are promoting a mapping exercise across the European Union to anticipate the jobs and the skills needed .
I am therefore determined to work in this new strategy to reinforce the social priority , as I already said to you when we discussed the broader political guidelines for the next mandate .
As we know , hundreds of thousands of people are losing their jobs in the current economic crisis and many of these are older people who are at a severe disadvantage when they try to get new jobs .
Even though the 2000 Employment Directive should be adhered to in each Member State , many of those older workers still do not know what their rights are under this Directive , and many Member States are flouting the rules .
Even if some workers do know their rights , all too often they find it impossible to take action individually without any back-up .
At present we do not yet have legislation to protect many people against discrimination in access to goods and services , but we do have the Employment Directive .
Can you tell us what action is being taken against Member States who do not implement it properly , and what mechanisms could be put in place to help older and disabled workers to achieve their rights ?
President of the Commission . - Whenever there is non-compliance with our directives by Member States , we launch infringement proceedings , so when there is a specific case , we can and will act .
Regarding the overall issue you mention , let me tell you that this crisis has made more than five million Europeans unemployed .
The most affected categories are young people and migrants .
Unemployment now stands at 9.1 % in the European Union , but that unemployment rate is more than double in young workers ( 19.8 % ) and migrants ( 19.1 % ) .
These are the most important concerns we now have in terms of social matters .
The issue of tackling child poverty also remains a very important priority .
We are also , of course , following the situation as regards older people , in accordance with the current directives .
( MT ) I believe that it is a worthwhile matter to talk about how we can create more jobs in the European Union .
However , I think that we should also consider how to safeguard jobs , and prevent them from being lost .
My government intervened at the point where the crisis was most being felt .
I believe that with the government 's intervention , thousands of jobs were saved , obviously through an increase in expenditure in the social sector .
Do you not think that the Commission needs to make more of an effort in order to ensure that this takes place in every European Union country ?
I know that you will bring up the newly amended Globalisation Fund , and the fact that it is being used to help even more workers ; however , I believe that we must do our utmost to ensure that these people 's jobs are safeguarded , so that they will not need to make use of the Globalisation Fund .
I think this should be our actual target .
President of the Commission . - Not only have we revised the rules of the globalisation fund , we have also reprogrammed the European Social Fund with the fast-tracking of EUR 1.8 billion to reinforce active labour market policies .
On cohesion policy , we have also made some changes to simplify the rules and to frontload payments .
This is a very important policy as well .
I have already mentioned the EUR 550 billion of the stimulus plan and , of course , I may also mention the Globalisation Adjustment Fund as well as some other proposals that we have made .
Unfortunately , I have to say that there was one idea the Member States did not follow , namely to suspend cofinancing for the Social Fund .
We put this on the Council table , but it was rejected .
I still hope that with your support , we can have that , because there are some countries that simply do not have the financial means to complement the funding for the Social Fund out of their own money .
So we are also using to the maximum all the instruments we have at Community level to back up what the Member States can do themselves to fight this unemployment .
( ES ) Mr President , thank you for this interesting debate that we are having today .
You said , regarding employment , that some Member States did not attend the Prague Summit .
What is more serious , Mr President , is that the Council , in the greatest employment crisis in the history of Europe - today 10 000 Europeans will have lost their jobs , and the same tomorrow and the day after - has not taken any serious initiative and there has not been a single summit on employment .
You could also have said that the Commission has an agenda from last year , which was outdated even then and which is now failing to meet the very pressing needs of millions and millions of citizens , of a whole generation of Europeans and the whole welfare state , whose future is at stake .
Mr President I want to ask for your leadership : we need active leadership , leadership that breaks with apathy and a lack of transparency .
You need to tell the Council that we cannot go on like this .
We need a Commission that not only manages ordinary resources and ordinary matters but which , at this difficult time - and I know that it is difficult for you , Mr President - places itself at the head of Europe , in a great institutional agreement to give hope to a whole generation of Europeans .
The fact is that we are doing all we can and , as I said when I outlined the programme , we are giving social matters a higher profile because there is currently an emergency situation from a social point of view .
To give an example , that was why I declared the need to examine the social impact in all new legislation .
That is why we are promoting the common active inclusion principles as Community policy .
That is also why I am able to say to the Member States that we are supporting social investment .
Social expenditure , which made up 28 % of GDP in 2008 , will rise to 31 % in 2010 .
That represents about EUR 3 500 billion more !
We are making a real effort here , but of course , Mr Cercas , the truth is that it has to be a collective effort by the Commission , Parliament and the Member States .
( DE ) Mr President , Europe means freedom , democracy and solidarity or , to put it another way , social and ecological responsibility .
However , you and the Commission have had an entirely one-dimensional focus on the freedom element of that for a long time - and specifically in that regard only on economic freedom , on freedom understood purely in the economic sense - and on regulating in numerous areas where no regulation is needed , yet , where what is at stake are billions , on the world financial markets , your focus has been largely on not interfering and not regulating because you believed that that would lead to the best results for everyone .
We have seen the catastrophic results that that has led to and I ask you in all clarity how and through what projects and plans you intend to make clear to this Parliament and the people of Europe in a credible way that you and the Commission have learnt from this catastrophe and will change our course radically ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , the question of credibility is a subjective question for you .
I think that the response to this question was given by Parliament , which gave me a new mandate recently , so it shows that this Parliament believes I am credible to go ahead with this policy .
In fact , we are pursuing our policy in response to the economic and financial crisis .
We have taken important decisions ; we are leading globally on regulatory and supervisory measures we have taken recently .
Based on the report I commissioned to the de Larosière Group , we have tabled some proposals which I hope will be approved by the Council and by Parliament .
Just today , at a meeting of the Commission , we approved the communication on derivatives , which will , of course , have to be followed up by concrete legislation .
So indeed we are responding to the financial crisis in all its aspects , including regulatory and supervisory , and I have already taken some decisions during this Commission , and the next Commission will , of course , follow this path because I believe the situation demands it .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to talk about the aid approved under the Temporary Framework aimed at reducing the problems that have arisen as a result of the economic crisis , and specifically about Opel .
I would like to ask you whether the Commission is examining whether the aid received by Germany under the Temporary Framework was dependent on a prior agreement regarding the geographical distribution of the restructuring measures , which would not be in line with the purpose of this aid .
If this is the case , I would like to know whether you agree with the company having the freedom to revise the distribution and restructuring of Opel according to its own economic and production criteria and maintaining the greatest possible number of jobs .
I have already responded to this question , but I will say that we did have a few doubts about the way in which this process was conducted .
The Commission expressed these doubts , and General Motors and Opel Trust are now reassessing the way in which the offer to buy Opel was made , and to verify whether , in fact , this offer was made on a commercial basis or not .
We , the European Commission , will do everything we can to ensure that the solution complies with the internal market regulations and the rules on State aid , and we will , of course , be objective and strict in applying these rules .
Every single European country is united in that we all face rising unemployment , which is obviously not just a social crisis , but also puts extra burdens on Member States ' public purses , with rising welfare costs , falling taxes and increased training .
Given this , would you agree , Mr Barroso , that we , as Members of this Parliament , and the Commission should be extra cautious with every penny that we add onto public sector burdens ?
If you do agree , firstly , how would you advise us to vote in the budget debate on Thursday ?
Secondly , why do we keep meeting in Strasbourg ?
President of the Commission . - I support the proposed budget for next year so my advice is to vote ' yes ' .
Regarding the issue of being careful and rigorous , I agree with you .
We have to be extremely careful with all taxpayers ' money , and we have to see the priorities .
Today , there is a clear social urgency in some Member States .
There are problems of social exclusion and poverty that , I am sure , are a matter of concern to all Members of this House , so we have to see what is the best way .
As you know , the Commission has been extremely strict , under the terms of the Stability and Growth Pact , in committing ourselves and the European Union to the rules of sustainability .
Of course , we do not think that problems can be solved just by throwing money at them , but in fact there are situations , like the current one , when we believe special attention has to be given to a situation of social urgency .
Exceptional measures were needed for what was an unprecedented situation .
It is a question , as always , of balance in judgment .

( HU ) President of the Commission , according to European Commission Regulation No 800 / 2008 , wage subsidies for people with disabilities were reduced to 75 % of the maximum amount .
This is why , since 1 January 2009 , employment for people with disabilities and for those whose work capacity has changed has been hit by a crisis .
As a result , the sources of employment provided for people with disabilities have decreased significantly due to budgetary restraint .
This is also the reason why the national support provided in many countries , for example Hungary , for setting up a job creation team , has been jeopardised .
They say that the European Union is to blame .
I would therefore like to ask a question .
During a financial crisis , how does the European Commission want to handle the employment rights of people with disabilities , the task of preserving jobs for them and the principle of equal pay for equal work ?
This regulation was formulated before the crisis .
President of the Commission . - As the distinguished Member knows , I am sure , the European Commission has put forward a proposal - a horizontal directive - for non-discrimination that also includes disability .
And now that draft proposal is in your hands and in the hands of the European Council .
So I really hope that it will be approved because we are certainly against any kind of discrimination against disabled people .
Many of the problems you have mentioned have to be dealt with at national level because these are the measures in terms of concrete support that are to be taken by the national social security systems .
But in the European Union , we are doing everything we can to have a binding framework that commits ourselves and all the Member States to the principle of non-discrimination and to special protection for disabled people .
( FR ) Mr Barroso , you have been appointed by this Chamber to be the next President of the Commission .
Your next urgent task is to organise that Commission so that it can serve a Europe that is hauling itself out of the crisis .
On that basis , how do you plan to use the inadequate Community tools that are at our disposal so as to optimise them , and how do you envisage dividing up the portfolios so that we can deal with the issues that arise ?
I am well aware that everything depends on your discussion with the Heads of State or Government , but as President of the Commission , you must share your vision with them .
How can we link these strategies that are available to us ?
How can we divide up the portfolios so as to take account of the lessons learnt from this crisis ?
With regard to the tools , I will cite just one example .
The Globalisation Adjustment Fund is today at odds with State aid strategies that stop us from implementing industrial policies that would help us come out of the crisis .
What are your proposals ?
What mandate are you going to ask the Heads of State or Government for , and how are you going to ask them to divide up the portfolios ?
The distribution of the portfolios is not a competence of the Heads of State or Government , but a competence of the President of the Commission , and I will certainly use that competence in the manner that I consider most appropriate .
I already made some announcements during my discussion with you about the programme of the next Commission , but in fact , I am in contact with the Heads of State or Government .
I can also tell you that , only today , I sent a letter to everyone asking them to send me female candidates for the College as well .
Indeed , I am very concerned about the problem of the balance between men and women ; if I do nothing , I will have practically no women , because the governments generally want only male candidates for the next Commission .
I therefore sent this letter only today .
As regards the actual distribution , there will be no major change .
I already announced the main innovations during my debate with you .
These included , in particular , a commissioner for justice and fundamental rights , and a commissioner for action in the field of climate change , and , of course , I now need competent men and women who are committed to Europe , who can successfully complete their respective tasks under the various portfolios , which will correspond to the priorities for European Union action .
Hitherto , the creation of wealth and the measure of well-being have been based largely on consumption , and so industry has been encouraged to pay little attention to the real value of raw materials used , even if their price is low , or to the real cost of waste produced .
How does your Commission intend to ensure that growth in future will be of a different nature and that we will not find ourselves in a situation where , after another 20 years of growth , we have a planet unable to sustain what we are doing and a society unable to afford the real costs of living in such a way ?
President of the Commission . - I would like to thank Graham Watson for this very important question .
In fact , that is the core of the programme for the next five years : to invest more in smart , green growth , sustainable growth .
This is very important .
We have to understand that the model of the future will not be like the model of the past .
I am for a strong industrial base in Europe - but a strong industrial base for the new age of sustainability , where we have to think about green development , green technologies .
That is where we can create new products , new markets .
This is a good example .
That is why we are organising our future programme in terms of what I called , in my political guidelines , ' new sources of growth ' because , with the traditional sources of growth , we will not win the battle of competitiveness with big emerging economies like China and India .
So innovation has to be at the core , at the centre of our agenda for growth , new sources of growth promoting the transition to a low-carbon economy : smart green development and innovation .
I think innovation will be key for the development of the European economy in the future .
( DA ) Mr Barroso , the financial crisis has given rise to an economic crisis on an historic scale and , at this moment , unemployment is rising dramatically in Europe .
Unemployment amongst young people - those under 25 - in Europe is 19.8 % , as you yourself said , and in Spain more than one in three of those under 25 are unemployed .
Right now , we are in the process of making a mess of a whole generation and so far , Mr Barroso , you have done pretty much nothing to solve this problem .
Today , I have heard that you are very concerned about this , and I am pleased to hear that - I would like to see the evidence .
Even if the responsibility for employment policy lies at the national level , there is also a need for European responsibility and European initiatives .
There are three things that I would like to call for . First of all , Commissioner Špidla promised 5 million traineeships for young people in Europe .
What happened to them ?
Secondly , we are currently adopting growth and rescue packages all over Europe .
Why do these packages not include a targeted jobs scheme for young people ?
Thirdly , what will you do to achieve a stronger social profile and a stronger plan for young people in the new post-Lisbon strategy ?
President of the Commission . - I repeat that we have used to the full our existing instruments .
We have Community-level instruments , but there are some instruments that are national-level instruments .
What we can do is to work with the Member States to make the most of these , to exchange best practice and to urge them to follow this .
Commissioner Špidla , who has done a great job in very difficult circumstances , is , in fact , together with the Commission as a whole , asking for the Member States to develop five million apprenticeships .
We are making available some best practices .
For instance , in France , there have been extremely good practices from private companies promoting in-house training in their companies and promoting apprenticeships with public money , but with part of it also funded by the companies themselves .
So this is indeed a priority and we are doing it with all our instruments - the European Social Fund , the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the Cohesion Fund and the doubling of the facility for balance of payment support to new Member States and non-euro area countries .
We have used our instruments to the full but we have to work with the Member States in a reinforced manner to address these social concerns and , as you mentioned especially , the concern of youth unemployment .
( PT ) Mr President , in order to reduce poverty and unemployment , we have to create jobs with rights , support production and improve universal , free public services .
In other words , we have to invest in other policies .
We need to do the opposite of what has been done so far .
For example , we were startled to learn , in this day and age , of a study by the Directorate General for Employment and the Eurofund which presented two scenarios for the textile industry , predicting the loss of 20 to 25 % of Community jobs by 2020 , while a third scenario even suggested we would lose 50 % of current jobs in the sector within the European Union .
How , then , can this situation be reconciled with the new proposals being drawn up aimed at the liberalisation of international trade , without taking account of the consequences in Portugal and other countries in the European Union which have very sensitive sectors , such as the textile industry , agriculture , and a plethora of micro- and small businesses which are being choked by these policies ?
I do not think that shutting off Europe is the solution for Portugal or any other European country .
Europe is the biggest exporter of goods and services in the world , and there is nothing at all to be gained by adopting protectionist policies .
There are indeed some sectors , often called ' traditional sectors ' in certain European countries , especially , but not exclusively , in the south of Europe , which are particularly vulnerable to the new conditions of international competition , and that is why they are making a special effort to adapt to these new conditions .
As I said in an earlier response , this means that we must seek new sources of growth and competitiveness within Europe .
However , we should certainly not shut ourselves in and close off Europe , which would mean running the risk that other markets would close themselves off in turn from our exports .
We need to invest in innovation , invest in training , invest in new sources of growth and aim to be more competitive , while at the same time , as you said - and we agree on this point - ensuring that this is not at the expense of the social standards that are important in Europe .
We are not suggesting that our social standards should be lowered .
We are also trying to help others raise their social standards , but I certainly do not advocate that Europe should shut itself off .
I think that it is in Europe 's best interests to maintain open global markets .
Mr Barroso , the financial crisis in the UK is very serious .
One of the many sectors struggling is the agricultural sector .
From 1 January 2010 , things are set to get a lot worse with the introduction of EID , which is ' electronic identification of sheep ' .
The equipment used to scan the sheep is not accurate .
I have been told it is only 79 % accurate .
If you drive your car , Mr Barroso , down the road , and the brakes only work 79 % of the time , you will no doubt at some point crash .
I fear that the agricultural sheep sector is also likely to crash with the introduction of EID , with its flawed equipment .
The bizarre situation is that if EID comes into force in January , we will know how many sheep we have in the UK , where they are and all their movements , yet in the UK - due to unlimited immigration - we have no idea of how many people we have in our country , or who they are or what movements they will make .
Will you , Mr Barroso , speak to the rest of the Commission and only introduce EID on a voluntary basis until the equipment used is 100 % accurate ?
That is a very specific question .
We prefer general questions about the crisis and how to overcome it .
The President of the European Commission cannot be informed about specific issues in individual countries , so please be more general in your questions .
President of the Commission . - I just want to say that I do not like that comparison between sheep and people very much .
I do not think it is in very good taste , really .
( Applause )
Having said that , we are committed to implementing the identification you mentioned , but of course we are being careful .
If there are problems in the implementation , we are ready to look at it .
However , I feel that the measures that have already been taken regarding the identification of sheep are indeed good in general .
Let us see how it works in practice .
( HU ) Mr Barroso , the global financial crisis triggered in the United States has spread to the real economy , resulting in the loss of millions of jobs and creating a state of social crisis .
The European Union is endeavouring to take steps in the case of companies like Opel , and if any plan is implemented , it will also involve direct help .
At the same time , it is small and medium-sized enterprises that create jobs , in fact , the majority of jobs .
Do you think , Mr President , that this measure to help them is sufficient ?
Hungary is in a particularly difficult position as it only has foreign commercial banks .
In this case , could direct State aid be given , or is this economic nationalism , which you have declared war on , or else market dogmatism ?
President of the Commission . - My clear answer is no : what we have done is not sufficient .
We have to do more for SMEs ; I think it is a priority .
We have approved the Small Business Act ; that is good .
We have improved the late payments issue by reducing delays in payment ; that was good and was very much welcomed by SMEs .
We are , of course , trying to limit all bureaucratic and administrative procedures that create administrative burdens , particularly for SMEs , and we are committed to making life easier for SMEs .
They are , as you said - and I agree with you - one of the most important sectors for creating more jobs , and this is part of our policy .
Another measure that we have taken recently , which I have not yet mentioned today , was to increase to EUR 500 000 the threshold of State aid allowed in direct support by Member States to some SMEs in special difficulties .
So I think SMEs should remain a priority of our action for sustainability , including sustainable employment .
( GA ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank President Barroso for coming here and answering questions openly , honestly and eagerly .
Unfortunately , President Barroso was accused of not being democratically elected and of bullying the Irish into submission .
I would like to tell Mr Farage that he certainly was not democratically elected to speak on behalf of the Irish , and his use of the word ' bully ' was also unfortunate because , for 700 years , Ireland was known as John Bull 's other island , when John Bull - namely England - tried to bully the Irish into submission .
Thankfully , that day is now over so I will go on to my question .
With the new competences which the Lisbon Treaty gives to the European Union , would President Barroso consider giving one Commissioner exclusive responsibility to bring forward new proposals and new measures to enact these competences ?
President of the Commission . - I am sorry , I did not understand the question very well because , if you are suggesting having a new Commissioner for all the new competences of the Lisbon Treaty , no , I certainly do not think this is reasonable because they are in so many different areas that we cannot ask one person to have all these competences .
Now I have already announced , answering a previous question , what I think will be some of the innovations in terms of the portfolios .
There may be some more ; I am working on it .
This is , after all , an interactive work with the Member States too .
For instance , Ireland has not yet designated a possible Commissioner .
I did this five years ago , and this is an interactive process where I also need to see the people that those Member States have put forward in order to form the Commission .
I will certainly do my best to find competent people - men and women ( and I am saying this also for Ireland ! ) - so that we can , in the end , have a college of committed Europeans who are competent and experienced in all fields , from economy , general politics , energy , environment , justice , fundamental rights and so forth : a huge set of competences for which we need a very able group of people .
This is the first time Parliament has had this question-and-answer session with the President of the Commission , so thank you very much once again , President Barroso .
As this was a special event for us , would you care to make a few general comments about this first question-and-answer session ?
President of the Commission . - Thank you very much , Mr President and all the distinguished Members of this Parliament , for this exercise .
I really enjoyed it .
I think it is a good exercise .
I have to tell you very frankly that it is extremely difficult for me to compress all my arguments , or at least my main arguments , into one minute , especially because most of the time I am not speaking my own language .
I am speaking in languages that I believe are more accessible and that requires an additional effort from me .
Anyway , you decide the format .
I can discuss it with you because I believe that free , confrontational and controversial debates are a good contribution to a stronger European democratic space .
( Applause )
That concludes the item .
Draft general budget 2010 ( Sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII , IX ) - Draft general budget 2010 ( Section III ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
the report by Mr Surján , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2010 , Section III - Commission ( C7-0127 / 2009 - and on the letter of amendment No 1 / 2010 ( SEC ( 2009 ) 1133 ) to the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2010 and
the report by Mr Maňka , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2010
Section I - European Parliament
Section II - Council
Section IV - Court of Justice
Section V - Court of Auditors
Section VI - European Economic and Social Committee
Section VII - Committee of the Regions
Section VIII - European Ombudsman
Section IX - European Data Protection Supervisor
( C7-0128 / 2009 - .
Mr President , I am going to speak in my mother tongue because , ceterum censeo , I am also protesting against any kind of law restricting the use of a person 's mother tongue .
The 2010 budget is being drafted in the shadow of the financial crisis .
State Secretary , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we all have to cope with this crisis in some manner or other .
The crisis has sown uncertainty among investors , made it more difficult to obtain credit , increased unemployment and reduced production .
Is the European Union able to respond to this ?
Does it have something to say on the dangers caused by climate change or on terrorism ?
Is it able to protect the EU 's borders ?
Is it welcoming refugees with an equitable approach ?
Parliament would like to have a budget that responds in the affirmative to all these questions , and Parliament is fairly united in this desire .
There are no major differences dividing political groups .
I would therefore , as rapporteur , like to thank all the political groups in Parliament for this .
However , there is a serious difference of opinion between the Council and Parliament .
Because of the crisis , the Council would like the smallest budget possible , which is understandable looking at it from the point of view of national parliaments and governments .
However , we in this House believe that Parliament has a huge number of instruments available that should be made to work even more efficiently , more smoothly and with greater impact , precisely so that we can overcome the crisis .
What does all this mean in actual figures ?
Earlier , when we were thinking about 2010 , it was with a seven-year budget in mind .
A decision was then made which would allow , in the current situation , a budget of EUR 134 billion in terms of payment levels .
On the other hand , the Council is thinking of a figure of EUR 120 billion , while Parliament does not regard the expenditure of EUR 134 billion as being realistic , is taking into account national governments ' problems and will end up proposing EUR 127 billion if the vote on Thursday is guided by the recommendation from the Committee on Budgets .
We must , of course , ask what sense is there in making promises intended for a seven-year cycle in a five-year cycle if we are never going to keep those promises .
This is actually the situation we are in because every year , the annual budget is much smaller than we discussed the time before .
However , there is also an even bigger concern .
Annual budgets also feature commitments , many of which remain unfulfilled .
We are already lagging more than one annual budget behind , with this gap increasing from one year to the next .
Therefore , raising the payment levels is an absolute must .
Otherwise , we will seem to have the same scenario as in every other year : the Council chips away at the Commission 's draft , while Parliament suggests even larger figures .
However , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the situation is not entirely like this .
These proposals have not come about from one line to the next , in a mechanical fashion , snipping indiscriminately here and there .
As a result of the crisis , everyone needs to tighten the purse strings .
This is why , for certain purchases , we supported the Council 's more economical figures in the Committee on Budgets .
Elsewhere , for instance , on the matter of staff assigned to particular tasks , we also took into account how the given task was executed .
At the same time , it is very easy to make mistakes in this area .
If we have made mistakes , we do not want to prevent the programmes from being implemented .
If such an event occurs during the year , we will always be prepared to rectify the situation , but we advocate correct implementation and accurate planning .
We must analyse whether the money that was spent yielded the benefit we were expecting and whether we achieved the objective we set ourselves .
For example , it is difficult to be satisfied with the communications policy , but there may also be , of course , many more reasons , which are also much more complicated , to explain the lost referendums and the low electoral turnout .
For this reason , it would be a mistake to reduce the resources for communications .
We suggested establishing some reserves for certain lines , which can easily be released at the time when , based on current analyses , a promising communication strategy is being prepared .
We must also look more closely in the future at the extent to which our objectives have been achieved .
The European Court of Auditors recently published a survey on the successes and struggles of the dairy sector .
Parliament is expecting the Commission to outline in the imminent Amending letter how the Milk Fund is going to work .
We think that it also requires a separate budget line and a reserve of an appropriate amount .
A legal basis must be created which takes into account the Court of Auditors ' observations and which will successfully help resolve the sector 's current problems .
Therefore , it is not only about money , but also about the European Union providing better and more specific support to this sector .
This is why I am calling on my fellow Members to try with the least possible disagreement to vote for a good , effective budget .
It goes without saying we will have debates on this .
It is only natural that each political group will also promote their views and seek to raise their profile .
However , we will agree on the most important matters .
In the case of the Milk Fund too , the fund itself is much more important than even how much money it will ultimately contain .
The Committee on Budgets has submitted a proposal for a manageable amount . Thank you for your respectful attention .
It is precisely now , in a time of crisis , that we must prove to the public and prove to ourselves as well , that when it comes to achieving our political goals , we will use all resources in the most effective way possible .
Most institutions create their budgets on the basis of previous years .
After all , what could be easier than multiplying last year 's budget by the rate of inflation ?
When we repeat such a budgeting process year after year , however , it can lead to deformations , inaccuracies and the wasteful use of resources .
Our aim is therefore to ensure that budgets are created on the basis of real needs .
In every institution , budget requests must correspond to a real need for tasks to be performed .
Every institution and every unit of every institution must make every effort to achieve savings .
This may require better organisation of work , the redeployment of existing resources to focus on priorities or reduced levels of bureaucracy .
In my previous speeches to the committee , and also in plenary sessions , I have mentioned many examples of recent successes in uncovering reserves .
We will uncover even more shortcomings and we will make the work of the individual units and institutions even more efficient if we go about it in a systematic way .
The budget for 2010 establishes this systematic approach .
The honourable Members who were here in the last Parliament will remember that we always tried to improve cooperation between institutions .
There have always been reserves here and many of them have even increased over recent years .
We have a common pot of funding .
If we all manage just our own corners and close ourselves off against others , we will not communicate and cooperate and it will be difficult to make effective use of our resources .
It is for this reason that we decided in the Committee on Budgets to implement a horizontal reserve of 5 % across all institutions in respect of external translations .
How else can we motivate institutions first to make use of their spare internal translation capacities and not to turn automatically to external providers ?
Our aim in all of these areas is to make the spare capacities of every institution available to other institutions .
Expenses for the purchase and rental of buildings form one of the main administrative expense items of the institutions .
In 2005 , the total floor space of the buildings used by institutions in Brussels , Luxembourg and Strasburg exceeded 2 million m2 .
Buildings were not always purchased in the right place , at the right time or for the minimum cost .
According to the Court of Auditors , the institutions do not cooperate in these areas and even fail to assess their own policies .
If we are purchasing a new building and we do not have more than one alternative in the bag , then it is difficult for us to achieve advantageous terms .
For this reason , we are expecting from the Presidency of the European Parliament by the end of the year an appropriate long-term strategy on assets and buildings which will also take account of renovation requirements and security costs .
Ladies and gentlemen , if we are to work in a responsible and efficient manner we need comprehensive information on what resources are available to us .
I would therefore like to emphasise the need to create an information management system .
With the help of such a system , our work will be coherent and efficient .
The administration is expected to submit a presentation on this project to the Committee on Budgets in the near future .
None of the draft budgets of the institutions include costs related to the Lisbon Treaty coming into effect .
When the Treaty enters into effect , we will have to look very carefully at reorganising existing resources before anyone submits a request for additional resources .
If staff at any of the institutions achieve financial savings through work efficiencies , the Committee on Budgets will no longer have a problem with allowing such resources to be used for the other priorities of the institution .
On the other hand , if an institution achieves savings due to unforeseen events , such savings should , as a rule , be returned to the taxpayer .
I would like to thank the members of the Committee on Budgets for giving their unanimous support to the proposal .
I firmly believe that the budgetary system of the EU must be developed in such a way as to give precedence to resourcefulness and innovative solutions .

Mr President , honourable Members , young people - I see that the future of Europe is sitting up there in the gallery - it is a great honour to be present here today at the debate on Parliament 's first reading of the budget for 2010 .
Europe is going through its worst economic crisis since the Second World War .
Jobs are being lost , unemployment is rising and there are record deficits in our public finances .
Budgetary discipline and sound economic management can accelerate the turnaround .
The right structural policy can strengthen the upturn that we hope is on the way and make it more sustainable .
In view of this , the Council unanimously agreed a well-balanced budget that invested resources in education , research , infrastructure , cohesion , responsible public finances and margins for unforeseen events ; in other words , all the factors that we know to be important for growth and prosperity .
Major issues remain .
Financing is required for the European Economic Recovery Plan and for support for the dairy sector .
Yet at this time , when Europe 's public finances are the worst in living memory , Parliament 's Committee on Budgets is proposing that the payments be increased by 10 % - by 10 % !
Can you name me a single other area , apart from the costs of unemployment , in which we would allow such an increase ?
Despite significant budget deficits - 8 % of GDP in France , 6 % of GDP in Germany , 14 % in the United Kingdom and in Ireland - the Committee on Budgets thinks that the Member States should finance greater expenditure and more administration .
It wants financing for administration !
I am particularly concerned that such a high level of expenditure will make it more difficult to finance the Economic Recovery Plan .
I am also particularly concerned that the Committee 's proposal contains no contingency whatsoever for unforeseen events .
We must agree on a budget that the Member States can afford and that we can justify to our people .
We must agree on the Economic Recovery Plan , which is of the utmost importance for Europe 's development .
In view of the agreement that we reached in April , I am confident that we will succeed in this .
We will need to resolve the complex dairy issue .
Bearing in mind the excellent cooperation that we have enjoyed to date , I am sure that we will be able to resolve even this complex issue in the difficult situation and predicament in which we find ourselves .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am very pleased to have the opportunity to speak to you today before you finalise your first reading of the 2010 draft budget with Thursday 's vote .
I would like , first of all , to thank Parliament for restoring the preliminary draft budget in many areas .
The Commission very much welcomes Parliament 's focus on using the budget as a tool to overcome the current crisis by enhancing economic growth , competitiveness , cohesion and job protection .
The Commission also welcomes the inclusion , in Parliament 's first reading , of the Amending Letter requesting increased spending , notably for Palestine , climate change and accompanying measures in favour of ACP countries .
Turning to the core issues of the present budget procedure , the Commission has fully understood that Parliament regards the financing of the second phase of the European Economic Recovery Plan as a priority .
Let me tell you that this is a priority for the Commission too .
From that point of view , I understand the logic behind the European Parliament 's so-called ' asterisk amendment ' on the Recovery Plan going beyond the current expenditure ceiling .
Next week , the Commission will present a package to address the needs related to the Recovery Plan with a view to reaching an agreed solution at the November conciliation .
At this stage , the Commission has not yet identified all the sources of financing corresponding to the full amount for the energy projects required by the recovery Plan in 2010 .
However , the Commission will endeavour to identify all possible availabilities with a view to closing any outstanding gap in time for the November conciliation .
The Commission is concerned about the current difficulties in the dairy sector and we have taken due note of Parliament 's proposal to create a special ' Milk Fund ' and of the stance taken by the ministers of agriculture .
In line with the proposal made yesterday by my colleague , Marianne Fischer Boel , next week 's Amending Letter to the 2010 budget will propose that EUR 280 million be dedicated to help address the immediate consequences of the crisis for milk producers .
This new proposal has an impact on the initially envisaged financing of the gap for the EERP but , as I said , the Commission will deploy all efforts to eventually find the necessary resources in time for the conciliation meeting .
Now I would like to draw your attention to a number of issues where Parliament 's first reading gives rise to concerns .
The European Parliament is proposing an overall increase of nearly 10 % in the level of payments compared to 2009 , which is some 4 % above the level proposed by the Commission .
While I share the wish of the European Parliament to support economic growth through the EU programmes , we should also take into account the amount of payments that can be reasonably executed without undermining sound financial management .
The Commission has no reason at this stage to depart from the estimates made in its preliminary draft budget .
Concerning the administrative support lines of spending programmes , the so-called ' BA lines ' , I understand the wish of the European Parliament to take a quite restrictive approach in the current circumstances .
But it is also important to provide the appropriate administrative means for managing growing financial envelopes of programmes if we want this budget to be adequately executed .
The Commission hopes there will be the opportunity to redress this issue in the second reading .
Parliament has also voted a number of reserves which , if maintained in the final budget , will have an adverse effect on budget execution .
The reserve on salaries , if maintained in the course of the year , would have an adverse effect on recruitment of new officials in 2010 to replace personnel leaving the Commission .
Let me conclude by assuring you that , in accordance with the Interinstitutional Agreement , the Commission will give its position on the amendments adopted by Parliament in early November through the so-called ' letter on executability ' and I hope Parliament can take it into account in its second reading .
The Commission will continue to act as honest broker and will do its utmost to help pave the way for a successful outcome to this budget procedure , bearing in mind that the financing of the second tranche of the EERP represents a real challenge for which all efforts should be heading in the same direction .
I count on your support for achieving a satisfactory and balanced result there .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - Madam President , I am honoured to speak on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Year after year , we see how Section IV of the budget is severely underfunded .
Year after year , we also see that , as the year progresses , the Commission and the Council have to resort to a variety of specific measures which are not in tune with regular budgetary methods in order to finance the needs which we all knew were there right from the beginning .
The situation in Palestine is , unfortunately , one of the best examples of this .
Having said that , I do note some positive elements .
I see that the Baltic Sea Strategy got some extra money .
I also see that the appropriations have been increased for a number of specific policies in favour of democracy and human rights .
I want to conclude by saying that , especially for the year 2010 , we will need to pay attention to the fact that probably - and hopefully - the European External Action Service will start to operate .
We will need to provide the necessary funds for that .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - Madam President , I do not want to ask for the budget to be bust ; all I want to ask is that we meet the commitments we have given to the developing world .
Eleven million children die every year in the developing world .
These are people who are hit not just by the financial crisis , in the way we are , but by the fact that they do not even get the remittances - which were greater than the financial assistance we gave them - from their families living in the developed world because they , too , are suffering .
These people are suffering doubly : they are also suffering from the consequences of climate change .
All I want us to do is to meet our commitment to these people .
If our GNP goes down a percentage , our contribution to these people also goes down .
So let us meet the percentage contribution we said we would make .
Clarity in the budget line , so that we can measure here in Parliament that you are meeting those commitments , and additionality are absolutely central to this .
Please , in all of this , do not ask the poorest people in the world to carry a burden they are not able to carry .
Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Budgetary Control has delivered an opinion containing a number of suggestions .
I will present three of them to you in one minute .
The first concerns research , in particular , the sixth and seventh framework programmes .
For the sake of legal certainty , it is advisable , Commissioner , for the European Commission to refrain from recalculating financial statements for projects that have already been approved and settled , by applying new interpretations of the eligibility criteria .
We would again ask the Commission not to deviate from the common nationally and internationally acknowledged and certified accounting and calculation methods .
The second point is the inclusion of EU staff pensions in the budget .
We propose that the claims against Member States in respect of staff pensions , estimated at EUR 37 billion at 31 December 2008 , be entered in the accounts as an asset .

We also suggest that the budget include the exact amount of these pensions , and not just the amounts paid , as the latter do not take account of the amounts paid into future pensions .
I would reiterate the proposal for a study on the creation of a Community pension fund , and we also support the Anti-Fraud Office , which must be strengthened so that it can carry out control activities outside the Union .
Madam President , in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , we have worked to increase the budget for the Area of Freedom , Security and Justice , which has increased by 13.5 % from 2009 .
In particular , the chapters on External Borders , Return , Visa Policy , Free Movement of People and Fundamental Rights and Citizenship have increased .
The chapter on Justice in Civil and Criminal Matters , in particular , has increased by 4.7 % .
However , the chapter on Security and Safeguarding Liberties has increased by 95 % as a result of the integration of Europol into the Community budget .
This is therefore something new compared to the 2009 budget .
We adopted an amendment to increase the FRONTEX budget , sending a clear message of commitment to managing the phenomenon of immigration and all aspects of migratory flows in a way that respects human rights .
Finally , I think that it should also be pointed out that in committee , we adopted a budget amendment of EUR 5 million to facilitate the integration of nationals from third countries .
Therefore , the section under Title 18 on the Area of Freedom , Security and Justice has increased to EUR 105 million , which will help to strengthen the administrative and financial management of the Member States .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( DE ) Ladies and gentlemen , it is no secret that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety takes the view time and again - this year included - that the funds provided in the European budget absolutely do not suffice to provide effective environmental programmes , to maintain our biodiversity and for a fight against climate change that has a chance of succeeding .
The fact that the Council makes even further cuts from these meagre funds is as incomprehensible as ever .
That is why ' back to the preliminary draft budget ' is the standard response .
There are two things that we must impress on the Commission .
The first of these is that we expect it to immediately include what are known as the ' assigned revenues ' for those agencies that are partly dependent on fees - such as the European Medicines Agency in London or the European Chemicals Agency in Helsinki - in the preliminary draft budget and not to achieve an artificial margin by omitting them .
The second point is that we expect the Commission to bring forward a proposal as soon as possible for how it will fund the anti-smoking campaign Help in future after the tobacco fund has run out .
You see , it is the same every time .
Madam President , there is cut-throat competition in the world today .
Developing countries now account for 20 % of the world 's wealth .
In 15 years ' time , they will account for 34 % .
In 2025 - in other words , in 15 years ' time - China and India will together account for 20 % of global investments in research and development .
While these investments are being made outside Europe , bureaucracy is stifling the research institutions , universities and industry of Europe .
We are facing three crises that must be resolved simultaneously : the climate crisis , the employment crisis and the financial crisis .
The response to these crises by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy is that we must invest in research and innovation .
Both the Council and the Commission have agreed that this is a priority - in the Lisbon process , in the Seventh Framework Programme and in the European Economic Recovery Plan .
In practice , however , their idea of prioritising is to implement cuts of 7 % .
All I can say is that I am grateful that the Council is not ' prioritising ' these incredibly important areas still further !
This is Orwellian Newspeak and it is unacceptable .
We need more resources to be allocated to research and development .
We must work together to reduce bureaucracy .
We would like to see the Council and the Commissioner for Science and Research focusing on this .
Above all , we demand that vigorous efforts be made in respect of research and innovation .
It is there that jobs will be created and it is there that the future lies for Europe and Europe 's competitiveness - not in cuts in this area .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - Madam President , compared to the 2009 budget , the Commission proposal for 2010 provides for a moderate increase in the budget lines concerning internal market and customs policy , whereas the amount of money allocated to consumer policy remains stable .
In the draft 2010 budget , the Council has decreased the money , in particular , for budget lines which concern the development of the internal market .
I believe that a functioning internal market in these times of economic crisis can contribute to the economic recovery .
In the area of customs policy , the budget will assure cooperation and coordination measures , thus reinforcing security and protection of external borders , supporting the fight against illicit trafficking and fraud as well as improving the efficiency of customs systems .
I consider measures in the area of consumer education a priority , in particular , the strengthening of financial literacy .
The crisis has shown how important consumer policy , in particular , consumer education , is , in order to help consumers take responsible economic decisions .
For all these reasons , the IMCO Committee called for a separate budget line on the SOLVIT programme to be financed by an amount of EUR 1 million .
SOLVIT is a very good example of how you can help businesses and citizens .
Finally , for the continuation of the pilot project monitoring measures in the field of consumer policy for the consolidation of a scoreboard and related market study , as a preparatory action , the amount adopted is EUR 1 million .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - Madam President , for 2010 we need a budget harnessing effectively all European policies to pull the European economy out of the crisis , while at the same time preserving our long-term objectives and commitments , which are sustainable growth , economic and social cohesion , and our obligations vis-à-vis the external world , including candidate countries .
In the draft budget , the Council has automatically cut 36 lines on administrative expenditure , among other lines accompanying the instrument for pre-accession assistance ( IPA ) .
The argument used , which is low absorption , is not justified as the necessary framework for the implementation of IPA could only be completed in July 2009 .
From 2010 onwards , the European Commission must appraise and approve a significant number of large projects for which it will need to employ significant numbers of people to provide external short-term technical expertise .
2010 will also be the year when the effective implementation of operations will start , requiring the performance of ex ante controls by the Commission on extensive numbers of tenders and contracts .
The budget cuts mean that the sound financial management of pre-accession assistance is put in real danger , with all its political dimensions .
We should therefore remain open to reacting positively to the request from the European Commission to restore the PDB level in this respect .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for the budget for the Committee on Agriculture I would like to thank the overall rapporteur , Mr Surján , for his constant willingness to talk in order to find a compromise .
This is necessary as European agricultural policy is , at present , the only policy area where responsibility lies fully at the Community level .
It is right that the funds for school milk , school fruit and a few other projects have been increased .
Stockpiling and export refunds , however , were even being labelled as yesterday 's tools two years ago .
At this moment , they are indispensable tools to overcome the crisis on the markets .
We are therefore calling for an increase of approximately EUR 81 million for stockpiling from 2009 to 2010 and of approximately EUR 440 million for export refunds and we will be voting in favour of these .

Nonetheless , this is actually too little at this time .
As before , I would , of course , have preferred EUR 600 million when it comes to the dairy fund .
The EUR 300 million that we are now calling for for 2010 is what is absolutely necessary and I ask that this money be fixed in the budget on a permanent basis as the dairy fund .
That would be the right signal to send , and also an important one .
The situation on the agricultural markets is drastic .
The Commission has put its hopes in self-regulation for far too long .
The agricultural markets , too , need budgetary and general policy frameworks and rules .
Madam President , thank you very much to the rapporteur and to the Committee on Budgets for accepting all of the amendments from the Committee on Fisheries .
What is particularly important for us is the amendment calling for greater flexibility in the funding granted to Regional Advisory Councils on fishing .
As well as being scarce , the funding is so subject to interpretations and to the discretion of the Commission that the Councils are prevented from spending even the little that they have ; this request was made to us unanimously by the seven existing councils .
One amendment that we consider particularly opportune calls for a comprehensive strategy to combat piracy that genuinely considers the situation of fishing boats , which are particularly vulnerable to these acts in all the world 's waters .
With regard to research and the Seventh Framework Programme , as in previous years , we have demonstrated prudence and asked that , now that fisheries research no longer has its own heading in the budget , at least the percentage of investment should not decrease , as all decisions on fisheries management hinge on knowledge of the environment and of marine species , especially given that one of our new objectives is to apply an ecosystem-based approach to all legislation in the Common Fisheries Policy .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , representatives of the Commission and the Council , why are the Council 's cuts , which we have to implement every single year in different policy areas , so stupid , so wrong and so short-sighted ?
The answer is because they are not oriented towards the common European interest , and that is what I criticise from a political standpoint .
You , as the Council , and the Member States are also encompassed by common European responsibility , and our European expenditure is expenditure for our common European interest .
It is absolutely incomprehensible that the funding for training and education could be cut at this point .
One of our most successful programmes is the student exchange programme that enables our young people to study in Europe , to get out into the world .
Why are you cutting back on that ?
We need to do more for culture , cultural exchange and town twinning because these make Europe real and generate acceptance of Europe from the bottom up .
And how can we cut back on the communications policy , where we have agreed that there is a need to really let the voters and the citizens know about the European Union 's positive achievements ?
I can only observe , regrettably , as has been said already , that this type of cuts is completely counterproductive from a political point of view .
Madam President , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I would like to emphasise two points today .
The first is the question of implementing supervision structures at European level .
In the wake of the crisis , or during this crisis , everyone understands that the Union must equip itself with structures that will enable it to supervise the banking , insurance and securities markets .
At the end of the last parliamentary term , we reached an agreement with the Council that focused on certain sums for the authorities that were supposed to prefigure those that we are putting in place today .
However , the draft budget as it stands does not comply with this political agreement , which was concluded under the previous Parliament .
I hope that the amendments that have been tabled again are adopted so that we are in line with this political agreement , which was concluded so as to ensure that the Union finally equips itself with supervisory authorities .
Moving on , I would like to emphasise the issue of fiscal policy .
Fiscal policy tools have been cut even though there is an international call for more governance in fiscal matters .
If we really want to combat tax havens , the Union must also equip itself with the resources to conduct this policy consistently .
We will not send out the right message by reducing the Commission 's competence in this area .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs . - Madam President , it has become quite evident in the last few years that the institutions of the European Union are much less familiar to the citizens of Europe than should be the case .
The European Union is a democratic body , so that contact with the citizens is in the interests of both .
What the European Union does , and why , should be fully known to the citizens .
The citizens are stakeholders in what is done by the EU , and clearly the European Union is a stakeholder in European public opinion .
There are various ways of ensuring that this mutual interest is given expression .
Communication is one of these , and an important one , and it is for this reason that the budget should include an element devoted to the communication of its activities by the European Union to the wider public .
On behalf of the Equality Committee , I would like to draw your attention to just one issue during the one minute I have available .
This is to do with the European Institute for Gender Equality and its funding .
Based on Parliament 's codecision , we established the Institute in 2007 in Vilnius .
One might think the time that has elapsed since then would have been sufficient for the Institute to have become operational .
Unfortunately , the situation is much more serious than this .
The Institute currently has just a director and an assistant .
I would like to thank the Committee on Budgets and the rapporteur , Mr Surján , for having taken into account that the Equality Committee was making a wise suggestion when it said the budget could not be automatically slashed based on this year 's income , because if we did this , the Institute would not be able to get up and running in the future .
We not only need to guarantee the rising staff expenditure in the future annual budget , but we must also establish a reserve for the amount allocated to its activities so that the Institute can fulfil its role .
Madam President , as chairman of the Committee on Budgets , I should like to react to the surprising publication of a draft Commission communication on the budgetary review .
The Commissioner will tell us whether this is an inadvertent error .
However , I should like to issue a warning .
Although it not does include any figures , the very innovative , and at times provocative , content of this text seems inappropriate for a Commission at the very end of its term of office and for a mid-term review of the multiannual agreement signed in 2006 .
The President of the Commission must therefore clarify , as a matter of urgency , his timetable in relation to the financial proposals that he plans to make , under both the outgoing Commission and the new College .
Changing the budgetary and therefore political priorities does not come under the management of current business .
The Committee on Budgets will be ready for the debate , but on the basis of proposals coming from a Commission that is fully legitimate , that is armed with a five-year mandate , and that is ready to assume its political responsibility when it comes to initiatives with this kind of scope .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is precisely on the budget that Parliament can and should bring to bear all of its power as an institution directly elected by the citizens , in order to ensure that this vital instrument for growth , and also for fairness and justice , is fully able to meet citizens ' needs .
The budget must have the ability to be tangible and dynamic , to listen and to respond .
We have worked towards making the 2010 draft budget as flexible as possible at this time of particular economic and financial crisis .
However , the budget must also be credible , feasible and tangible , and in this regard , it was fundamental to avoid making financial resources for the coming years too inflexible by restricting excessive spending beyond the maximum expenditure ceiling contained in the perspectives of the multiannual financial framework just to cases that really are an absolute priority .
This is the case with the Recovery Plan .
Again with the same aim , namely establishing a budget truly able to meet citizens ' needs , we have formulated specific amendments regarding payments in order to free up the maximum amount of resources possible with immediate effect .
The European budget is structured on two tracks : commitments and payments .
The commitments represent serious political intentions , but also real , concrete actions .
Therefore , payments have been increased to EUR 127 billion in line with the draft budget tabled by the Committee on Budgets , compared with EUR 120 billion proposed by the Council and EUR 122 billion proposed by the Commission .

Still with the same aim , with the same political approach , as a group we are strongly opposed to the creation of reserves , which are not genuine resources immediately available to citizens .
The policy of establishing reserves at times of crisis should be reduced to the absolute minimum , to cases in which a reserve really is technically indispensable .
In times of crisis , there is no point merely writing figures in the budget , but instead we should build a useful budget , immediately ready for action .
Other matters also deserve special attention .
As a group , we have taken the important responsibility of re-tabling the amendment to increase the milk fund to EUR 600 million , as decided by a unanimous vote of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and therefore with the participation of all the Members and groups , and also re-tabling an amendment for a microcredit project amounting to EUR 37 million which , and this is extremely important , does not jeopardise the implementation of other programmes under heading 2 .
There is a particular risk at times of crisis : that budget resources will not actually be increased , but transferred from one budget line to another .
It is to counter this risk that Parliament , as a directly elected institution , with a role different to that of the Council and the Commission , must be especially careful in its actions , not least with regard to scrutiny .
Madam President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Surján for his sterling work in keeping the different elements of this budget process together .
People are now saying that many of the Member States are having great difficulties with their public budgets , and that we should therefore rein in on spending too .
That is true , but there is no public budget more controlled than the EU budget .
We in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe support the result of the vote in the Committee on Budgets .
We support the draft budget put forward by Mr Surján .
For us , the funding of the investments under the recovery plan in energy and climate policy and the focus on research and innovation were the most important priorities for the 2010 budget .
That is also the way we want to see the EU budget go in future - in other words , that we should concentrate on these areas .
We think it is a poor state of affairs that neither the Commission nor the Council has indicated where we are to find the money for these investments in the recovery plan - investments that not only we here in Parliament , but also the Heads of State or Government of the EU , support .
It is appalling that we have to see this acted out time after time when expenditure can be indicated but no decent funding can be found for it .
We therefore support Mr Surján 's proposal to review the Multiannual Financial Framework and look at whether the money for energy investments can be recovered from unused funds within the agricultural budget .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe also supports the proposal to allocate EUR 300 million to a dairy fund to cushion the current crisis for dairy producers .
We share the view that the crisis is serious and must be tackled .
Personally , I am not a supporter of the new fund as the Commission does already have tools to help the industry and has also earmarked nearly EUR 0.5 billion for the purpose .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development wanted to earmark EUR 600 million for a dairy fund over and above this half a billion .
In this regard , I believe that the result of the vote in the Committee on Budgets - the EUR 300 million - is an expression of a more realistic solution .
This draft budget removes a number of the Council 's savings and provides a more realistic assessment of the needs for payments in the coming year , and the multi-annual agreement has proven itself to be more a rigid and inflexible framework , in particular , in relation to category 1a , which includes research , education and transport , and category 3 , which includes legal and asylum policy and culture and information policy , as well as external affairs policy , while the ceiling for category 4 is chronically far too restrictive .
I would also like to thank Mr Maňka for his work on the budget for other institutions .
Parliament 's budget remains within the 20 % for total administrative expenditure in the EU , and that despite taking on the expenditure for Members ' compensation under the new Statute for Members .
Our group believes that we should be careful of excessive increases in the allocation for political parties , but we have agreed to the draft that is on the table , and I would also like to thank Mr Maňka for the fact that he has focused on the expenditure on translation and on Parliament 's buildings policy .
It is high time that we got collaboration between the institutions and a report into Parliament 's buildings policy over a number of years . We have been calling for this for a long time .
Now we may finally see it laid on the table .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to start by thanking Mr Surján and Mr Maňka for their cooperative efforts , and I would then like to move on to Mr Surján 's statement , in which he said that the Council wants , above all , to pass a small budget .
In our view , that is precisely the wrong direction to take in times of crisis .
In times of crisis , you have to have the political courage to act and you have to spend more money on the right , sustainable investments for the future .
We have , after all , an environmental and an economic crisis , and we have a crisis of hunger and poverty in the world .
If we Europeans want to act correctly , we need to change our political goals .
We need a transformation to a sustainable society , we need a Green New Deal , and specifically in relation to the Lisbon strategy , we need more sustainable technologies , efficient green technologies , new propulsion systems and , of course , also new materials that are truly environmentally friendly .
That also means that we need to invest more money in research and development .
As I have already emphasised on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , we in the European Union need to invest more money in training and education and to educate our young people , our talents , well and better , because we could then be sure that that money would not be misspent but would pay off in the future , both for the individuals in question and also in terms of the success of our economy .
We must also , however - and this is what makes the Green New Deal a truly all-round challenge - change structural funds policy and make it an environmental tool when it comes to retrofitting buildings and to new and sustainable concepts of mobility .
We need to change our agricultural policy , which must become more environmental in nature .
Yet energy generation , too , can play a major role in the rural economy and can take place in an environmentally friendly and ecological way .
At the moment , I see far too few plans here - but we must push forward with this .
I will now turn to the arguments about the dairy farmers .
We Greens take the view that the dairy farmers must be helped at this point .
It is not enough , however , to just spend the cash - the money must be spent on the right policy in this field .
We need quotas , and we need good rules , frameworks and regulation .
If we are to spend this money now - the EUR 280 million that we are debating - it must go direct to the producers and their organisations .
We also want to redistribute money .
We do not believe that we should spend EUR 449 million on export subsidies in the dairy sector because what this does is to ruin markets elsewhere , primarily in Africa .
We propose that the EUR 300 million plus that we are spending on tobacco production should be reallocated and then truly made available to small dairy farmers .
That would be more ecological and would be much more beneficial to the dairy farmers than what we are doing at present .
My final comment is on the recovery plan .
Ultimately , we will only support it at second reading if it is clear that a green and sustainable approach really is being pursued here .
We want an ecological energy policy , we want broadband in rural areas and we want pan-European electricity networks .
These things would really be a step towards a future-oriented policy .
That is what we expect from the negotiations over the coming weeks .


on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I will be focusing my comments on the Commission budget and I would like to congratulate Mr Surján for everything he has done as the general rapporteur but , in the absence of the coordinator of our group , Mr Bokros , who happens to be in Hungary for a long-term engagement that he was committed to , I am asked to present the group 's position today .
I understand that this is the third different group that I have presented views for in this House since I have been a Member - not that I have changed , just the groups have .
So the three points I would like to make in the debate today are as follows .
Firstly , the general situation is a serious one , which has already been indicated in a financial and economic manner .
Our deficit levels are at historic highs in several Member States , as the President of the Council has indicated .
Indeed , in some Member States , the debate is not about where the money is going to be contributed but about the levels of cuts which will be needed to bring the expenditure back into line , as it is in my own country .
Therefore this is a very mixed debate on how we are going to make sure we can make the European Union run effectively .
Here , however , we will be looking at the budget .
In terms of the budget that we will be preparing for 2010 , it is a budget which obviously is at the beginning .
We are in our opening gambits , but in our group , we will be looking very clearly at the quality of expenditure - as the Commissioner has said , on expenditure where monies can be reasonably executed and not being in any way excessive in this regard because of the general situation we find ourselves in .
My last comment relates to the comments made by our Chair in the Committee on Budgets , Alain Lamassoure .
We must use this occasion - it is the first year of a five-year Parliament - to look ahead .
We must discover , if we can , from the Commission when we are going to get the mid-term review , how it will be shaped , how we are going to be able to look ahead , not just to the mid-term review , but how we are going to approach future financial perspectives , as Mr Böge laid out in his report in the last Parliament .
Not least , how we begin to set in train an interinstitutional process that will look at long-term trends and that will enable us to get the right budgetary analysis , because without that , it is really difficult to plan ahead .

I would like to open with the most positive aspect : on Thursday , we will vote for more than EUR 3 billion in payment authorisations to go to Structural Funds and programmes of a social nature .
The Council does indeed dispute this policy , believing that we should not ask the Member States for more money .
I hope the Swedish Minister will forgive me if I say that this point of view shows a shopping list mentality .
We are living in exceptional times , and I believe that , on the contrary , the Commission , the Council and Parliament should have had the courage to tackle the problem of funding this budget head-on and made it an exceptional budget .
Even with the expenditure that we are going to approve on Thursday , this will continue to be a budget that skirts around the crisis .
It is a business-as-usual budget .
We do not need drops of water in seas of milk .
What we need is another policy for rural areas .
We do not just need Structural Funds for our territories , but a European social policy that complements the policies of each of our States .
What we really need is courage !
Today , there are as many people living in poverty - 79 million - as there were at the beginning of the century .
There is a great deal of uncertainty about the standards necessary to tackle climate change .
The key issue that we need to discuss is financing the European budget and future Financial Perspectives .
That is the question , and do not tell us that there is no money , because there is ; we can go and look for it among the tax evaders , in the taxation of capital gains in the financial markets and in tax havens .
Mr President , rapporteurs , this problem with the budget is so vital that we , the MEPs , should set an example by making cutbacks .
I have made proposals about travelling expenses .
These days , when travelling , an MEP receives his / her salary , expenses for the cost of the journey , the distance travelled and the time wasted .
This is ridiculous and incomprehensible .
I hope that on Thursday , we will at least have the decency to review this state of affairs .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , it is unbelievable that in these times of financial and economic crisis , the European Commission proposes an increase of almost 5 % for the 2010 budget .
But what is worse is that , while the Council , at its first reading in July , put forward a reduction of almost 2 % on the preliminary draft budget , this Parliament is now proposing an increase of 5 % on it .
The 2010 budget would then end up being over EUR 127 billion in payment appropriations which equates to 1.08 % of the EU 's gross national income .
Is this the way this Parliament wants to bring the budget closer to the citizens ?
It is all very nice to want to subsidise the Special Olympics in Poland and Greece and the European Youth Olympic Winter Festival in the Czech Republic , or even Xacobeo 2010 , but our constituents have other priorities in their lives , such as paying their mortgages and giving a reasonable education to their children .
The daily cost of the European Union for the United Kingdom currently amounts to GBP 45 million per day and the proposed increase will bring it to GBP 50 million or more with the reduction of the rebate .

Believe me , there are many other priorities in the UK to invest this money in , and now that the European Commission has warned that Britain is in danger of going bust due to its high level of national debt , this country would be happy to have a significant reduction in its EU contributions , and I am sure that other countries would also be happy with a similar reduction .
Year after year , the Court of Auditors has been unable to give us satisfaction that the EU budget has been legally and regularly spent , and I was really concerned at the lack of control over taxpayers ' money when I was the chief accountant of the European Commission back in 2002 .
But still , Parliament wants to put more money into the EU coffers .
Do not count on me ever to vote in favour of any increase in the budget .
If you want to subsidise projects to fight the crisis , you should find areas where the budget can be reduced .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is not only in the figures that the crisis shows up , in the falling markets and in the billions of euros spent on propping up the banks and re-initiating our economy .
It can also be seen in the exploding unemployment figures .
This crisis can be seen most of all in the very real fears and anxieties of the citizens of the European Union .
They fear for their jobs and they fear for their pensions .
Our citizens are worried about climate change , about energy supplies and about the curtailing of their individual rights in the fight against terrorism .
The EU can make a positive contribution to calming the thoroughly justified fears of its citizens , even if , at present , there is a need for the relevant processes to be made more effective and efficient .
In this regard , I am primarily thinking of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , for example , in the case of Nokia , and of the Solidarity Fund to support the Italian earthquake victims .
In order for the money from these funds to actually reach those affected , I think it is important both to redesign these processes to be more efficient and to ensure crystal clear oversight , as the Globalisation Adjustment Fund must in no way be confused with an EU back-up for the multinationals .
Europe was a guarantee for peace and prosperity for a long time .
Let us work together to make sure that it continues to be just that .
( FR ) We are Europe .
Madam President , honourable Members , Commissioner , due to some slight delays , I will have to leave Parliament very shortly , as my flight leaves in 45 minutes .
I will ensure that everything that is said is passed on to me .
It has been a good debate .
Many good suggestions have been made .
It is difficult to set priorities , but set them we must .
As regards research , I can tell Mrs Ek that we are investing 7.3 % more in research than in the 2009 budget , which I think is a lot .
In its proposal , Parliament invests and increases expenditure substantially compared with 2009 .
At the same time , we must bear in mind that the EU is in recession .
Public finances in the European Union are declining by around 7 % .
That is not something we can ignore .
The Council is also investing more , but it is also investing more selectively .
We are investing in measures that will stimulate growth and we are being more restrained when it comes to areas such as administrative expenditure .
At the same time , we are pleased to see that Parliament is also taking important steps in this area .
Following today 's debate and the discussions that I have had previously with representatives of Parliament , I believe that - together with the Commission - we will be able to reach agreement on a genuinely good budget in the time to come .
( PT ) Ladies and gentlemen , I am convinced that the European Union 's budget for 2010 will help us to overcome the economic crisis that we are undergoing at present .
One of the results of the crisis is unemployment .
I therefore wish to emphasise and outline the importance of the amendment we have made to reinforce the ERASMUS programme , in order to promote and facilitate the creation of first jobs for young people .
With regard to Parliament 's budget , I am overjoyed that our main proposals have been taken into account , both in the budget itself and in the draft resolution .
Our goal is excellence in lawmaking .
We recognise the importance of multilingualism , of course , but we feel that our prime objective is excellence in lawmaking , and to that end , we need to have the necessary resources so that Members can achieve this objective .
So as to bring about greater transparency and stringency , we have proposed a baseline budget , which should be implemented at the beginning of each legislative cycle .
We have also proposed reserves for this objective , the transparency objective and the stringency objective , and therefore reserves in the case of the communication policy , for example , where we would like there to be a cost and benefit analysis .
There should also be reserves to seek to reduce the existing bureaucracy , for example , in contracting assistants , and we want to ' oblige ' the Administration to help reduce this bureaucracy .
We also agree on the property policy , and concur that it should be a long-term policy .
Finally , my congratulations to the rapporteurs László Surján and Vladimír Maňka .
Special congratulations are due to the rapporteur , László Surján , for resisting the temptation to be demagogic about the milk fund , for example , and for doing his utmost and not attempting the impossible in order to sell abroad .
( SV ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Swedish Presidency has criticised the Committee on Budgets for wanting to increase payment appropriations in the current circumstances .
In practice , this refers to the execution of the EU budget .
I consider the criticism absurd for a number of reasons .
Firstly , the Council 's finance ministers have always withheld payments to such an extent that large parts of the EU 's budget are never executed .
Instead , large sums are repaid to the Member States as rebates .
That is absurd , because the commitments in the budget are there to be executed - not to be repaid to the Members .
We are prepared to fight for this .
The question therefore arises as to whether the Presidency 's policy is actually to make great promises in the form of commitments that are then never executed .
Secondly , this year , the arguments for this are even stronger than usual .
We should be increasing the execution of Social Fund measures that concern job creation , skills development and other such measures , for example .
The Presidency 's criticism is directed not just at the European Parliament , but also at the Commission , because most of what we are doing concerns restoring the cuts in the Commission 's budgetary proposal that the Council wants to force through and , in addition , focusing on measures for job creation .
I also note that the Presidency has criticised the fact that the Committee on Budgets is increasing certain administrative appropriations - while the Commission is criticising us for doing the opposite , namely for having accepted some of the Council 's cuts .
Our abiding principle has been to increase those administrative appropriations that are needed to guarantee the execution of important policies - but not otherwise .
This year 's budget debate looks set to become something of a battle between the Council and the Commission .
As regards the European Economic Recovery Plan , the EU 's budget is not of such magnitude as to be able to be used for Keynesian stimulus policy , but it can be used for certain small but strategic matters , such as the Recovery Plan .
As we now have a high level of unemployment , it can only be a good thing to bring forward investments that were going to be made anyway and that help to bring Europe together into a genuine internal market - such as those relating to energy infrastructure .
Nonetheless , almost a year after the Plan was launched , we still have no tangible proposals from the Council or the Swedish Presidency concerning where the money is to come from .
We are open to discussion , but obviously it is pointless to take the money from other priority areas that also contribute to employment , lifelong learning or energy and climate development , for example .
It is a pity that the minister had to leave as I had a question for him .
I will ask it anyway and perhaps he will respond by another means .
The Swedish Presidency has stated that the strategy for the Baltic Sea area is one of its priority issues .
At the same time , it has not proposed any financing for this strategy .
I find that surprising , because it means that everything that needs to be done must be financed from other sources that have already been earmarked for other important objectives .
There will be no net contribution to the Baltic Sea Strategy .
In view of this , I wonder how the Swedish Presidency can claim that it sees the Baltic Sea Strategy as a priority .
We want an allocation of EUR 20 million , equivalent to SEK 200 million .
It is an important contribution .
( PL ) Madam President , as we all know , the most important budget items in the financial year 2010 , and an evaluation of the budget , were set out in a resolution of 10 March this year .
In its resolution , Parliament was highly critical of the tight margins available in most of the headings of the Multiannual Financial Framework .
It is alarming that in this draft , the Council reduced the initial draft still further .
The resultant disproportions between the levels of commitments and payments were so great that they contradicted the fundamental principle of prudence .
I had expected that closer attention , if not the closest attention , would be paid to the economic crisis which we still face , but as can be seen , Parliament is having to fight on its own for the interests of citizens , and to persuade them that Europe is not the source of the problems , but that it might find an effective remedy for them .
This is why I fully endorse the draft , which includes funds for the implementation of an economic recovery plan , and I think that it should be one of Parliament 's priorities .
However , the cuts introduced by the Council would limit growth and job creation , or simply render them impossible .
They would also put an end to work on solving our citizens ' energy problem .
In the context of the crisis in agriculture , for example , in the dairy sector , there are no possibilities of extending programmes which would support a growth in consumption of agricultural products , such as by popularising the consumption of milk and fruit in educational establishments .
Therefore , I think that the draft budget , in its present form , is not capable of achieving the objectives set by the European Union .
From the few issues which I have mentioned , it can already be seen that there are areas of the EU budget which can overcome the problems we should be solving , but in many places , budget entries are planned historically , as if the present situation and current problems did not exist .
They do not foresee future challenges , and where they do , they make little attempt to influence them .
I think that as a Parliament , it is incumbent on us to strive for more dynamic decisions in reacting to problems which appear in Europe , remembering at the same time to be transparent in our management of funds .
This is what our electors charged us with six months ago .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the effects of the world economic crisis in which we currently find ourselves cannot yet be foreseen .
We have to be aware that the crisis still has not hit the labour market with its full force .
What does the European Union do in this situation , where more and more people are threatened by poverty and unemployment and fear for their existence ?
The European Union decides on new focal areas in its budget .
Or , to be more precise , it adjusts its finances in favour of a sealing off of its borders , in favour of hi-tech military projects and in favour of a more and more sophisticated monitoring of Europe 's citizens .
Believe it or not , there is to be an increase of 16 % for the area of freedom , security and justice .
The fund to secure the external borders is to receive 12 % more funding next year .
The expenditure on strategic military security research is being almost doubled and will now rise to a total of EUR 215 million .
From the point of view of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , this means that the EU is taking leave of its founding idea of being a peace project for Europe .
This draft budget instead follows the logic of the Treaty of Lisbon , with its obligation on the part of the Member States to constantly modernise their military apparatus and to secure the external borders .
Europe 's Left instead demands that the European Union implement a consistent peace policy .
Instead of an agency for armament , we call for a disarmament agency .
Europe must concentrate its resources on civilian conflict resolution strategies such as a Europe-wide civilian peace corps and promoting independent research into peace and conflicts .
In our view , this budget sets our sights increasingly on war instead of on crisis management and the Left in the European Parliament will not , therefore , support this budget .
( NL ) Madam President , the 2010 budget has been drawn up under particular economic and financial circumstances .
Rapporteur Mr Surján wants to set budgetary priorities , and I very much appreciate that .
I support him where these concern core tasks of the European Union and lines that are of particular importance to economic recovery .
However , the overall result too often comes down to spending more money , even though the Council had already made less rigorous cutbacks in the draft budget than in other years .
I should like to thank Mr Surján explicitly for his open and constructive attitude , which was evident with regard to my amendment seeking improvements in childcare , and particularly deinstitutionalisation .
This amendment , which concerns the European Social Fund , was adopted with broad support in the committee .
The European Union and the Member States must help ensure that children from homes can grow up in families as far as possible .
At a time when we are focusing on economic measures , we must not forget expenditure of great social importance such as this .
Otherwise , it will be these children who suffer at this economically difficult time , and that is unworthy of the EU .
( NL ) Madam President , the Members of this House often talk of solidarity among Member States ; naturally , as it is easy to show solidarity if it is paid for out of other people 's pockets .
The figures for 2008 came out on 23 September .
Again , the Dutch , more than any other Europeans , feel the extent to which the infamous Europhile dream is eating up their pay slips .
The Dutch public - the class dunce - is of course the largest net contributor once again .
Each Dutch citizen pays a staggering EUR 267 to Europe every year .
The Party for Freedom ( PVV ) , the biggest Dutch party according to the opinion polls , will continue to fight against this .
It is also a disgrace that the Netherlands is the third largest payer , after Germany and Italy , when it comes to the net contribution for 2008 .
The Party for Freedom wants to ensure that the Dutch public is no longer treated as Europe 's cash machine .
Let there be an end to money for corrupt countries , to the Globalisation Fund and the Cohesion Fund , to the travelling circus and to the left-wing projects , and let us give Dutch bakers , butchers and greengrocers their hard-earned money back .
After all , it will probably be the case with the 2010 budget , too , that Dutch citizens are left holding the baby and have to dig deep into their pockets , whilst MEPs from 19 out of the 27 countries present here play Santa Claus with other people 's money .
This is termed ' solidarity ' , but it is theft , pure and simple .
The PVV would never even dream of adopting a budget for the European Union that would so extremely and disproportionately disadvantage the Dutch public .
( ES ) Madam President , if the Lisbon Treaty enters into force , as we all hope , from January we will have new powers of joint decision regarding the whole budget that will also naturally apply to agriculture .
Perhaps we will be happier in the Committee on Budgets when the Lisbon Treaty enters into force .
However , the new powers will also mean new responsibilities .
These new responsibilities affect all of us , whether we are MEPs , members of the Council or members of the Commission .
The first of the obligations is to fulfil interinstitutional responsibilities and commitments .
I am going to mention two of them .
Firstly , the funding of the European Economic Recovery Plan .
This is a disgrace .
We have been negotiating for a year and we have still not been able to secure EUR 5 billion out of an overall European Union budget which this year amounts to more than EUR 130 billion .

We have not yet been able to find a solution .
Firstly , we lost a budget surplus from 2008 and now we do not have the funding guaranteed .
If the Council tries to save on other items , we will find ourselves negotiating at a serious disadvantage , because the previous commitment involved funding the activities of the Recovery Plan with new money .
The second matter is the Dairy Fund .
We need to comply with the principles , with the needs for budgetary discipline , which require that a margin be left in Category 2 .
The Council and the Commission have just accepted EUR 280 million .
I would like to put a question to the Commission , because it is very important that we are sure about what we are going to be voting on in two days ' time .
Do these EUR 280 million that we have accepted , that you have accepted , come from what was not spent in 2009 or can it be assumed that you are making commitments in relation to the money for 2010 that this House has not yet voted on ?
We believe that this is a question that requires an immediate response from the Commissioner .
In any case , these EUR 280 million are not part of the Dairy Fund , but rather we are talking about a one-off intervention .
The Dairy Fund is another long-term intervention that involves restructuring and a financial commitment from the Commission and the Council .
( DE ) Madam President , the congratulations of my group to our rapporteur are all the warmer for the fact that , through the 2010 budget , we have brought about a state of ongoing works .
It is a snapshot missing significant elements that we will be accruing as a result of the Treaty of Lisbon , including obligations that we enter into under the Treaty , so that we work on the basis that we can and must re-visit this budget relatively speedily , even if , at that point , the focus may be more on the argument about Parliament 's rights and less on the contents of the budget .
The President-in-Office of the Council said that there would be a 7.3 % increase in funding for research .
We played our part in attaining that .
We support it because we need this extra money for innovations and because this is how we will have to earn our money in future .
At the same time , however , we must also consider the rules according to which we will provide this money and ensure that we do not provide it in such a way that the researchers for whom it is actually intended will no longer be able to access it because they fail to navigate through complicated rules .
I would therefore like to call , at this point , for greater collaboration between the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
The Committee on Budgetary Control will be discussing two reserves on Thursday that failed to pass in the Committee on Budgets and I would like to ask , as the spokesperson for our group in the Committee on Budgetary Control , that these reserves be approved .
One of the reserves relates to Commission staffing , specifically in connection with an idea from the Committee on Budgets known as ' staff screening ' .
By this point we are very well informed about 30 % of the staff at the Commission , but we know nothing about the other 70 % , who are still not covered .
This reserve is designed to obtain information about the 70 % about whom we currently know nothing .
The second reserve relates to the Financial Regulation .
At the end of this year , the scheduled revision of the Financial Regulation will take place , and our aim with this reserve is to help the Commission out a little , as we believe that we need simplifications and that we must implement certain proposals in the Financial Regulation .
I am very grateful to Commissioner Šemeta for the fact that the Commission , under his leadership , has now , for the first time , carried out a consultation amongst subsidy recipients on the subject of ' Obstacles and difficulties in the application procedure ' .
I also want to argue in favour of this reserve as it relates to OLAF , the European Anti-Fraud Office .
The Commission has been refusing to provide us with a working paper since November last year and in so doing , has obstructed the progress of the consultations about OLAF and its legal basis .
It is important , therefore , to obtain a majority for these two reserves .
Thank you very much , Mrs Gräßle .
As you are addressing the Commission directly , I would encourage the Commissioner to listen closely to what you have to say .
That makes it much easier to answer afterwards .
( NL ) Madam President , I should very much like to contribute from the perspective of the Committee on Regional Development .
It is this committee that makes the citizen-focused policy that is needed , particularly in the context of the crisis we are seeing at the moment .
I should like to start by thanking Mr Surján , who has cooperated on responding to good signals .
In a time of crisis , it is unacceptable for financial arrangements - particularly in regional policy - to be violated and amounts to be reduced .
It is excellent , in my view , that this is now being set to rights .
It is necessary to be alert in a time of crisis , and the European Parliament and the Commission have done so in the proposals that were adopted just before the recess .
We have more flexibility , we can provide our budgets earlier , and we can invest more in energy-efficient buildings and housing , for example .
I also welcome the additional budgets that have been provided for three pilot projects .
In recent weeks , representatives of the regions have been meeting at the Open Days in Brussels , and have said that they can put these resources to very good use in enabling better participation in policy in all kinds of fields .
This is the citizen-focused policy I referred to .
I have just heard Mr van der Stoep , another Dutch representative , say he rejects these resources .
Take cross-border language projects , for example : these promote participation by the people , something we are happy to endorse .
There was one small sticking point , but Mr Surján found a good solution to that , too .
It has been said in the course of the debate that the Green New Deal should be paid for out of these resources : the regional resources .
Sustainability policy is an excellent thing , of course , but adopting such a proposal in its entirety would give rise to a great many unrealistic expectations in the regions and also among our fellow Members .
We have specified in the Structural Funds regulations what can be done in the way of innovation , of sustainability policy and of ecology , and so it is good to include that just by way of example rather than declaring we are going to adapt the regulation to this .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me , Madam President , to thank the Committee on Budgets for its work which , with regard to the needs of the farming world , has sought to provide a global framework of resources to resolve the issue of dairy farmers and milk , which is certainly of concern to many European countries today .
Nevertheless , the need for a minimum margin has prevented us from exceeding EUR 300 million for the milk fund .
This is nonetheless a robust intervention if these resources , as the Commissioner was asked , are additional resources and envisage , naturally , a package of appropriate measures .
On the other hand , we have heard some other groups proposing , probably playing in part to public opinion , a far higher figure , albeit in the knowledge that there is no way that these resources can be found , and merely so they can send a certain message to the outside world .
Allow me also to highlight another budget area which needs adequate attention : long-term buildings policy .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon , with the new powers that will be conferred on Parliament , the clear need to strengthen relations with regional parliaments and the new thematic areas , we will need more room in the Brussels offices and so , given that 97 % of the current buildings are already occupied , I think that we have to put in place a serious policy for the construction of an even larger European quarter which gives a clear sense of unity to Europe , through an appropriate buildings policy .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I think that , with this budget , we have succeeded once again in developing new strategies .
I am pleased that the House has decided to support the Small Business Act , at least with EUR 1 million for obligations and EUR 500 000 for payments .
Commissioner Verheugen has promised that he will use these funds accordingly .
We have also increased the allocation for the programme of research for small and medium-sized businesses .
Doing so is especially important in a crisis situation , and the SOLVIT programme is also to be significantly reinforced .
This relates to getting across borders within the internal market , which often represents a very particular challenge for small and medium-sized enterprises .
I am pleased that the ' ERASMUS for journalists ' programme is finally on the agenda and that ' ERASMUS for young entrepreneurs ' is successfully operating .
( EL ) Madam President , although it is commonly accepted that the Structural Funds and the cohesion funds are the spearhead in combating the economic crisis , the Council unfortunately is being contradictory by making cuts to the relevant payment appropriations .
Unlike the Council and the Commission , we are endeavouring to safeguard adequate financing for the European Economic Recovery Plan by strengthening energy infrastructures and research and innovation .
At the same time , we need to safeguard the viability of existing Community infrastructures and tools in the civil protection sector , especially by further strengthening the rapid response capacity of the European Union in the event of natural disasters , thereby paving the way for the future creation of a European civil protection force .
Finally , we need to point out that green development and strengthening research and innovation must be the basic component of the Community budget for a clean and viable environment in all sectors .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report .
The financial crisis Recovery Plan and the milk crisis have made the budgetary procedure for the coming year very challenging .
We still face challenges and we await with great interest the Commission 's proposal next week for financing the Recovery Plan .
Important questions have been raised here , some of which relate to the milk crisis .
For my part , I want to mention just one special matter .
The economic situation has meant that the Member States are keeping their purse strings tight where it concerns the forthcoming budget .
Budgetary discipline on the part of the Member States may well be partly understandable in an economic whirlwind , but it is inexcusable that over these past few years , Member States have had to be refunded sums of money out of the Structural Funds budget in the form of unused appropriations .
The reason for this passivity is the Administration and Control System , which needs simplifying urgently .
In view of the economic situation , it is extremely important that the Structural Funds are exploited effectively in the outermost regions in order to support recovery measures .
Madam President , during the economic and financial crisis , Wales benefited from cohesion policy and structural funds under Headings 1a and 1b .
So , although the recovery plan was welcome and indeed necessary , we must not now cut important lines under Heading 1 to fund the GBP 1.98 billion required .
I fear that may happen and I also fear that the proposals to do so are part of a wider attack on cohesion policy .
I refer to the budget review paper produced by the Budget DG , which was referred to by Mr Lamassoure earlier .
I understand this includes the possibility of renationalising convergence funding , watering down competitiveness and saying ' no ' to transitional status for regions coming out of convergence .
I think Members should resist all this .
Indeed , I would welcome the views of the Commission on these proposals , because these proposals would damage cohesion policy and damage places like Wales and similar regions .
( PL ) Madam President , we are all aware of the difficult situation we find ourselves in regarding the economic and financial crisis .
I am therefore particularly glad that the Committee on Budgets and the rapporteur himself have taken a positive view of the amendment on holding the Special Olympics .
The Special Olympics are , if I may explain , sports competitions for people with intellectual disabilities , enabling them to play a full part in society and giving them the opportunity for self-expression .
I am very glad it has been made possible to hold the Special Olympics European Summer Games in Warsaw in 2010 and the Special Olympics World Summer Games in Athens in 2011 .
I would like to take advantage of this opportunity to appeal to the Council to look favourably on this financial commitment , and to ask the European Commission for help in practical matters relating to the organisation of this annual event .
( PL ) Madam President , the proposed budget has to be a direct measure in the fight against the crisis .
One branch of industry which has been affected especially badly as a result of the world crisis is shipbuilding and maritime transport .
In addition , the European Commission , by its restrictive policy , has contributed to the destruction of the shipbuilding industry in Europe .
Where Poland is concerned , the European Commission 's actions have destroyed its shipbuilding industry and made thousands of people unemployed .
This way of strengthening the economy strengthens the economies of countries in the Far East .
Therefore , I would like to make an appeal , and to point out that it is important for next year 's budget to provide funds to rescue this industry , that is to say , the shipbuilding industry , throughout Europe .
( PL ) Madam President , the budget for next year also foresees an increase of funds for security and defence .
This has evoked remarks and reservations from some politicians .
Such remarks have also been heard during the debate .
I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner a specific question - what will the increased funds for defence be used for ?
Does this concern a joint mission of some kind , or are these additional funds related to the promotion of new technologies or the promotion of joint military programmes ?
For if this were so , I think it would certainly be a move in the right direction .
This is because the Army also generates new technologies , and can create new , modern jobs .
I would therefore ask for more information on the subject .
Madam President , recently , the Irish Government decided to scrap the REPS scheme for farmers : that is the Rural Environmental Protection Scheme .
That scheme , like many more , was cofunded by the European Union .
I want to know : what happens to the money when it is not utilised by the particular government ; whether the same happens in other countries ; where this money goes and how is it utilised when it is not used within the country for which it is designated .
( LT ) Firstly , I would like to congratulate my colleague , Commissioner Algirdas Šemeta , who today , with Parliament 's approval , participated probably for the first time in such a debate .
However , on the matter of the 2010 budget , today we can surely all accept that the situation has changed somewhat since we debated the 2009 budget .
There really was a lot of talk about solidarity , about solving those problems linked to the current financial crisis .
To my understanding , the 2010 budget should have been slightly different .
Whether we want to or not , we still have to consider the real situation which brings us new challenges every day .
I would like to congratulate Parliament , which very recently in Brussels , a few days ago , unanimously agreed on support for certain states that have suffered from various natural problems .
I believe that the same sort of problems also exist in some of the other small Member States of the European Union which today lack funding .
Therefore , I really believe that in future , specific measures should be designed that would allow those states to come out of the financial crisis .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I will be very brief .
First of all , I would like to thank all the Members of the Parliament for their proposals regarding the budget for 2010 , and hope that in the further budgetary procedure , we will find proper solutions in order to establish a good budget for 2010 .
I just wanted to respond concretely to this very important issue of milk funds and say that what Mrs Fischer Boel stated yesterday was the commitment by the Commission to come up with a proposal on certain amounts of money , namely EUR 280 million .
The Commission will discuss this issue next week and we will come up with a concrete proposal on this issue according to the Rules of Procedure .
These are my brief remarks regarding the discussion .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Šemeta .
There were a few more questions from the Members , but it is my understanding that you do not want to answer Mr Garriga and the other Members directly .
Perhaps you would like to get your answers to the Members in question in writing .
They would certainly appreciate that enormously .
Mrs Gräßle , Mr Garriga and numerous other Members have asked additional questions .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) I would first of all like to address the Council , even though the State Secretary has had to leave .
I totally agree with his statement that there is a problem .
I also entirely agree that everything he considers important Parliament also considers important , such as education and research .
There is also a great deal of consensus on the objectives .
However , there is a large gap when it comes to the means to be used .
We somehow have to reach a consensus on this by the middle of November .
The Commissioner mentioned that he welcomed steps Parliament was taking to restore lines featuring in the Commission 's preliminary budget .
I would ask him to realise that this does not happen in a few lines .
In fact , I mentioned that we tried to adopt a position using a nuanced approach .
However , I must mention a few ideas expressed during the debate which I do not agree with .
I cannot accept the attitude that we describe as theft the amounts being transferred from one contributing country to another beneficiary country as a gesture of solidarity .
I do not think that this is what the issue is about here .
The European Union has been built on the basis that members show solidarity to each other .
In fact , I know of a contributing country whose leaders say that their revenue has substantially increased thanks to enlargement which has granted them access to a huge market .
The European Union cannot be measured in terms of the ratio of payments to contributions .
This is spurious and misleading , and it will ruin our whole common future .
At the same time , I would like to draw my fellow Members ' attention to the fact that some people here very enthusiastically referred to each proposal in the past tense : we raised and arranged it , and this is the way it will be .
What we will vote on now on Thursday is a draft and a political message .
The political message is about how this Parliament would like to lead the European Union to greener pastures .
I also ask the Council to realise that what the rapporteur represents is not an individual 's opinion , nor is it the opinion of a party , or only the opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
So many people have spoken here from different committees and different political groups , but all with the same message : we need a better , more practical and more powerful budget .
My time has run out .
Thank you for your respectful attention .
I would like to express my thanks for the debate in the Chamber and also for the cooperation in the Committee on Budgets , in the political groups and in the arbitration proceedings .
I would like to thank the Secretary-General of the European Parliament and all of the representatives of the Directorates-General of the European Parliament ; we have been working together since January looking for the best solutions to help us make effective use of the financial resources of Europe 's citizens .
I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs and coordinators .
I had the feeling in our discussions that we really were looking for positive solutions .
It is thanks to you also that we found these solutions and many of them form part of my report .
I would like to thank my advisers and the staff of the Committee on Budgets .
The numerous discussions that we had with representatives of all institutions helped us to develop a more objective view of the matter and , more importantly , we discovered where to look for solutions .
I highly appreciate the agreement from the arbitration proceedings concerning the implementation of an organisational audit of the INFO Directorate-General and of the security services .
The aim is to assess whether resources are being used in the best possible way .
In the past , only the Court of Auditors agreed to external inspections of their work - and it paid off .
Following the audit , the Court of Auditors reduced its administrative costs and achieved higher productivity levels .
The Committee on Budgets has also worked constructively with other institutions in the past .
On this occasion , too , we worked together to find the best solutions when creating the budgets of European institutions .
Where the requests of the institutions were justifiable , we reinstated some of the original requests which the Council had reduced .
I would like to applaud the method of creating budgets at these institutions , which are already creating their budgets not only on the basis of the inflation rate , but also on the basis of real needs .
That brings the joint debate to a close .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The draft Community budget for 2010 is much too low given that we are in the midst of an economic and social crisis , with a dramatic effect on employment and the living conditions of many people .
The fact that it even falls about EUR 6 billion short of what was agreed in the multiannual financial framework for 2010 is unacceptable .
In view of the serious social reality in many Member States , particularly the so-called ' cohesion countries ' like Portugal , we think that the budget should be revised and increased as a matter of urgency , and we have put forward proposals to that effect , including :
Greater financial support for structural and cohesion policies ;
The re-evaluation of the N + 2 and N + 3 rules which , to date , have meant a loss of around EUR 106 million for Portugal within the previous financial framework ;

An increase in the rate of Community cofinancing in the structural and cohesion funds .
It is unfortunate that other proposals with a significant social and environmental impact were not accepted during the budget discussions , including , for example :
A development programme for Portuguese industry ;
A programme for supporting the textile and clothing industry ;
A programme for supporting small-scale , artisanal coastal fisheries ;
An increase in funding for the LIFE + programme .
in writing . - Following the adoption of Budget 2010 and in light of the positive developments in Ireland concerning the Lisbon Treaty , I believe that there is a need for a comprehensive review of the budgetary procedure aiming to improve the process as a whole and make it more efficient , relevant and visible to European citizens .
In this regard , I believe that a key goal of the revision must be to enhance transparency in decision making and during the implementation phase .
For that purpose , we should consider the introduction of uniform control standards and statistical mechanisms across Member States to get higher quality feedback on the budget delivery results .
Furthermore , the budgetary procedure should incorporate a better balance between long-term stability and flexibility to respond to changing needs , while preserving the principle of subsidiary by providing clear advantages and added value in comparison to national budgets .
There are also certain policy areas that need to be developed further .
Europe is facing today significant challenges due to the financial crisis , climate change , energy supply , security and immigration .
I appreciate the efforts of the Commission in addressing them , but I think we need a stronger , more coordinated and holistic approach in order to be effective .
Preparing a budget is never an easy process , even less so during an economic crisis .
However , this is all the more reason why this task is even more important .
Managing a crisis of the magnitude of the current one also depends at EU level on the balance that exists in the negotiations between the authorised European institutions .
The European Parliament has undoubtedly a crucial role to play in this debate .
The main issues at the heart of the discussions on the 2010 budget have been the Economic Recovery Plan and the European Milk Fund .
These issues have , in a sense , highlighted how rigid the 2007-2013 financial framework is , as they are new financial projects and therefore new money .
The EU budget needs to make full use of the financial margins to respond to the economic crisis .
However , this budget is likely to have a limited impact if Member States are not going to adopt an active approach to accessing the available resources .
We must send out a strong message to the capitals of Europe , and especially to Bucharest , in my case .
Our efforts here to obtain as much money as possible for the European funds are in vain if , in our home countries , the powers that be do not take the measures required to access and use the funds efficiently .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the fact that the pilot programme for Roma social integration proposed by the European Parliament in 2009 is still included in the 2010 Community budget .
The European Commission 's Directorate-General for regional policy issued an invitation to tender for the programme at the end of July .
Its aim was to devise original and complex solutions for dealing with the wide-ranging problems affecting Roma communities .
The explicit objective of the draft is to devise such measures which , based on existing experience , can promote Roma integration through education , social and economic measures , with cross-border cooperation and the sharing of best practices .
According to the original proposal from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , the cornerstone of the programme is , on the one hand , the development of early years education and , on the other , the promotion of self-employment and granting of micro-credits .
In addition , information and awareness-raising campaigns will also be run in connection with the pilot programme .
This project will hopefully provide the opportunity to draft the guidelines for a Community action plan , aimed at Roma social integration , and contribute , through the expansion of the ideas that prove to be effective , to the drafting of a regulatory Community action plan , extending beyond the instruments currently available .
I should like to raise a question which is significant for the economy and employment , and not only in my own country .
We expect to receive a proposal from the Commission in the near future on the possible extension of current antidumping duties imposed on the importing of footwear with leather uppers from China and Vietnam .
The positions of individual Member States on this matter are very different .
In view of the significant levels of employment in the industry , maintaining the current duties is extremely important .
Extension of existing legislation does not give rise to any objections from a technical point of view .
I would , therefore , like to ask for an assurance from the Commission that it will base its proposal on the substantive findings of an investigation , while at the same time taking note of the fact that this is an opportunity to verify promises made not long ago by the President of the Commission about protecting jobs .
in writing . - I welcome the proposal of the draft budget for 2010 as it is a balanced report , taking into consideration in a realistic manner the EU 's priorities .
Two matters are to be highlighted - the increases to payments on the main lines ( ERDF , ESF , Cohesion Fund ) for regional development , and the creation of a ' milk fund ' .
The increases to payments are important as they will boost the implementation of structural policy in the Member States for the benefit of all European citizens , while the setting-up of a special ' milk fund ' would represent a strong signal sent out by the European institutions to European farmers .
A third key point in the budget is represented by energy policy , an essential area for 2010 , as it will be the year of the adoption of a new energy plan for the period 2010-2014 aimed at boosting the EU 's energy security and competitiveness .
In the coming years , the Commission should also consider as a priority investments in infrastructure , especially in the new Member States , as they have a positive effect on economic and territorial cohesion .
Establishing the Milk Fund would send an important signal to European farmers , highlighting the genuine concern that the EU 's institutions show for the crisis the dairy product sector has endured .
The dairy market is one of the most volatile markets and has been hit hard by the economic crisis we are currently experiencing .
Such a basic solution as establishing a fund to support the sector 's modernisation is patently preferable to a palliative solution , such as a return to the traditional ways of controlling production via milk quotas .
We would all like to see a larger financial allocation .
However , the sum being proposed for setting up this fund , which is EUR 300 million , is the maximum amount compatible with the budgetary ceiling .
If this ceiling were to be exceeded , it would make it impossible for the Council of Ministers to approve the establishment of the fund .
At the same time , new steps must be taken to boost the use of rural development funds by livestock farmers .
I believe that the most useful measures would be those linked to information access , the exchange of good practices and providing instruction on how to apply for these funds , which are currently underused in certain Member States .
Democracy building in external relations ( debate )
The next item is the oral question by Gabriele Albertini and Heidi Hautala , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , and Eva Joly , on behalf of the Committee on Development , to the Council on democracy building in external relations ( B7-0213 / 2009 ) .
Madam President , I am delighted that , during its presidency , Sweden has made support for democracy in external relations an important issue .
From the viewpoint of the Subcommittee on Human Rights , I would like to stress that democracy and human rights belong inseparably together .
This is patently obvious from the different definitions of democracy that exist , and I would like to draw your attention to the fact , for example , that the United Nations attempted to define democracy in 2005 .
The definition contains a long list of items , from a pluralist political system to the rule of law , transparency of government , freedom of the media , and so on .
This clearly shows us that human rights cannot be divorced from democracy .
If it wants to use them , the European Union has a very wide range of resources at its disposal to promote democracy in the world .
The entire development policy and the Common Foreign and Security Policy cover this whole spectrum .
The resources available to us are dialogue with other countries , various financial instruments , involvement in international forums and election observation , which are obviously very important to us .
There are also situations where we have to think about various negative measures .
I would like to bring to Minister Malmström 's attention the fact that next week , the General Affairs and External Relations Council is preparing to discuss the revocation of the ban on the exporting of weapons to Uzbekistan .
I think that everything indicates that this is quite the wrong signal to send , as Uzbekistan has not really listened to the demands of the international community .
The international community , including the European Union , requested it to conduct an independent , international investigation into the tragic and shocking events in the spring of 2005 in Andizhan , when democracy was well and truly suppressed .
I would also like to hear what Minister Malmström thinks about this situation .
How can we promote democracy when some Member States now want to end this ban on the exporting of weapons ?
I would also like to say that democracy cannot be exported .
It is no product for export .
It does not really work as something brought in from the outside , and that is why I would like to emphasise the importance of including civil society in the process , because that way , democracy grows organically , as it were : from the grassroots of society .
I would like to mention that Russia is a cooperation partner that systematically refuses to agree to the involvement of NGOs in dialogues on human rights between it and the Union .
In my view , we cannot accept this situation in the future .
Finally , I would like to say that support for democracy should be higher up the agenda in the Union 's foreign and security policy and development policy .
It also needs more resources .
For example , the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights is very modestly resourced and we should increase its funding .
Madam President , Mrs Malmström , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , democracy and human rights are inextricably linked .
It is through respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms that a democratic regime can ultimately be recognised .
We must therefore welcome the fact that , on 19 May , the Council indicated that the European Union had to adopt a more consistent approach to democratic governance .
The efforts made up to that point had been largely inadequate .
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a striking example of this .
Although the mission sent to observe the 2006 Palestinian elections recognised the legitimacy of their result , the European Union and its Member States chose to boycott the elected government , just as they boycotted the government of national unity formed thereafter to break that deadlock .
Where is the European Union 's consistency and credibility when its own decisions contrast so sharply with its much-vaunted principles ?
And what can be said of the Member States that refuse to endorse the Goldstone report ?
Its conclusions are fair and balanced , and universal support for them would represent a step towards peace .
It is this hope that the major powers are destroying , and they are destroying it through their lack of courage and their lack of loyalty to their own values .
Organising election observation missions is therefore not enough , especially when one refuses afterwards to acknowledge the result .
We must be true to ourselves and take a global approach to these issues .
The Council should swiftly adopt a programme of action along these lines , with the creation of a genuine strategy for human rights , which would be imperative at all levels of the EU .
We need to outline our priorities clearly and integrate them formally into all of our instruments : foreign policy , human rights policy and development policy .
What kind of monitoring will we carry out in those third countries in which the European Union observes the elections in order to ensure respect for political pluralism and the involvement of civil society in the long term ?
What are our demands as regards the establishment of an independent judiciary and of institutions that are transparent and accountable to their citizens ?
The persistent vagueness concerning the place accorded to human rights in our policies is reprehensible and counterproductive .
It is time to clear this up if we want the European Union and its most fundamental values to be taken more seriously at international level .
Madam President , honourable Members , in the EU consensus on development , the term ' poverty ' is defined with a number of dimensions .
Poverty means an absence of power , opportunities and security .
Development is impeded if there is no freedom , and freedom is restricted without democracy .
It is difficult to have peace without democracy .
Consequently , there can be no development without peace .
Both require full respect for human rights .
These concepts are intertwined and we need a coherent overall framework for better use of existing policies and instruments in support of democracy building .
I would like to thank the European Parliament for its great interest in and support for this work .
After seven years as a Member , including on the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I am only too aware of Parliament 's wholehearted commitment and real contributions to democracy building within the context of the EU 's external relations .
This initiative , which was launched by the Czech and Swedish Presidencies , has been discussed here previously on a number of occasions , including with my colleague , Mrs Carlsson .
The starting point of the initiative is that democracy building is a key factor not only in the EU 's development cooperation , but also in the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
That is undisputed .
However , the intention is for the initiative to go one step further .
As a global player , with 27 Member States and the European Parliament , and as the world 's largest contributor of aid , the EU has a key role to play in terms of supporting democracy building in its external relations .
There is a symbolic dimension to this , since we hope that our successes at home will serve to inspire our partner countries around the world .
However , it is also intended that the initiative will work at a pragmatic and operational level .
The aim is to ensure that we fully utilise the instruments at our disposal within the EU 's legal and political frameworks and our institutions in a coordinated , effective way .
We are not starting from scratch .
We have already achieved a great deal .
We are experienced in supporting democracy building in our external relations .
This is a priority area in our relationships with ACP countries - written into the Cotonou Agreement - and with other regions such as Asia , Latin America and Eastern Europe .
We have strong rules on human rights that include dialogue with third countries and seven common EU strategies .
Certainly , there is substantial room for improvement , however .
We can do more .
We can do better .
The essence of democracy demands a new political framework , and the current distribution of labour between the various pillars does not necessarily correspond to the needs that exist .
Various instruments are used in parallel , and sometimes not very consistently .
This is undermining the impact of what we are doing .
It may also affect our visibility and credibility and limit our opportunities for effective cooperation .
Without therefore inventing new tools or models , we quite simply want to bring about greater coordination and coherence in the way we work on supporting democracy .
How can we do this ?
Well , by identifying specific ways of using the EU 's instruments more effectively within a uniform framework .
We can draw inspiration from some of our success stories .
Our involvement in the Western Balkans is one such example .
It combines first and third pillar instruments and is , at the same time , oriented towards supporting political reforms , including institution building .
That is why it is becoming a stable environment for democracy .
The ' two hats ' that the EU 's special representative has help to bring about better coordination and coherence between the EU 's various instruments .
We must be humble , however .
We face substantial challenges in the region .
I want to make myself clear .
Some people - perhaps not those of you here - are concerned that this initiative will introduce new conditionality into development aid .
Naturally , this is a sensitive issue .
However , talking about human rights and democracy with our partner countries can never embody conditionality .
Where are we now ?
The relevant working groups have initiated discussions on proposals for the Council 's conclusions , based on various contributions .
We are building on the work started by the Czech Presidency , which held a special conference on the EU and democracy building .
I have also seen a very interesting report from the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance that compares our intentions when carrying out democracy building with how they are perceived by our partners .
It is too early to assess the initiative , but I want to emphasise that the process is already providing added value .
Those responsible for development and human rights issues are working together more closely .
Discussions in the Council working groups on development and human rights are taking place in parallel or at joint meetings .
That alone is an added value and an important point of the whole initiative .
We are working towards the Council 's conclusions being adopted at the General Affairs and External Relations Council in November .
One of the proposals being discussed is the need for country-specific approaches that are based on an in-depth analysis of a country 's situation and that feed into democracy building at EU level , affecting the choice of appropriate instrument .
Another proposal is the need for real partnership , based on dialogue and consultations , in which support for democracy is treated as a separate topic and in which various dialogues are more coherent and coordinated .
The EU 's support for election processes around the world is important .
The Council and the European Parliament are largely of the same view concerning this .
We share the concern that Parliament sometimes feels as regards the need to ' go beyond the elections ' .
Election support needs to be made part of a continual process that involves following political developments over a long period of time .
This means we must focus on what is happening in the lead-up to elections , during elections and between elections in order to ensure there are functioning mechanisms for demanding responsibility .
I cannot emphasise enough the role of our various parliaments - in other words , the role of the European Parliament and the national parliaments - in the democracy building process .
They must be fully involved in the EU 's activities .
I hope that the Treaty of Lisbon will enter into force in the near future .
These new ' rules of the game ' for the Union will bring about a more democratic and effective EU .
The Treaty will also help make Europe a stronger player on the global stage by establishing the European External Action Service .
The idea behind this is , after all , to make the EU 's external policies more concordant and to bridge the gap between the Commission 's and the Council 's work so that the policies are moving in the same direction .
Along with the European External Action Service , the political framework for supporting democracy building will improve so that the EU can provide even better support for developments in various places in the world .
EU support for democracy building is incredibly important .
If a democratic state cannot meet its citizens ' basic needs and stimulate economic and social development , this will result in dissatisfaction with how democracy works .
The government then risks losing both legitimacy and political support .
I would like to thank the Members of the European Parliament for pushing this issue .
You contribute through your commitment , through legislation , through your relations and contacts with parliaments around the world and through your participation in the EU 's election observation missions .
For this reason , you are a key force in democracy building , and I hope that the European Parliament will continue to perform this role for a long time to come .
Madam President , how can one bring democracy to a nation ?
Well , by relying on and strengthening its civil society , by combating poverty and exclusion , and by liberating its women .
Europe has not been naive enough to believe that it can bring democracy with tanks and bombs , even if certain Member States may have laboured under this misapprehension .
Europe must therefore assume its role as a soft power .
This is a thankless , difficult role .
It has equipped itself with a European instrument for democracy and human rights , which today resembles a newborn child .
It is fragile but promising , if taken great care of .
The NGOs can submit projects to it without the support of their government , and that is important .
However , it is also out of the very limited budget for this instrument that the election observation missions are financed .
These are crucial missions which , in the space of around 10 years , have succeeded in proving their worth , but for which Parliament has already requested more resources and certainly more follow-up action - thank you , Mrs Malmström - but also more political consistency in terms of the way in which we monitor their legitimacy , and here I fully support what Mrs Joly said regarding some of our missions .
It is not normal for a country that embarks on the democratic electoral process not to be supported in its consolidation .
Those who take a short-term view no doubt think that democracy is costly .
It is less costly than war , that is for sure , and this is data that the External Action Service will most certainly take into account in its operations .
Mr President , can there be democracy without freedom ?
No .
Can there be freedom without rights ?
Of course not .
This brings us back to the notion of human rights in this debate .
Joseph Ki-Zerbo , a great Burkinabe scholar , gave the following answer to that question : ' He who lives in absolute poverty has no freedom because he cannot choose between several options . '
Poverty is therefore synonymous with a lack of freedom .
There is therefore a close relationship between freedom , democracy and human rights .
It is no surprise , then , to see many references to this in the basic texts that govern relations between the European Union and third countries , starting with the Cotonou Agreement , which includes , in particular , a clause on human rights and democracy in the context of the political dialogue with the ACP countries .
Promoting democracy therefore raises fundamental issues linked to the intelligent stipulation of conditions .
On the basis of these few observations , we come to the conclusion that democracy is not at the origin of development , but is very often the result of it .
The partnerships between the European Union and third countries cannot ignore this fact .
We will not make progress without determination , but we will not make progress without patience , either .
Today there are a significant number of countries that are embarking on the democratic process .
Europe can be credited with having supported these processes thanks to a strategy that incorporates the imperatives of the fight against poverty , the codification of human rights , and the promotion of democratic principles and the rule of law .
In spite of all the criticisms that have just been directed at the policy and which I share , I nevertheless remain convinced that what has been proven to work in the past should also guide us in our future action .
Mr President , democratisation assists the peaceful pursuit of politics , political change and the management of power in society , as well as respect for human rights .
Supporting democracy underpins our foreign policy goals of preventing conflict and reducing poverty .
That is why I was pleased to put the parliamentary amendment calling for European consensus on democratisation , and I would like to congratulate the Swedish Presidency for its initiative in this respect .
I strongly believe that democratisation should inform all of the European Union 's policies vis-à-vis third countries .
I have to say that I condemn the European Conservative and Reform Group when they oppose paragraph 10 in our text and seem to suggest that Europe can say one thing about democracy and do another about undemocratic countries when it suits us .
No .
Finally , as Mrs Malmström has said , democracy building is much more than about elections : it is about building pluralist civil society .
That is why Europe should fund NGOs that increase citizen participation , support the inclusion of marginalised groups , provide training for legal professionals , promote freedom of expression and of association , and strengthen political parties in parliament .
It means supporting a civilian surge .
Mr President , I would like to address the issue of democracy building with regard to our eastern neighbours .
In recent years there has been a stagnation and , in some cases , a backsliding in terms of democratic standards in these countries .
Developments in Georgia and Moldova raise most concerns .
The backbone of any democratic polity : a well-functioning - and I stress well-functioning - civil society is essentially absent in all of our eastern neighbours .
I would like to congratulate Sweden , the current presiding country , for being one of the initiators of the Eastern Partnership policy .
This policy has the potential to draw our eastern neighbours closer to the EU .
However , in many respects , the Eastern Partnership stops short of providing really significant incentives for these countries to embark on painful and lengthy reforms .
My additional question is : what is the position of the Council in this regard ?
In other words , what is in the pipeline ?
Do we intend to act more robustly in order to ensure that democracy in this and many other troubled and fragile areas will be strengthened ?
( FI ) Mr President , I would finally like to say to Minister Malmström that , in my opinion , we as a Union have two weaknesses when it comes to attempts to promote democracy and human rights throughout the world .
Member States often have very conflicting and differing aspirations .
The ban on the export of weapons to Uzbekistan would appear to be just such a case : not all Member States are of the same view .
How can we pursue a common policy like this ?
Secondly , I want to say that Uzbekistan is also a good example of a country that says to us that the European Union has nothing to teach them about democracy and human rights because the Union has its own defects and problems .
How can we rid ourselves of these double standards ?
We are in the habit of lecturing to others , but we do not necessarily practise what we preach .
I also think that the idea you mentioned of an account of an organisation 's democracy focused attention on these double standards .
Mr President , I would like to express my thanks to the Members for being committed to this issue .
We are entirely in agreement on the need to strengthen democracy in the EU 's foreign policy .
Today , during a period of economic crisis , it is particularly important that this dimension is not overlooked .
We know that many developing countries are being hit very hard by the crisis .
Recession results in dissatisfaction and social unrest .
If there are not well functioning democratic institutions in such a situation , things can go seriously wrong .
That is why it is important that there are secure democratic institutions and a strong civil society capable of dealing with such crises .
The eastern partnership is a very important instrument , not least for strengthening democracy .
We are working intensively on this .
We will have a meeting of foreign ministers in December and we hope to be able to launch a great many specific measures at the start of 2010 .
The eastern partnership is an important instrument for strengthening democracy among our immediate neighbours .
Mrs Hautala brought up the issue of Uzbekistan .
This is , of course , a very serious matter .
The human rights situation there is far from satisfactory .
As Mrs Hautala is aware , extending sanctions requires unanimity in the Council .
At present , the Council is not unanimous .
We agree on the objective , however , which is to strengthen democracy and human rights in Uzbekistan .
We hope that the means of achieving this is through stronger commitment .
We hope to be able to find alternative ways of strengthening democracy by continually assessing the human rights situation and considering what sort of relations we should have with Uzbekistan .
There are other ways of having an influence which may be more effective than an arms embargo .
Very few countries trade in arms with Uzbekistan , so an arms embargo might be more of a symbolic gesture than anything else .
Perhaps we can find other ways .
As I mentioned , however , we first require unanimity in the Council and we do not have that at present .
If the EU is to be credible in its relations with the outside world in the area of human rights and democracy , we must also be strong within the EU .
Shortcomings exist .
Perhaps they are not comparable with the terrible injustices committed in other countries , but there are shortcomings internally within the EU .
We must be vigilant of this at all times if we are to be credible in our dealings with the outside world .
Finally , I would like to thank you for this debate and also for the excellent resolution that I have seen that has been tabled by Parliament .
I have not yet managed to look at all the amendments , but I think the resolution tabled is very good .
It accords entirely with the ambitions of the Swedish Presidency .
As mentioned , we hope to be able to adopt the Council 's conclusions at the meeting with the General Affairs and External Relations Council in November .
We then look forward to continued discussions with Parliament on this issue .
in writing . - I fully support this call for a more coherent and effective framework for EU support for democracy-building , the promotion of democratic values and respect for human rights in the world .
The European Union itself is founded on the very values of democracy and human rights .
Indeed , the Copenhagen Criteria governing conditions of EU accession demand of candidate members " stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy , the rule of law , human rights and respect for and protection of minorities " .
Moreover , the Lisbon Treaty enhances Union 's commitment to continue its external action according to its founding principles .
Indeed , a key objective of the Common Foreign and Security Policy is to consolidate democracy , rule of law , and , respect for human rights .
I urge that the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) be established speedily not only an aid to democracy building but also be established as a democratically accountable service to European Parliament .
Democracy is a universal value .
Democratisation and good governance are not only ends in themselves but are vital for poverty reduction , sustainable development , peace and stability .
Indeed , democracy , development and respect for human rights , including economic , social and cultural rights , are interdependent and mutually reinforcing .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0212 / 2009 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Subject : Women 's participation in positions of responsibility in the job market
Recent data have recorded the continuing under-representation of women in positions of responsibility in the European job market : in the larger European enterprises , there is , on average , only one woman in every 10 board members .
What is the Commission 's opinion of the Member States ' initiatives to promote more women to positions of economic responsibility ?
What good practices have been identified , particularly through the work of the European Network of Women in Decision Making in Politics and the Economy ?
Is the Commission in favour of the proposals on quotas for women on the boards of major enterprises ?
What proposals and initiatives does it intend to put forward with a view to the final evaluation of the Roadmap for equality between women and men and the revision of the Lisbon Strategy guidelines in 2010 ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the number of women taking part in decision making may have been rising over recent years but power in the political and economic areas still lies firmly in male hands .
Stereotypical preconceptions about the role of women and men and the difficulties of establishing a work-life balance , along with other forms of overt or hidden discrimination , constitute obstacles that prevent women from gaining access to responsible , leading positions .
Over recent decades , women have become more involved in political decision making in most EU countries .
The speed of these changes is slow and , unfortunately , the overall proportion of women in powerful positions remains low .
In the economic sphere , the proportion of women with decision-making powers is very unsatisfactory .
In the private sector , men account for nine out of ten directors of top European companies .
Only 3 % of these companies have boards headed by a woman .
The Commission cares very much about supporting the better representation of women in senior roles and it backs the activities of Member States in this regard by collecting , analysing and disseminating comparable data for this area , supporting networks of interested parties and encouraging the sharing of experience and proven approaches at a European level .
The European network for supporting women in managerial positions , which the Commission set up in June 2008 , has stressed the importance of measures aimed at supporting mentoring , developing networks for supporting women , raising the profile of women who take on important roles and encouraging women to apply for senior positions .
During 2010 the Commission will arrange information activities and the sharing of proven approaches .
The Commission reports with satisfaction that many Member States have launched initiatives to support the access of women to leading roles , particularly through cultural events in the private sector , educational programmes for women who are interested in careers at the most senior levels , the development of a charter or mark for companies that support gender equality , the introduction of codes of good practice in companies and events in support of the work-life balance and the fight against gender-based prejudice .
The question of quotas for women on the boards of large companies is under discussion .
In my opinion , there is a need in this context to study the experience of Scandinavia , where this radical approach has been adopted .
It is , however , entirely up to the Member States which strategy to choose , based on their specific circumstances .
I would like to point out that Article 141 Paragraph 4 of the Treaty allows Member States to adopt ' positive action measures ' .
The European Court of Justice , however , has interpreted this option narrowly and has prohibited the automatic adoption of such measures , requiring that each case be examined individually according to objective criteria .
The Commission intends to submit a new strategic framework for gender equality in mid-2010 which will be accompanied by a detailed impact analysis and will take account of the results of implementing the existing plan for the period 2006-2010 .
It should be a Commission priority to support the greater participation of women in senior roles .
Last but not least , the Commission will submit a proposal at the beginning of next year for a new post-2010 growth and employment strategy .
The issue of gender equality should be a central element in the new strategy .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to stress that the equal representation of women and men is an issue not only of political principle , democracy and ethics , but is , in essence , a fundamental economic issue , since there can be no hope for future development unless our society makes use of all of its talents in the best possible way .
I must therefore state clearly that gender equality and an appropriate representation of women in leading roles in itself constitutes an active component of European competitiveness .
( EL ) Commissioner , thank you once again for your commitment to the promotion of women to positions of responsibility .
May I say that my question was more specific .
In light of the review of the Lisbon objectives and the evaluation of the roadmap , will the European Commission propose specific measures to combat the lack of women in positions of responsibility in the labour market .
Will the models , the Norwegian model to which you referred , be an inspiration in terms of a guideline ?
How does the case law of the European Court of Justice , to which you referred , link in with this ?
Is it encouraging or discouraging you , as the European Commission , to take a position in favour of one direction ?
Thank you for the supplementary question .
In my opinion , I expressed myself clearly on this matter , but nonetheless I think there is a need to be clearer still .
The Commission generally considers equal opportunities to be a major component of European competitiveness , regardless of the moral obligations that are associated with it .
This form of equality will therefore be a very high priority component of future strategies and we are proposing appropriate measures that may advance this issue in all of the relevant documents .
I would like to state that we must always remain within the framework of the Treaty , of course , but we are prepared to use this framework to the full .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , what you have just had to say did sound very good , but politicians must always have an eye on whether their actions live up to their words .
I have a question for you , namely how can it be that , over the last five years , it has only been male high-ranking members of the Commission that I have had the opportunity of working with ?
How can it be that the Commission does not have gender parity in its composition ?
It also appears that it will not be possible for the Commission to have a balanced gender make-up in future , either .
Would it not be a good thing to set an example for once , in order to be much more credible when taking further steps ?
I think it would be appropriate to emphasise that the Commission currently has a greater representation of women than ever before .
It would also be appropriate to point out that my female colleagues have held , and are holding , the most important portfolios .
There is no doubt at all about this .
I could mention Neelie Kroes , Dalia Grybauskaite and so on , as simply all of my female colleagues hold very significant portfolios .
The Commission is therefore setting an example from this perspective , but it is clear that the appointment of commissioners is in the hands of Member States and if the Member States do not put forward female candidates , then that will naturally be reflected in the make-up of the Commission .
As far as the structure of the European administration is concerned , you are well aware that the Commission has plans to improve the situation and to carry on improving it , as we are still far from having an appropriate representation of men and women and I am delighted to say that , thanks to the efforts of my colleague Siim Kallas , we have made some very clear progress if you compare the numbers at the outset with the situation today .
However , you are right to say that the situation is still far from satisfactory .
Mr President , we have this conversation every year , and it strikes me that the politics needs to change if we want to have more people - and specifically more women - involved in the Commission , Council and Parliament , which does not seem to want that .
The way we function as a parliament does not suit parents with children - be they men or women - and one has to make a choice .
I chose this career but I have somebody who has chosen to be at home .
I think we need to be realistic in our discussions about what is practical .
I pointed out in my introduction that there were many situations that were either negative or positive .
It is obvious that we all take our own fundamental decisions in the end , although some institutions , some policies and some arrangements clearly give people much more freedom of choice than others .
I am therefore quite clear in my mind that , apart from anything else , we need to take a constitutional approach to equal opportunity and to the elimination of all types of discrimination , whether direct or indirect , because at the moment , it is not true that men and women are afforded the same choices .
Women are still in a disadvantaged position unfortunately which , apart from anything else , manifests itself overtly in their lack of access to roles in which political or economic decisions are taken .
As the questioners are not present , Questions 22 and 23 lapse .
Part two
Subject : Language learning in border regions
Does the Commission consider that enough is being done in the Member States and at EU level to ensure that young people living in the border regions between Member States learn the language of the neighbouring country ?
Can national minorities and cross-border Euroregions make a specific and positive contribution to this ?
In accordance with Article 149 of the EC Treaty , educational content and the organisation of education systems are the sole responsibility of Member States .
As is mentioned in the relevant article , the EU will contribute to the development of quality education by encouraging cooperation between Member States and , if necessary , by supporting their actions .
On the other hand , the Commission believes that the selection of languages taught in Member State schools must take into account geographical location and the presence of national minorities .
This point was emphasised in the September 2008 Communication entitled ' Multilingualism : an asset for Europe and a shared commitment ' , where it is stated that efforts are still required to increase the number of languages being taught , particularly with regard to choosing the second foreign language , while taking account of local conditions .
As part of the procedures for extending the options in terms of the languages taught , the European Commission suggests that dialogue is established between the education bodies and education providers , supported , for instance , through the Comenius Regio programme , partnerships with the interested local parties , and through twinning with institutions in other countries .
The EU 's programmes for education , training and young people support the learning of all the languages spoken in the European Union , including those spoken by minorities , by also supporting young people travelling abroad in order to learn these languages .
The programmes promoting European cross-border territorial cooperation can also support actions relating to training and social inclusion , including the study of languages .
For example , the project Avenir éducatif commun , supported by the France-UK cross-border programme for the 2007-2013 period , is intended to set up a cross-border network of schools , especially for the study of languages and getting started in business .
The total cost is EUR 2.2 million , with partners involved on both sides of the Channel .
Another example from another part of Europe is highlighted by a project being run as three cross-border programmes involving Vienna : Austria-Czech Republic , Austria-Slovakia and Austria-Hungary .
The project entails preparing young people for life in the cross-border region within Central Europe , particularly through offering an education aimed at acquiring a range of skills : linguistic , intercultural , communication and knowledge .
The total cost of this project is EUR 791 000 .
I would like to ask Mr Posselt whether he has an additional question .
( DE ) Mr President , you are an impressive example of multilingualism .
First of all , I would like to ask the Commissioner whether a similar project to the one he mentioned , namely between Austria and Hungary and between Austria , the Czech Republic and Slovakia , could not be put in place between Hungary and Slovakia ?
That would certainly be very beneficial and useful from a political point of view .
My second point is that I believe that there should be more real-life learning of the languages of the neighbouring countries in border regions , such as Czech in eastern Bavaria , but that this should not be restricted to schools .
In Schirnding , for example , we have a German-Czech nursery school .
Could you also support nurseries ?
I am also interested in adult learning - lifelong learning - whereby older generations in border regions , too , have an opportunity to learn the neighbouring language .
Thank you for the additional questions .
As regards the first issue concerning a possible project between Hungary and Slovakia , if such a project is submitted to the European Commission , we will certainly give it our utmost attention .
We want to contribute in this way to finding solutions of mutual interest to both countries .
As regards the second issue , I would first of all like to emphasise that in September , we launched an initiative linked to the early learning of foreign languages .
This initiative will last a number of years and is already enjoying a particular degree of success .
There is also a campaign in Member States as part of this initiative to encourage the parents of children aged between 2 and 6 to motivate their children to learn foreign languages .
With regard to the second part of the question about lifelong learning , this is the main objective of the policy we are promoting .
We have a large number of projects aimed at learning foreign languages and also acquiring intercultural skills for people who are outside the education system , including for those attending vocational colleges , those who have , so to speak , fewer opportunities , as well as for retired people and the unemployed .
This situation is not only reflected in the way in which we finance different projects , but it is also very clearly highlighted in the strategy the European Commission adopted in 2008 .
We want all of the European Union 's citizens , not only young people , to be able to have the means and opportunity to learn at least two foreign languages .
( PL ) Commissioner , I would like to thank you for that interesting information , but in your answer , you concentrated on schools , whereas attempts have also been made in several border cities to set up universities .
This type of university has been established , for example , on the border of Poland and Germany in Frankfurt - European University Viadrina .
I would like to ask this : within the framework of the various schools which you spoke about , is support also being considered for this type of institution of higher education , namely universities which have come into being in various cities situated on national borders inside the European Union ?
If universities are able to submit projects to meet the requirements of the lifelong learning programme during the 2007-2013 period , the European Commission is prepared to finance these projects as well .
In fact , I want to mention to you that a whole series of projects already being financed by the European Commission also include a large number of universities as partners throughout the whole European Union .
Therefore , my answer is a definite ' yes ' .
What matters is the quality of the project submitted by the various representatives .
( DE ) Mr President , we have numerous Erasmus programmes for students , young entrepreneurs and now for journalists .
Do you think that it would also be possible to use Erasmus programmes in order to improve communication in border regions , and where would you put the emphasis in that regard ?
My answer to this question is a definite ' yes ' .
On the subject of the Erasmus Programme , what started around 20 years ago as a programme that was not viewed in a very positive light by various agencies in the EU is currently one of the most successful programmes in the European Union .
During the frequent visits that I have made , not only to the capitals of Member States but also to very many regions in the European Union , I have been able to witness the extremely positive impact of this programme .
The subject of universities in Poland and Germany has already been mentioned earlier .
I remember with pleasure that when I visited the University of Warsaw , I had the opportunity to see a large number of German students in Poland who had the chance , through the Erasmus Programme , to acquire some knowledge of Polish and of Polish culture as well , in other words , what we would term as intercultural knowledge .
They demonstrate very clearly how efficient and effective this knowledge is .
In conclusion to my response , I wish to remind you that the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , mentioned his intention to promote during his future mandate in the period ahead those initiatives which relate to strengthening and accelerating the movement of young people , precisely so that they can acquire these skills which are increasingly necessary .
Subject : Commission negligence in investigation of Siemens scandal
The biggest case of corruption to hit the European Union in the last five years is the Siemens scandal .
It emerges from the judicial investigation , court judgments , the confessions of those involved and public statements by the company itself that political parties and individuals in positions of responsibility in various countries , including Greece , were bribed so that the company would gain an advantage in obtaining contracts for projects and procurement on behalf of government and public enterprises , many of which were co-financed from Community funds .
Since the Siemens scandal came to light , the Commissioner responsible for combating fraud , Mr Siim Kallas , has stated , in response to parliamentary scrutiny of the case , that the investigation is not within the competence of the European Union and that the Member States have not requested the assistance of the Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) .
In the light of that statement , will the Commission say in what way the Commission and OLAF , which is competent to investigate cases of fraud against the Community budget , have protected European citizens ' money ?
In what way have the Commission and OLAF intervened in this important case to demand transparency ?
What are the Commission 's and OLAF 's conclusions in relation to this case ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Commission pays great attention to all corruption cases all over Europe , but I must say that the number of current matters directly and indirectly involving Siemens in which EU funds are involved is quite limited .
The following is an overview of four of the matters concerned .
A case currently investigated by OLAF and closed in the last quarter of 2003 , involving external aid , is in judicial follow-up in Germany .
OLAF is following closely the judicial proceedings in that country .
A second OLAF case relating to projects funded by the EIB is currently being investigated .
It involves public procurement procedures .
Thirdly , another matter relating to projects funded by the European Investment Bank and involving public procurement procedures is currently being evaluated by OLAF in order to determine whether there are sufficiently serious suspicions of fraud or irregularity detrimental to the financial interests of the EU .
Based on the outcome of this evaluation , OLAF will decide if a case needs to be opened in this matter .
Finally , fourthly , the Spanish Supreme Court issued a ruling on 4 November 2008 in a case involving Structural Funds and in which Siemens was originally implicated .
It was investigated by the national authorities in the mid-1990s , and the resulting judicial proceedings have been closely followed by UCLAF and subsequently OLAF .
This ruling , inter alia , sentenced several persons to terms of imprisonment , and imposed fines for forgery .
However , it should also be noted that in this instance , Siemens was acquitted in the case in the first ruling of the Criminal Court of Madrid issued on 22 June 2006 .
As with all these kinds of cases , the general point is that OLAF is not a law enforcement agency .
OLAF cooperates closely with Member States ; the latter have an obligation to inform OLAF , and OLAF naturally follows up and gives serious attention to all the cases where EU funds are somehow involved or have been under investigation .
This is the general picture .
OLAF also participates closely in international cooperation with all other international institutions in combating misuse of money made available for humanitarian aid and other projects .
In relation to possible specific case elements , if the honourable Member is in possession of material which could be relevant to such matters , the Commission would encourage him to transmit it to OLAF , which will assess it and take appropriate decisions on it in accordance with its mandate .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the feeling in Greece about the Siemens scandal is basically as reported in the press .
In other words , the feeling is that the scandal - the biggest in post-war Greece - is heading definitively towards limitation following the second ruling by the Supreme Constitutional Court in Germany , which states that Mr Christoforakos , the former CEO of Siemens Hellas and high priest of the corruption , cannot be extradited from Germany to Greece .
That is the feeling .
This is how the scandal is developing in Greece , the scandal in which , further to confessions and convictions by German courts , state officials have been involved and included , officials who , for years , were bribed with its dirty money to award an unknown number of procurement and works contracts to Siemens .
I ask again , Commissioner ; while everyone knows that most of these procurements were cofinanced works , only your services - and unfortunately your reply confirms as much - pretend that they do not know this , taking refuge in my view in arbitrary terms of Community provisions .
Questions are being asked and the answers are : give us information , we are investigating the matter , we are monitoring it .
I want a specific answer .
Commissioner , you have an obligation to save European taxpayers ' money .
What will the Commission do in order to bring persons who it has been confirmed are infringing Community procurement legislation to justice ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - In my area of responsibility for budget discharge , I will soon appear before Parliament and the Committee on Budgetary Control to explain what should be done to protect and to ensure the proper use of European money ; these are very large topics .

Again , if you have any information concerning the misuse of money in cofinanced projects , we would be very happy - as would DG REGIO and other departments - to receive such information .
I can assure you that this information will be handled very seriously .
However , as regards the extradition of an individual from one Member State to another , this is purely a matter in the hands of Member States , and none of the directorates-general in my area of responsibility can do anything to facilitate the extradition of a person for whom this is requested .
Subject : Cigarette smuggling and revenue
A European Anti-Fraud Office press release in August told of the conviction of a major cigarette smuggler in the US .
While this is to be welcomed , the fact remains that the illicit cigarette trade costs the EU as much as € 9.5 billion in lost revenue each year and that this money goes to criminals and has been used to fund terrorist organisations such as the Real IRA .
What is the Commission 's strategy to deal with the fact that 97 % of illegal cigarettes are evading the legitimate tax net at the European taxpayer 's expense and , subsequently , to the detriment of European security ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I should like to thank the honourable Member for this question , which allows me once again to pay attention to this huge issue which is damaging to the budgets of the Member States .
This is again a matter where Member States act , but where cooperation between Member States is vital and also where our service , OLAF , is very active and plays an important role in fighting international cigarette smuggling .
OLAF has a clear strategy .
Firstly , OLAF assists and supports law enforcement authorities throughout the European Union with their cases , and organises and coordinates Europe-wide operations : Operation Diabolo in 2007 aimed at counterfeit from China which is smuggled in shipping containers to the EU ; Operation Mudan in 2008 , to address the growing problem of smuggling of cigarettes by post ; and Diabolo II , which had the same objective as the first Operation Diabolo , which took place in September 2009 .
OLAF provides intelligence to its partners about the emerging threats and cooperates with Member States , so this is really an area of international cooperation .
OLAF 's work demonstrates that this cooperation should be enforced , but I must also say that there have been two very important events during the five-year tenure of this Commission in which OLAF has been extremely instrumental .
These are the Philip Morris agreement , and subsequently the Japan Tobacco agreement in December 2007 , where the biggest tobacco corporations admitted that they had some shortcomings in dealing with fair trade in cigarettes , and paid substantial amounts of money to the EU budget ; they are also cooperating very closely to fight cigarette smuggling , which is not in their interests either .
These were very important achievements , and all Member States are signatories to the latest Japan Tobacco agreement .
We continue to cooperate in this difficult field , but I think that with these two big agreements , the landscape has changed a little and we notice modest progress .
The case referred to by the honourable Member , of the prosecution and jailing of a third country national , is a very important case , and this is one of the many international investigations coordinated by the Office on the basis of such an agreement .
There have been many prosecutions in the EU based on OLAF 's work .
This is the first prosecution in a third country of a non-EU national directly related to the smuggling of cigarettes into the EU , so it also shows worldwide cooperation .
I can produce several other details from liaison officers in China and other places .
We all have an interest in enhancing this cooperation and combating cigarette smuggling .
Leaving aside the jobs which have been undermined in registered businesses , the health implications of this are extraordinary .
Half of all the patients admitted to the largest hospital in Ireland , St James 's Hospital , are admitted with smoke-related illnesses .
If you care to check in all the other Member States , you will find a similar situation .
These cigarettes are contributing to that problem but not making any contribution to the cost of treating it .
I understand that the figure that has been put on the amount of illicit trade coming into the European Union by way of cigarettes is EUR 9.5 billion , and 97 % of it goes undetected .
Is it not time for a comprehensive approach by the Commission , including , for example , looking at the possibility of a coastguard to deal with this problem ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I recently visited a country outside the European Union where smoking is not prohibited , and I really noticed how big a difference there is in the European Union where you cannot smell the odour of cigarettes in public places at least .
I suppose that this is the most important step to take in order to avoid all health risks .
As regards the fight against cigarette smuggling , we must use all our law enforcement agencies .
This is clearly the most important priority , but it is again the duty of border guards in the Member States to seize illegal cigarettes .
I myself have visited a port which has very sophisticated equipment for discovering shipments of illegal cigarettes , but this is the province of each individual Member State .
We can only facilitate , we can only provide intelligence , and do everything we can to help the Member States .
It is up to their border services to seize such shipments and stop them at the border .
( DE ) Commissioner , cigarette smuggling can be divided into three streams : the funds , the goods and , finally , the accompanying documentation .
Can you envisage the introduction of dedicated taxation or duties for the funding streams which , after all , are known and do flow here ?
We are , of course , already familiar with this kind of financial transactions tax , where it is not the product , not the paperwork , but the financial transactions that are heavily taxed .
It is an attractive challenge to consider this with countries such as Switzerland .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I agree that this is a very important issue for the tax authorities .
We in Europe have quite a substantial excise tax on tobacco products , but as I know from the experience of dealing with the Philip Morris agreement and the Japan Tobacco agreement , this involves largely the same corporations , which are our main producers of tobacco .
This is also the outcome : that they are cooperating .
I do not know about Switzerland ; we do not have any indications that Switzerland is behaving problematically in this field in Europe in general .
All states recognise the threats from the illegal cigarette trade , so if we have some indications , we will definitely be in contact with the Swiss authorities .
As the questioner is not present , Question No 27 lapses .
Subject : Education under the new European political strategy
In the current context of economic recession , there have been many calls for a new European strategy for employment and sustainable and intelligent growth .
In this regard , a number of recommendations have been made in a wide variety of fields but no indication has been given as to what should be done for education , nor have any actual initiatives been taken by either the Commission or the Member States .
In view of the need to complete the implementation of the Bologna Process , itself fraught with difficulties , to modernise universities and other higher education institutions , to foster the education / innovation / research triangle and to encourage the accreditation of professional training across Europe , does the Commission intend to take measures or initiatives in this field under the new European strategy to create a fully integrated , globally competitive , socially inclusive , high-quality European Higher Education Area by 2010 ?
Member of the Commission . - Thank you for that question because it is very relevant these days .
I would like to highlight that , under the umbrella of the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs , the Commission has , for several years , been pursuing its modernisation agenda for European higher education .
This agenda is particularly focused on the three specific areas of curricula , governance and funding .
Reforms in the area of curricula are largely pursued within the framework of the Bologna Process , which seeks to create a European higher education area by 2010 .
As you know , the Bologna Process is not a Commission initiative , but an intergovernmental process of 46 European countries .
The Commission , however , recognises its utmost importance and has joined the process , and is fully supporting it because of its relevance to its own modernisation agenda for higher education .
Just to highlight some of the related initiatives over the past year , I would mention the fostering of the knowledge triangle by creating the European Institute for Innovation and Technology , encouragement for recognition of education and training across Europe , the introduction of the European qualification framework for lifelong learning , the European credit transfer and accumulation system , diploma supplements and European credits for vocational education and training .
One of the goals is also to make European higher education more transparent and comparable , and therefore the projects for classification and ranking of higher education institutions are under way .
The Commission also recognises the high importance of today 's and tomorrow 's labour markets and the challenges which this brings , especially for the young generation , and we have therefore come up with the ' new skills for new jobs ' initiative , and the establishment of a university business forum where very important exchanges of views , opinions and experience are taking place both in academia and businesses .
Regarding the European higher education area , there is consensus among the participating countries that , although a lot has been achieved up to now and since 1999 , the project will not come to an end in 2010 but will continue at least until 2020 .
From the Commission perspective , the Bologna Process should , in the coming years , focus on how to further promote mobility in higher education , strengthen the social dimension through equitable access to higher education , and develop the global dimension of the process , meaning cooperation between European higher education institutions and their partners worldwide .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , for the second time today , I have the pleasure of putting questions to you and hearing your answers .
Thank you for your words .
Obviously we agree on the assessment of everything that is happening in the Bologna Process .
My question was more in relation to the immediate future and the not so immediate future , because the economic crisis that we are suffering means that there is an entire series of sectors , some mature sectors , that are not going to generate new jobs .
And we are talking about new jobs in a new economy that we are calling ' green ' , among many other things .
Therefore my question is : how does this new situation , this new economy that we are trying to start up , translate into the plans and studies , both in universities and in professional training , particularly now that , as you are perfectly aware , we have already begun to implement the Copenhagen Process on professional training ?
I would like to hear more about your views on this .
Member of the Commission . - I think that again you have pointed to a very important problem .
We already discussed this morning that we now have 78 million people in the European Union with basic or lower skills , and it is very clear that , by the deadline which we have set for ourselves of 2020 , we will definitely not have the same number of jobs for those people with basic or lower skills .
Therefore , it is absolutely imperative to prepare for that time : we have to upgrade and modernise our educational system , and we have to progress with analysing and searching to ascertain what these new skills and jobs might be .
We have to prepare the younger generation , in particular , but also the middle generation , for this .
Therefore we would like to continue with the ongoing research under the strategic framework ' Education and Training 2020 ' for policy cooperation and mutual learning .
This is just one of the frameworks in which we would like to continue and to cooperate with educational institutions and with businesses on future requirements for the most wide-ranging and most relevant mix of skills that our citizens will need by 2020 .
Clearly , education is largely a matter for Member State governments , but one issue that the Commissioner could help to coordinate is putting an end to what I would call apartheid in the educational system .
In whole sections of our community , people just do not have access to third-level education .
If you take Dublin , for example , I could identify five areas which make up 75 % of the prisoner population at Mountjoy Jail , which is our biggest prison .
Needless to say , access to third-level education in those same communities in the 21st century is still at an all-time low .
I presume that is the case right across Europe .
Could you not promote standards to end apartheid and open up third-level education to everybody ?
Member of the Commission . - You started your question with a very clear analysis that there is a division of labour and division of competences , but it is very clear that the Commission is strongly behind all efforts to increase the proportion of the population with the highest possible level of education .
It is very clear that only by improving the level of education , by enlarging access to high-quality tertiary education , as you mentioned , that we can preserve the cutting edge of the European economy and preserve the prosperity and high living standards we enjoy in Europe .
I think therefore that the Commission and the Member States have to work very closely in this respect to create the conditions whereby students or pupils from difficult socio-economic backgrounds can also get a fair chance and fair access to higher and university education .
Nowadays , 19 % of young people in Europe drop out of school .
The European Union cannot achieve sustainable economic development if it is going to fail to invest in education and research .
So far , only five Member States have invested more than 2 % of GDP in research and innovation .
Both Member States ' GDP and the Community budget are decreasing due to the economic crisis .
There is therefore a risk that the budgets assigned to education and research will be reduced in the coming years .
However , we need to invest in education and innovation so that the European Union can maintain its economic competitiveness and create new jobs .
What measures can the Commission , along with Member States , adopt to ensure that a minimum level of investment in research and education will be guaranteed in the coming years ?
Member of the Commission . - You are absolutely right that the percentage of early school leavers in Europe is very high .
We set ourselves the level of 10 % , to be achieved by 2010 .
It is quite obvious that this benchmark will not be reached because currently , there are around 15 % of early school leavers , and you are absolutely right that this does not reflect well on the need for quality in our educational systems around Europe .
You are also right that , under current circumstances - where national governments are under different constraints regarding public finances and the financing of stimulus packages , and are very often implementing exit strategies aimed at restoring public finances to a sound footing in the coming years - there is much debate over the budget .
What should be the priorities ?
Where should we place our emphasis ?
I think you have already noticed that there is always a strong voice from the Commission side highlighting the need to keep an adequate level of financing for research and innovation in the educational sectors , because we believe this is how we will preserve and improve our competitive edge and prepare our future researchers , our future workers in highly competitive areas for better performance in the future .
You will certainly hear voices from the Commission appealing clearly to keep financing for education-related activities and for research and innovatory aid at the highest possible level , even under these very difficult economic constraints .
Subject : Measures to guarantee young people access to quality education , to encourage and assist them to continue their studies and to ease their entry onto the job market
There are 96 million young people between the ages of 15 and 29 in the EU , which represents around 20 % of the total population .
20 % of young people under the age of 25 are exposed to the risk of poverty , according to Eurostat statistics for 2007 , while stable jobs are increasingly hard to find owing to the economic and financial crisis .
Approximately 15 % of young Europeans abandon their schooling .
In February 2009 , some 17.5 % of Europeans under the age of 25 did not have a job , with this being more than twice the overall unemployment rate for the EU , which stood at 7.9 % for the same period .
Similarly , many young Europeans are being forced to accept temporary jobs because they cannot find permanent ones .
Since the future of Europe depends on the younger generation , could the Commission state what measures it is contemplating to guarantee young people access to quality education , to encourage and assist them to continue their studies and to ease their entry onto the job market , thereby ensuring their fuller integration into society ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I already used some of the arguments in my previous answer , but it is clear that this is a very important area and I will try to highlight some other additional information in responding to this question .
As you know , in accordance with Articles 149 and 150 of the EC Treaty , responsibility for the content and organisation of education and training systems rests with the Member States .
It is really up to them to decide the content of their educational programmes for all levels of education and training .
The Commission recognises , however , the importance of the issue raised by the honourable Member and supports Member States in implementing their reforms through the open method of coordination .
The 2006 recommendation on key competences for lifelong learning defines the key competences young people should develop during their initial education and training to a level that equips them for adult life and which would allow them to develop very good job skills for the future .
We should also look at the aforementioned strategic framework for European cooperation in education and training ( ' ET 2020 ' ) from this perspective .
I would underline that among the priority areas for the first cycle of this programme , the Commission aims to develop cooperation among Member States on improving basic skills in reading , mathematics and science , and to intensify work on reducing the number of early leavers from education and training .
Through the Copenhagen Process , European Union Member States are increasingly cooperating to share experience and improve links between vocational education and training and the labour market to help youngsters access the labour market on better terms .
Boosting the attractiveness and quality of vocational educational training is a main priority , as is fostering the notion of lifelong learning and related policies so that the European workforce is flexible and able to adapt to changes in labour market conditions .
Just to highlight some other programmes , the Leonardo da Vinci programme 's mobility action is also a highly effective tool to help youngsters access the labour market .
This mostly concerns apprentices and other youngsters on the job market .
Thanks to this programme , they can undertake part of their training in another country .
So far , the results have been very positive because these placements abroad have improved skills that are useful for employers .
They have improved their language abilities and intercultural skills .
I should also mention the Erasmus Programme , but in a slightly different light because , up to now , we have been speaking mostly about exchanges for students among universities .
Since 2007 , however , the Erasmus Programme has also been supporting student placements in enterprises .
This programme has been very successful since the start , as in its first year of operation alone , over 20 000 students carried out a work placement abroad and over 15 000 enterprises have participated in this effort .
This is one example of how we can enhance the employability of graduates and foster better cooperation between academia and business .
We have already discussed the positive impact of the Bologna Process on student mobility and on cooperation among universities and higher education institutions , so I will not repeat what I already said a few minutes ago .
To conclude , I would like to underline that the Commission acknowledges the particular difficulties that young people face when they are entering the labour market .
In the framework of the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and more and better jobs , both the Commission and the European Council have put a particular focus on improving the employment situation of young people .
Member States have committed themselves through the adoption of the European Youth Pact in 2005 to devote more attention to the integration of young people into education , employment and society overall , but the initial very promising progress has been stalled because of the current economic crisis .
It is true that young people have been hit particularly hard as they have been the first to lose their jobs under the current circumstances .
In its Communication ' A shared commitment for employment ' of June 2009 , the Commission has encouraged Member States and social partners to ensure that young people , despite the difficult economic environment , have access to quality education and training and , in particular , to high-quality apprenticeships and traineeships .
( RO ) There is a risk due to the economic crisis that it will be harder for young people to find a job , that they will have to accept a job that is beneath their level of qualifications or that they will be forced to spend longer periods in unemployment .
The Commission should ensure that these young people have the opportunity to receive training during this period of unemployment and are not put at a disadvantage by employment terms requiring a minimum period of experience , sometimes of 5-10 years .
What measures does the Commission envisage adopting with this in mind ?
Member of the Commission . - You are absolutely right that , under the current circumstances , the Commission and the Member States must be very creative in improving conditions for young people to enable them either to keep their jobs or , if they have lost them , to retrain them and better prepare them for the next opportunity , the next possible employment .
The Commission is working very closely with the Member States and experts , and in the current situation , they are focusing on three areas : how to use this period to ensure that they achieve the right basic skills and key competences , how to make high-quality education more equitable and how to ensure the quality of teaching and learning in schools .
I believe that these are basic preconditions for preparing young people to overcome this very difficult period and better prepare them for the next wave of jobs which , hopefully , will be created once the crisis has subsided .
Subject : Volunteerism in Sport
Can the Commission outline the initiatives that it intends to pursue to promote volunteerism in sport in Europe to a greater extent ?
Member of the Commission . - Volunteering in third sector activities plays an important role in EU policy making , given the benefits for society in terms of cohesion , inclusion , democracy , citizenship and also bringing us very clear , inherent , economic value .
Volunteering provides many occasions for non-formal education and deserves to be adequately recognised .
While volunteering takes place in many sectors , there are structural specificities regarding the field of sport .
Voluntary activity in sport forms the basis for the organisation , administration and implementation of sport activities in new Member States and plays a fundamental role in supporting the entire sport structure .
This importance of voluntary activity in sport has repeatedly been acknowledged at the EU political level : in its 2007 White Paper on Sport , the Commission explicitly recognises the role of voluntary activity as one of the common elements of the European approach to sport .
In its ' Pierre de Coubertin ' action plan , the White Paper therefore seeks to promote volunteering in sport and non-profit sport organisations through specific actions , including a study on volunteering and exchange of good practices within the informal EU ' non-profit sport organisation ' working group .
In addition , projects relating to volunteering in sport have been financed through the ' Europe for Citizens ' and ' Youth in Action ' programmes .
A new study on volunteering was launched in spring 2009 and it described volunteering and it will describe the volunteering in all 27 Member States .
This will bring deep analyses of the main opportunities and challenges , and it will be followed by the recommendation to the European Union Member States , civil society and sport organisations .
The study results are expected before the end of 2009 , so we will definitely be receiving them in the coming weeks .
We believe that this study should contribute to an increased understanding of volunteering in sports , in both societal and economic terms , as a basis for responding to the political demand to promote voluntary activities in sport and its underlying structure in an EU context .
As stipulated in its proposal , which is still subject to the legislative procedure , the Commission also intends to promote voluntary activity in sport under the framework of European Year on Volunteering 2011 .
Provided that the Lisbon Treaty enters into force , the implementation of new provisions on sport , which include the specific reference to the promotion of sports structures based on voluntary activities at EU level , will require due reflection .
In that event , the Commission will hold consultations with all concerned stakeholders to develop policy and suitable initiatives with a clear EU added value .
I would like to thank the Commissioner , particularly for his references to the White Paper on Sport , which I welcome .
I want to refer to obesity , which is one of the most serious public health problems in Europe at the present time .
It is estimated that there are 22 million overweight children in the European Union , of which 5.1 million are considered obese .
The increase in child obesity is extremely worrying .
As childhood obesity is also strongly linked to obesity in adulthood , the best time to address the problem is early in life .
How does the Commission intend to link volunteerism in sport and the ' sport for all ' concept with the battle against rising obesity levels amongst children within the European Union and within Member States ?
Is there any possibility that an education programme could be run by your department to ensure that message is got across throughout Europe and in each Member State ?
Member of the Commission . - Thank you for raising this very important topic , which is a little bit related to the subsequent question .
I agree with you 100 % that obesity in children and , later on , among adults , is one of the urgent problems we are facing in the European Union .
I will speak later about the studies which we have completed and evaluated on this subject , and it is very clear that there are two sides to the coin .
On the one hand , we have to work very hard on improving sports activities in schools and on encouraging sports activities among adults ; on the other hand we have to be very careful about nutritional guidelines .
As I am sure you are fully aware , the latest studies have clearly established that we probably had a higher intake of calories in the 1950s .
At that time , we consumed more fat , but we did not have the problem with obesity .
The answer is very clear that people then moved about much more and had much more physical activity .
One of the conclusions is therefore that we cannot win the battle against obesity through dietary recommendations alone , but that these must be combined with adequate physical activity .
In this respect , the European Union is still waiting for real competences in sport .
We are waiting for the completion of the Lisbon Treaty ratification process , and then the Commission will engage in wide consultations with all stakeholders so that we can prepare very good , widely accepted and positive initiatives .
This will be one of the topics on which we should concentrate , as one way to positively improve the situation among children is to increase the number of hours in school devoted to physical activity .
This will not be so difficult to introduce and I am sure it would bring very important and positive results .

You said in your response to Mr Aylward that volunteering brings clear economic value .
Indeed it does , and social value as well .
Given that you also mention 2011 as the European Year on Volunteering in your response , I would like to ask why the Commission has only proposed a budget of EUR 6 million for this year ; the year 2010 will have a budget of EUR 18 million .


Volunteering is free in the sense that it is freely given , but that is not a good reason for the European Commission not to invest in the 100 million volunteers across the EU .
I would therefore like your views on the amount of funding that has been allocated to this year , because I genuinely believe it is not sufficient .
Member of the Commission . - I was just consulting my chef de cabinet to give you as precise an answer as possible .
As far as my information goes , EUR 8 million was allocated for the whole Year of Volunteering .
I believe that with appropriate planning - which I hope we could start very soon once the decision is taken - and this amount of money , we can really highlight the importance of volunteering , the benefits it brings to social life and the savings it brings to the organisation of societal , cultural and other activities .
I hope that we can definitely achieve the goals you mentioned in your question with this amount of money .
Subject : White Paper on sport
In accordance with the policy objectives of the EU White Paper on sport , what programmes is the European Commission implementing to highlight the benefits of better dietary practices in Europe ?
Member of the Commission . - This question is still related to a certain extent to my previous answer as to how we can combine better dietary practices , how we can promote a healthier lifestyle , and how we can bring European value added to the national policies in these areas .
I should first of all mention that the Commission 's White Paper ' A strategy for Europe on nutrition , overweight and obesity-related health issues ' highlighted the importance of taking proactive steps to reverse the decline in physical activity , and the actions suggested in the area of physical activity in this White Paper and in the White Paper on Sport mutually reinforce and complement each other .
The Commission has created a High Level Group on Nutrition and Physical Activity where officials from all Member States can exchange policy ideas and best practices and gain an overview of all government policies in this area .
As you probably know , this High Level Group meets at least three times a year .
Through the Public Health Programme , the Commission has been giving support to initiatives , among others , to network local partnerships targeting nutrition and physical activity in young people .
Coming back to the White Paper on Nutrition , I have to underline that this paper highlights that the private sector and NGOs have very important roles to play in helping us to ensure that there will be an actual decline in obesity levels .
The work of the European Platform on diet , physical activity and health is ongoing , and Platform members commit themselves to actions in their area to try to reverse the trend .
In the area of sport , the White Paper remains the single most important reference point .
It foresees several actions in the area of sport and health , known under the concept of ' Health-Enhancing Physical Activity ' ( HEPA ) , which include the support of the HEPA network .
It also proposed more funding opportunities for projects in this area , namely in the context of the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development , the EU Public Health Programme , the Youth and Citizenship programmes and the Lifelong Learning Programme .
The EU Physical Activity Guidelines adopted in 2008 can also be regarded as a contribution to informing citizens about the benefits of physical activity and maintaining an appropriate balance between nutrition and physical activity .
The Commission is currently implementing a preparatory action in the field of sport in order to prepare future EU actions in accordance with the budgetary decisions taken by Parliament , and the 2009 preparatory action has already provided a clear indication about the high interest in the area of HEPA , with 64 % of the applications for the action being in this area .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response .
In fact , it was not related to the previous question ; I was taking a different angle .
The Commissioner touched on two points that I wanted to bring up : first of all , with regard to the Nutrition and Health Group that is meeting with regard to types of food and dietary conditions , but also with regard to false advertising by many people involved in saying that sport is linked to certain types of products and additives , which can be very harmful to health .
Instead of using natural products to create a better , healthy environment for those people who want to train in sports , they are using supplements such as growth hormones condensed into certain drinks and high-performance drinks , which are sold on the basis that they give you extra pep or extra zip but , in reality , cause huge health problems .
This is why I wanted to link the very finest of sport and what sportsmen and women do to get to the condition they are in , while also encouraging those at lesser levels of sport to understand that taking a quick drink is not going to make you the best sportsperson in the world .
Member of the Commission . - I think your angle is absolutely right because , if you go to a fitness centre today , even before you actually get to the machine you see the shelves full of different kinds of products , dietary supplements , energy drinks and so on .
You are absolutely right that this area is very big business and that we should think very carefully about how to approach it and how to find an appropriate balance in offering the possibility for sports people to have good products but , at the same time , ensuring that they have proper information about what kind of products they are using .
I think an information campaign on the negative consequences of this type of product would be very important .
At consumer protection level , these products must be very clearly described and it must be very clearly marked what kind of harmful consequences the consumption of these products could bring upon sportsmen .
I think that you are absolutely right in saying that we have to think how we can avoid the negative consequences of taking part in sport and then totally wiping out the benefits by using products which are actually harmful to health .
Subject : Difficulties of the Slovene theatre in Trieste
The EU urgently needs a Commissioner for Human Rights .
The rights of minorities are being flagrantly violated in the EU . Here is an example from Italy .
One of the pillars of the national identity and culture of the Slovene minority in Italy is the Slovene theatre ( Slovensko stalno gledališče ) in Trieste , which was established as long ago as 1945 by the municipal , provincial and regional authorities of Italy .
The theatre has always faced financial difficulties because the Italian authorities do not provide regular funding .
The theatre had to stop performing its programme in September because of financial difficulties .
The Italian state has an important internal and international obligation to provide for those Italian citizens who are members of the Slovene minority .
The Italian state is not respecting the rights of its own citizens , and by preventing the theatre from operating , it is carrying out a policy of active assimilation of a minority .
In Slovenia , this behaviour is viewed as a flagrant violation of Italy 's obligations towards a minority , in this case the Slovene minority .
What can you as European Commissioners do to preserve the Slovene theatre in Trieste , and with it the Slovene language ?
Member of the Commission . - I would also like to thank the honourable Member for this question .
It is clear he is trying to explore all possible avenues of how to help and improve the situation in this theatre .
I have to start by underlining that Community action in the field of culture is based on Article 151 , which provides that Community action shall be aimed at encouraging cooperation between Member States and , if necessary , supporting and supplementing their action .
However , the decision on the allocation of national funds to cultural institutions belongs to Member States , and no Community competence allows the Commission to influence such choices .
Nevertheless , intercultural dialogue and the promotion of cultural diversity are key objectives of the European cultural agenda , and transnational projects in this field may therefore be eligible for Community support under the culture programme .
It aims , more specifically , at encouraging creativity and mobility of artists , public access to culture , the dissemination of art and culture , intercultural dialogue and knowledge of the history and cultural heritage of the peoples of Europe .
Only projects with a European dimension can be financed , meaning at least three - or , in the case of multiannual projects , six - organisations from different Member States must participate in the project .
Operating grants for a single cultural institution are only possible if the activities are carried out at European level in at least seven countries participating in the cultural programme .
It should also be mentioned that the Commission has developed a strategy to promote multilingualism in the European Union which covers official , national , regional , minority and migrant languages .
The communication of September 2008 , ' Multilingualism : an Asset for Europe and a Shared Commitment ' , confirms Commission support for all languages spoken in the Community , including the languages spoken by minorities .
This strategy is implemented in close cooperation with the Member States , who remain , however , the decision makers with respect to internal language policy .
The promotion of language learning and linguistic diversity is also one of the general objectives of the lifelong learning programme .
Under this programme , the European Union supports projects and networks to promote all languages present in the EU , including minority languages .
In addition to that , it must be stressed that the protection of persons belonging to minorities is one of the principles on which the Union is founded .
Therefore , the Commission considers that Member States must use all available legal instruments in order to guarantee the rights of individuals - including those belonging to national minorities - and act proactively against all sources of discrimination .
The European Commission reaffirms its commitment to the protection of fundamental rights and non-discrimination .
( SL ) Thank you for your answer , Commissioner .
It answers my question in principle , but this is not a problem of principle .
This is a very specific problem and one that concerns people 's lives .
The Commission is , indeed , of the opinion that this is a matter which ought to fall within the competence of the Member States , but this House is of the view that not everything in Italy is working as well as it should .
For precisely that reason , we shall be voting here tomorrow on a resolution which is a product of the debate on media freedom in Italy .
Although , admittedly , the Commission believes that it has no authority in this regard , the majority of us here are of the view that the Commission actually is in a position to deal with such issues as well .
The minorities issue is not merely one of citizens ' rights .
It is also an issue of the State itself being responsible for , and obliged to respect , the rights of its minorities .
Commissioner , I am pleased that you have spoken about discrimination and countering it , but the fact is that no minority can survive unless it is granted positive discrimination .
A minority needs extra understanding and help and extra moral , political and financial support if it is to survive .
That is positive discrimination .
And in this particular case , Commissioner , we are talking about an institution which was established by the aforementioned State .
This theatre has been up and running for more than forty , fifty , years , but every year , we hear the same old story .
Refusing to grant funding until the very end of the year is a form of political pressure , and as you yourself know , all the Slavic peoples have a similar saying : an empty bag cannot stand upright .
What we need is concrete financial action .
Member of the Commission . - I fully understand your preoccupation , but we in the Commission have to operate under the very clear rules established , especially for the field of budget allocations and budget disbursement .
Therefore , I was trying in my answer to provide you with possibilities of how we , from the European level , can help Slovenian theatre .
The only way in which the Commission can financially assist in this respect would be if the administration of the theatre could establish cooperation with their neighbours and become active in the cultural programme under the current conditions .
This , I think , would be achievable and possible , and I believe it would also be for the benefit not only of the theatres but also for other reviewers and other partners with whom the Slovenian theatre would cooperate in the future , because only under these conditions can the Commission have a positive look at the financing of these concrete actions , which very clearly describe the element of European value added and European cooperation in this respect .
As you know , if we do not have a special budget line for this type of project , we cannot finance them .
I fully understand that the debate on this issue is very often very intense , because it really concerns nations , nationality and languages .
Therefore , I think the European Parliament is very well placed to debate this issue , as you highlighted in your supplementary question .
That concludes Question Time .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
Modification of Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 ( the ' Single CMO Regulation ' ) ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agricultural products ( Single CMO Regulation ) - C7-0223 / 2009 - .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me start by thanking you for allowing the urgent procedure to be applied to the two proposals that I hope will help the situation in the dairy market - one proposing that milk be included in the scope of Article 186 , and one regarding the management of the buy-out scheme for quotas .
These proposals are the latest in a long series of dairy-oriented measures that we have adopted .
I have taken note of your resolution of 17 September , and I hope you have noted that many of your recommendations are already covered in practice , covered by ongoing studies or will be covered by today 's proposals .
As regards the long-term measures mentioned in your resolution , we have set up a high level group .
The first meeting has taken place and we expect that the final paper will be delivered before the end of June next year .
I am very happy to be able to say that the reality today in the dairy market is that prices are increasing and we are no longer seeing any buy-up into intervention because the market prices are better than the intervention prices .
Regarding my proposal , Article 186 is an existing provision for a large number of products , but milk is not included .
The recent price volatility that we saw , starting in 2007 , has shown that it is , or it will be , necessary to include milk under this article , because this would then allow the Commission to take faster action .
Yesterday , in the Council of Agricultural Ministers and in COMAGRI , I also announced this EUR 280 million for dairy farmers .
In order to be able to pay out this money quickly , I simply need the legal basis in Article 186 .
The idea will be to allocate the money in national envelopes , according to production in the year 2008-9 and , of course , within the ceiling of the national quotas , distributed in a non-discriminatory manner to those dairy farmers most affected by the crisis .
Again , to use this possibility , we need to include milk in Article 186 .
When I say I announced the possibility of proposing EUR 280 million , you have to be aware that the budget authority , which is the European Parliament and the Council of Finance Ministers , will have to decide on this amount at the ECOFIN meeting on 19 November .
I also said yesterday that this is the last money that I have in my pockets , with the exception of the EUR 300 million which is necessary as a buffer to avoid financial discipline .
It is important for me to say clearly to you that Article 186 is not a carte blanche to propose whatever ideas the Commission might get .
At this stage , I can only say that private storage for different products - and this could include cheese - is a candidate , provided that the market situation is such that we can justify it .
The second part of the proposal is the management of the quota system .
The possibility already exists today for Member States to buy up quotas .
What we are introducing here is the possibility that the Member States simply reduce the overall national ceiling of the quota with the amount of quotas they have been buying out of the market .
This is a voluntary scheme because it has been obvious in our discussions that compulsory schemes simply would not work politically .
I look forward to hearing your comments .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I very much welcome the fact that this request to use the urgent procedure was passed here in Parliament today by a large majority .
In this way , we have sent a signal to our dairy farmers and have not shied away from the responsibility .
In contrast to a minority of my fellow Members from other groups , we see , in this request to use the urgent procedure , an additional tool to get help to dairy farmers at a difficult time .
It is certainly true that this request from the Commission did come very late in the day and that it is less than what is possible .
That said , it is always better than doing nothing at all .
The views within my own group about the proposed buy-back programme also diverge widely .
The programme would have to be obligatory for it to have any impact at all .
Yet I see no majority for that in this Parliament or in the Council .
Furthermore , such a programme would not be acceptable to some of the Member States as it would be tantamount to a cutting back of the balancing out arrangement and also of the quotas .
The indication that quotas are to be raised for priority groups is a decision that is already the law in force .
The inclusion of milk and milk products in Article 186 for immediate measures in the event of market disturbances is to be welcomed .
Nonetheless , I will be tabling an amendment to the effect that this measure should be restricted to two years .
If it proves its worth , we will then agree to an extension .
Finally , I would like to say thank you for the EUR 280 million .
Commissioner , you have indeed largely accommodated Parliament .
I know that you do not have any more money available to you .
I ask that the - possibly amended - motion for a resolution be approved on Thursday .
Mr President , Mrs Fischer Boel , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to take the opportunity to say how pleased I am at the responsibility shown this morning by the House when it adopted the urgent procedure to include the dairy sector under Article 186 of the single CMO Regulation , along with many other agricultural products .
The rapid extension to this sector of the rules governing intervention in the event of market crisis enables us to provide a significant response at an extremely difficult time for farming as a whole and the dairy sector in particular .
At this point , we expect the European Commission to take onboard , as Mrs Fischer Boel just said , Parliament 's requests , which have pointed out several times that the measures taken until now have proved to be inadequate given the seriousness of the current crisis .
Parliament 's openness towards the Commission today should not be interpreted as full delegation with unrestricted powers , but as a gesture of responsibility in a dramatic and wholly exceptional situation .
I am keen to stress that in this regard , Parliament considers it essential to be involved at every stage of the decision-making process in order to guarantee democratic scrutiny , and this is why we believe that the Commission should notify Parliament in advance of how it will actually use these new powers conferred under Article 186 for the milk sector as well .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , could I , too , thank the Commissioner for coming here tonight to further explain the powers she seeks .
Commissioner , could I first of all thank you for responding positively to the resolution agreed with this House on 27 September .
I welcome the moves you have taken to try and stabilise what is a very serious situation for dairy farmers .
I also welcome the EUR 280 million that you have announced for restructuring .
In terms of the first part of your proposal , the question we all have to ask today is : why are we being asked to approve urgency measures at this late stage , and will they assist market recovery ?
Because clearly , as you said in your speech , the green shoots of recovery are already starting to show .
I am not convinced that the proposed quota changes will make a great deal of difference but , as they are voluntary on Member States , this group will certainly not oppose them being granted .
Turning to the proposal on widening the scope of Article 186 to include milk and milk products , in my experience , ministers - or in this case commissioners - usually come to parliaments asking for powers so they can take action to solve a problem .
Tonight , we seem to be being asked to grant the powers to the Commission without first being told exactly what action they will be used to address .
As I understand from your contribution early on , you did mention that you needed this extra power as a legal basis to pay out the EUR 280 million .
I would be grateful if you could clarify whether that is the case .
Is that why you require the powers ?
Because the great concern we all have is that we may well be handing over a blank cheque to the Commission .
Commissioner , you said you had been financially plucked of your last feather , so , if you have other ideas for action you might take , clearly there is not much financial scope to do anything at all significant .
Our group will only grant these powers if they are time limited and they are constrained to extreme circumstances .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , finally there is movement in this debate .
The Commission must now bear the overall responsibility again .
This morning , we saw something different , although we would have liked Parliament to have been more involved .
Let me say quite clearly that we are not against financial support .
We must be clear , however , that such support is just a drop in the ocean , in the truest sense of the expression .
The decisions made in Luxembourg unfortunately also did not help us bring about a rebalancing of supply and demand - which is , of course , the crucial element here .
The voluntary buying up of quotas is all well and good , but it will not have a major impact as it does not contribute significantly to a reduction in volume .
I already mentioned yesterday that we must give proper consideration to the Court of Auditors ' report and set about implementing a policy aimed at the long term and that we need to look at what the Court of Auditors has said .
The Court said that we need supplies to be managed in future or else the whole system will be incapable of being financed , and we need a dairy policy based on quality products in the European market .
We must move away from export refunds as quickly as possible - this is an old demand on our part and we have often pointed out the disastrous consequences of these measures .
We really need a policy that goes beyond this current crisis and we also expect longer-term answers from the Commission .
Regrettably , the Commission has not given us such answers so far , specifically as regards how we need to strengthen the producer organisations in order to give them more market power and restrain the supermarket chains .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , first of all I would like to say that I certainly welcome this decision , and I think the debate last night in the committee and tonight in plenary allows us to bring more clarity to the situation .
The reality , and I think the cause of the frustration that many dairy farmers feel , is that while they have seen to some extent what Mr Lyon referred to as the green shoots emerging , this money has not passed through into their bank accounts yet .
So this does create a degree of frustration for the dairy farmers .
Many have been under financial pressure for a long time .
It is a good and useful thing that we can talk , because I do now accept the need for Article 186 to be brought into place so that we can get this money direct to the producers as fast as we possibly can .
I think that is the challenge .
I like Mr Deß 's idea of an amendment , and if he puts it forward I think I would like to support that amendment for a limit of two or even three years to get this job done .
However , I remain unconvinced by the buy-out scheme .
We must do this to protect the industry .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am obliged to tell you again , this evening , that the financial provisions that you are proposing are a mere drop in the ocean when it comes to the crisis and the despair in which farmers are living today .
You are going to release EUR 280 million , when only a few weeks ago it was going to be EUR 600 million .
You are therefore going to give a one-off payment of EUR 1 000 to farmers who are now losing EUR 100 to 200 per day .
We are therefore calling for a real emergency financial plan , not a plaster to treat a life-threatening illness .
On the other hand , you want to use public money for a huge plan to slaughter dairy cattle and to shut farms .
In so doing , you are going to destroy the future of our farmers , as it is the young farmers who will be the hardest hit , the smallest farmers , those who develop the land , who produce milk products and quality cheese , and who preserve the environment .
How dare you propose that , when so many families , in Europe and elsewhere , do not have access to food , starting with milk !
I would add that , with your plan , we will have a milk shortage in the future .
The fact is , at a time when the Treaty of Lisbon is being pitched so strongly to us , we can only be surprised that you should want to enforce this Article 186 of the regulation , which will give you full powers .
You had these full powers , though , and it was these that led you to opt for the liberalisation of quotas that is plunging us into the crisis that we are in today , for the sole benefit of manufacturers and distributors , because , even today , the European Court of Auditors points out that , between 2000 and 2007 , the consumer prices of milk products increased by 17 % while the producer prices fell by 6 % .
Commissioner , I say to you once again that there is an urgent , a very urgent , need to provide a huge amount of help to the agricultural sector by means of a major European emergency fund , to return to a policy of minimum agricultural prices , and not to let the capitalist market destroy our farmers .
( HU ) Commissioner , I will , of course , vote in favour of the proposal , even though I am aware that this handout will not resolve the situation for farmers .
However , I have three questions to ask .
The first one is as follows . What do you see as the lesson from this crisis ?
Have we learnt any lesson from it ?
Commissioner , this crisis has not been caused by any kind of natural disaster , tsunami or other similar event , but by a series of bad decisions and a basically failed agricultural policy .
Looking at the future , what can you promise farmers ?
How will they avoid a similar crisis in the future ?
I would like to hear a clear-cut , detailed answer from you .
Now for my next question .
You said yesterday at the Committee hearing that Member States can freely use this sum of money .
What does this mean exactly ?
Will Member States be able to distribute this money fairly so that it is not given to farming 's big business and large farms , but to smallholders , family farmers who are most in need and whose livelihood depends on it ?
These farmers have ended up in the direst situation .
The other large group that should be considered are farmers in the new Member States , especially smallholders .
How do you want to get rid of this intolerable discrimination which derives from the fact that we Hungarians , for instance , had to hand over our markets lock , stock and barrel to the European Union , but we have received only a fraction of the subsidies ?
How and when will this injustice and inequity be eliminated ?
( IT ) Mr President , Mrs Fischer Boel , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the Commissioner 's approach in deciding to come before Parliament to set out the package of measures in the dairy sector .
With reference to the content of the proposed measures , despite a lack of adequate operational details for them , I think that things are moving in the right direction towards solving the problems which our farmers are currently experiencing .
I do not believe , however , that the proposed measures alone can solve the problems we are facing .
Nevertheless , I think it is vital to vote in favour of the proposal to amend Articles 78 and 79 of Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 .
With regard to Article 186 of the same CMO Regulation , I would point out first of all that paragraphs a ) and b ) of this article lay down different levels of protection for different goods , intervening for some when prices rise and fall significantly , whereas for others - pigmeat , olive oil and other products - only when prices rise significantly .
I think this is an unacceptable discrepancy .
I would like to put forward , also on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , an amendment with the aim of ensuring that the Commission informs Parliament prior to undertaking the measures set out in Article 186 , and I think that this amendment is compatible with what the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament just proposed .
Lastly , I call on the Commissioner to increase , as requested in Parliament 's resolution of 17 September , the amount of de minimis aid for all productive sectors regardless of the national ceilings currently in place .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , we are all unfortunately aware of the grave state of the dairy sector in Europe .
My political group has been calling for months for the adoption of urgent measures to try to save thousands of farmers threatened with ruin .
We have adopted our own initiatives and backed initiatives by other political groups in order to achieve this .
That leaves us with little choice but to welcome the Commission 's initiatives , however inadequate they may seem to us .
That was also why the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament voted this morning in favour of the urgent procedure that was put before us .
We will , however , propose and demand that the European Parliament be kept permanently informed of the measures which will be adopted over the coming days , under the powers which we now transfer to the Commission .
We will continue to do our utmost to restore the balance of the market , so that it can guarantee adequate returns to the producers , as reaffirmed in the Treaty of Lisbon .
( SV ) Mr President , obviously it is necessary to take action promptly when crises occur in certain sectors , such as has happened with banking , with the car industry and with dairy farmers .
However , such crises recur again and again .
Perhaps it will not be dairy next time .
Perhaps it will be cereals , or something else .
If I may take the discussion slightly beyond the actual scope of this debate , we cannot keep addressing only the immediate problems .
We also need to find the time and the energy and the political planning to bring about a Common Agricultural Policy for Europe which is strong , sustainable , flexible and which removes the worst consequences of the price instability that we can expect .
I want the countryside to be viable in Europe , and the countryside cannot survive without farmers and animals !

( DE ) Mr President , unfortunately , Mr Bové cannot be here tonight , so I am speaking again .
I have more questions for the Commissioner .
Does she really , seriously believe that paying out this money will end the protests ?
As I said earlier , I believe that Parliament 's decision this morning equated to granting the Commission a blank cheque because we do not know what it will do with it .
I will say it again : the Commission is not part of the solution to the problem , but is actually part of the problem .
I stand by that view .
Yet I also simply accept the decision - as you have to see the facts as they are and this is what has been decided - and I would say to the other Members that we must limit these measures .
We should limit them to a manageable period , so that we in Parliament can also get our hand back on the tiller .
I have another question for you , Commissioner , as it is repeatedly said for all the programmes that we need to continue to promote restructuring .
So what do you mean by restructuring ?
Do you really think it is right that we continue to give out money in order basically to encourage smaller-scale farmers to give up so that we can give money to the bigger farms ?
This policy is no longer an effective means to an end .
We must ensure that we employ the money in a targeted way , specifically in the disadvantaged regions , in order to maintain the structures in those regions that are in greatest jeopardy .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , the proposal presented by the Commission acknowledges the failure of its policy for the dairy sector , but leaves its disastrous basic policy guidelines for the sector untouched .
The millions mentioned here are far below the amount needed to compensate producers for the falling prices that they have been suffering .
Contrary to what is claimed , it is necessary to reverse the route that the CAP has been heading down , where successive reforms have dismantled the instruments to regulate the market , quotas and production rights , leading many thousands of producers to gradually abandon the sector .
Thousands of jobs are in the balance : whole families who depend on farming , and the dairy sector in particular .
Vast regions are at stake , where the land will be increasingly abandoned , with drastic social and environmental consequences .
All this cries out for immediate intervention to restore fair prices for producers , but this will require more resources than those now being made available .
Above all , and we repeat , the situation demands measures with a greater scope that are not merely palliative , such as the cancellation of the annual increase in milk quotas , returning them to the levels in place prior to the decision to increase them , and the repeal of the decision to abolish the quota system in 2015 .
Mr President , like the majority of Members of this House , I voted today to support the urgent procedure in relation to Article 186 .
Any financial aid to the dairy sector is imperative to its survival , especially the survival of small family farms as we find in Northern Ireland .
If , as you say , Commissioner , you need the changes to Article 186 to trigger the EUR 280 million fund , then it will have my broad support .
We can only hope that the money is paid and distributed quickly .
Many farmers have waited too long to have the aid that is required .
I am , however , underwhelmed by the proposals concerning Articles 65 to 84 .
It is almost certain that these will not impact on the UK , and I have a number of questions surrounding them , particularly in that I feel it will create an uneven playing field between the regions of Europe and it seems contradictory in the light of the Commission 's current policy .
( FR ) Mr President , there has to be consistency in politics .
Over the last few weeks , many of us in this House have demanded measures from the Commission .
When solutions are proposed to us , we will vote in favour of those solutions , even if - I agree with what has been said - they are slow in coming and even if they have had to be extracted by means of the positions adopted both within the European Parliament and among ministers .
This amount , which will be useful in the very short term , does not resolve , as many have already said , the long-term issues concerning the way in which the planned end of quotas is dealt with .
If we want to be in a position to cope with and to prevent repeated crises within the agricultural produce sector , there is no way that we can do so without production regulation and control tools or without a combination of the two .
That is not the issue at stake this evening , however .
The issue at stake this evening , the only issue that counts at the moment , is that of Article 186 .
Commissioner , I have one simple question : in concrete terms , what is Article 186 meant to do , and from when and in what way ?
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , a month ago , we debated a Parliament resolution here and the proposals for the intervention in the dairy sector .
Today we are dealing with two new measures : the change in the management of the quotas and the measure on Article 186 , measures which we agree to process urgently , as you have requested .
However , Commissioner , the sector needs to be considered as a whole , and it is not good to have this trickle of proposals on a matter that we have been dealing with for several months now .
We demand common , European solutions .
In this respect , the reported increase in minimum aid for all sectors will cause distortions between Member States and make it difficult to apply the CAP in a uniform way .

To conclude , one final thought : aid of EUR 280 million is being considered , which we do of course welcome , but I would like to remind you , Commissioner , that this Parliament adopted a resolution raising the need for an additional fund of EUR 600 million to deal with the crisis in the dairy sector .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a farmer , I see the tabled amendment of Articles 78 and 79 as a deviation by the Commission from its hitherto sound route through agricultural reform at the expense of efficient and forward-looking farms .
It is dangerous to tamper , simply because of a desire to do something , so close to the final phasing out of the milk quota system , a system that has really been to the disadvantage of dairy farmers hitherto .
It has also been left behind by developments on the ground , as the market is currently finally beginning to recover .
I therefore reject this amendment .
It is easy to see how the Commission is seeking to exploit Parliament 's call for urgent measures for its own ends .
It is doing this by attempting , shortly before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , to ensure for itself permanent scope to act without Parliament 's consent through this amendment of Article 186 .
I therefore reject this amendment .
However , I could live with Parliament granting the Commission scope to act for a limited period in cases of crisis .
This ability would also be available to Parliament in future times of crisis , with very rapid effect , through Rule 142 of its Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , the dairy industry is in crisis , and I want to record my thanks here and compliment the Commissioner on her very timely actions , which I think were precisely right .
I think EUR 280 million is a realistic sum and will be welcome within the industry .
I am persuaded that it will be necessary to grant powers under Article 186 in order to deliver this benefit in a timely manner to the producers , so it has my support .
It has my support , although I prefer that we limit this concession until 2013 at the latest .
With regard to the national quota buy-back scheme , which I note will include powers to raise super levies from producers exceeding quotas , I have reservations .
I think it is penalising the efficient and progressive producers - often the young men , the young people who are the very future lifeblood of our industry - and I think it is sending all the wrong messages .
We live in a very volatile marketplace , and what this industry needs is not short-term reactions but long-term strategy .
I have been a long-time supporter of the Commissioner for her long-term vision for the future of the industry , and I would encourage her to go down that path , which is long-term strategy , not short-term reaction .
( PL ) Mr President , I hope that the milk producers now have the worst behind them .
This hope is strengthened by the decision to support milk producers with a sum of EUR 280 million next year .
A fundamental question , however , remains : what should be done about milk production and milk producers in the long term ?
The most important question in this matter is the future of milk production quotas .
At present , there are two approaches .
The first , which is the effect of the review of the common agricultural policy , increases production quotas gradually , and aims to lift them in 2015 .
The second approach , which is contained in the present proposal of the European Commission , aims to limit milk supply by a new method of calculating the charge for exceeding the national quota .
These two approaches contradict each other .
Personally , I am in favour of maintaining the quotas , but only when the breakdown of quotas among EU countries and producers is based on objective and fair criteria .
The development and adoption of such fair and objective criteria would be very difficult , but perhaps it is worth making the attempt .
If we are talking about extension - I fully support the extension of Article 186 , but I think this should be accompanied by a definition of the role of the Commission and the instruments it will be able to use .
Mr President , I would say this to the Commissioner : If you will forgive the pun , the milk crisis is something the Commission has made a pig 's ear of , a saying we have in Ireland when somebody has made a complete hash of something .
Only 18 months ago , you were saying that milk prices would increase substantially , only to see them fall by half in some countries .
This is why the Commission must be able to intervene more quickly in the market , and this motion is positive in that respect .
In my constituency of Munster in Ireland , many in the dairy industry , both big and small farmers , and particularly family farms , are just subsisting or are just teetering close to bankruptcy .
They are looking at their difficulties and the paltry amounts being offered while others , like banks and bankers , are being bailed out to the tune of huge sums .
( The President asked the speaker to speak more slowly )
The EUR 280 million milk fund announced yesterday is welcome but is merely a sticking plaster over a much wider problem .
The House voted last September that EUR 600 million should be made available .
In the interests of showing solidarity with small farmers in particular , this figure should be maintained .
The next priority for the Commission must be to address the whole issue of milk supply .
I firmly believe this .
Until this is addressed , we will be facing more problems and we are quickly going to run out of sticking plasters .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , yes , we should agree to milk being incorporated into Article 186 , and I hope that we will do so tomorrow .
We cannot always criticise the Commission for acting too slowly , for lagging behind , for saying that there is still a silver lining that is not there in reality .
The Commission now has the chance to act quickly and we should grant it this chance and in so doing , we should always demonstrate our own willingness to hold it to account .
Mr Deß 's amendment on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) will enable us to do that together .
The EUR 280 million that many have spoken about is just a drop in the ocean .
We must also recognise , though , that it is the end of the financial year .
We have to understand that there simply is no more money available .
How should we handle the overall situation ?
We would like to see those dairy farmers who have been hardest hit by the crisis receive the EUR 280 million .
We talk about the milk market , but these are real people and the rural areas that we discuss and that we are always saying we want to protect when we are debating other subjects .
Commissioner , support the dairy fund !
This afternoon , the Commissioner speaking in the budget debate spoke out in favour of the fund , I want to make that quite clear .
I was very pleased about it .
We also need this signal urgently , and this money , too , is within the 2010 budget .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I too am delighted at the approval of the urgent procedure in this Chamber , as I think that the inclusion of the milk issue in Article 186 is both timely and important .
I have argued that a situation as serious as the one faced by the dairy sector requires urgent measures to defend the sector , for both economic and social reasons .
I actually come from a country , Portugal , and a region , the Azores , where the dairy sector is very important and embedded in regions that are socially rather fragile and where , in fact , it would be vital to maintain the quota system beyond 2015 .
The measures proposed here are somewhat flimsy , but they are nonetheless necessary and imperative .
I am also worried about how the Commission will use the new powers it is to be given , especially since it has acted in quite an insensitive way in this crisis , putting forward weak measures , too late , and only under intense pressure .
In view of this , I would like the Commission to submit an annex to Article 186 , setting out measures which can be used for a radical intervention in the dairy sector so as to ensure its sustainability .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I very much welcome your motion .
There is one point that I feel the need to criticise , however , which is the voluntary buy-up programme for milk quotas .
A programme of this kind , if it is to succeed , must be obligatory , not voluntary .
I find this voluntary arrangement to buy back milk quotas counterproductive .
I believe this not only because this arrangement will initially mean that we retain a quota increase which it will then be very difficult to rein back in .
By buying back the milk quotas , we will be giving them a financial value again , and the main effect of that will be that it hampers the ability to do the balancing out .
I feel I must reject any measure that restricts balancing out .
Particularly in the phasing out period for the milk quotas , balancing out is a necessary tool in order for individual farms to be able to orient themselves better in the market .
For the reasons I have mentioned , I will be forced to reject this part of the motion , although I will vote in favour of the motion as a whole .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is true that we are going to adopt measures aimed at a partial solution for the crisis in the dairy sector .
Everyone here is aware of the livestock rearing situation for our farmers and we know what these measures mean for them and their families .
Our farmers do not want to be constantly subsidised .
They are asking us to be able to do the work in a dignified way , selling their products at respectable , fair prices that are in line with the effort and investment they have put in .
Commissioner , apart from the boost and the confidence that we can give our farmers with these new measures , we are on the way to future reforms , major reforms that will be discussed further in Parliament .
Mr President , the most important words that came from the Commissioner are that market prices are beginning to rise .
We should acknowledge that in this House and push to ensure that they are passed on to farmers .
We are saying there is EUR 280 million available to them , but every additional cent they receive is worth much more than the doling out of payments to them .
That is most important .
I think it is important that some have criticised the Commission hugely .
Let us acknowledge that intervention and export refunds have been used to maintain prices , even with that horribly low price for producers , so I think some of the criticism is unnecessary and harsh .
I support the extension of Article 186 if you needed to pay out this EUR 280 million , which I regard as symbolic rather than significant .
Let us look at the lessons .
We need to look at what is going to happen to CAP reform post-2013 ; the high-level group is focusing on it .
I would say to those political groups who tonight support funding for dairying : make sure that you also support a properly funded common agricultural policy after 2013 ; otherwise your words are empty .
( FR ) Mr President , please excuse me , I was supposed to come earlier , but I was tied up .
I was explaining to French listeners what took place yesterday in Luxembourg .
I believe that the Council 's decision is a bad one , since the only word to appear in the text is ' restructuring ' .
In France , we have gone from having 480 000 milk producers in 1984 to having fewer than 88 000 today .
Today , we are told that yet more producers must be forced out and that the money that will be recouped - this appears in the text - will be used for producers who have exceeded their quota .
Production will therefore have to be concentrated still further and milk producers in the most difficult areas forced out .
This is the wrong approach .
The money that has been given , the EUR 280 million - the figure has already been quoted - equates to EUR 50 per month and per farm , for one year .
That is peanuts ; it is almost a show of contempt for the crisis that the producers are going through .
Lastly , on the subject of Article 186 , I should like to say that , at a time when we are moving towards codecision in agricultural matters , it is unacceptable for power , for a blank cheque , to be handed back to the Commission .
( RO ) I would like to ask the Commissioner a question , as well as thank her for appearing before the House .
You said that the resources promised for the funds to support the dairy sector will be allocated to Member States according to an historical factor , in other words , based on the negotiated quotas .
However , many Member States claim that these quotas are unfair .
In fact , this is the reason why many Member States insist that the market should be deregulated .
For example , some states cannot even produce enough to cover their own consumption .
Do you not think that using an historical factor will maintain these injustices ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
I will have to summarise my question so as not to exceed the time allotted to me by too much .
The Commissioner said that the resources will be allocated to Member States according to an historical factor .
However , many Member States claim that the quotas currently allocated are unfair .
In fact , this is also the reason why many Member States insist that the market should be deregulated .
Do you not think that using an historical factor would maintain these injustices ?
( BG ) I would like to welcome the decision made by the Council and Commission to allocate an additional package of EUR 280 million in subsidies for dairy production in 2010 .
This sends out a clear signal to all those who are suffering the adverse consequences of the crisis every day .
I urge that this adequate response will not be a one-off economic solution , but part of a targeted , long-term strategy for restoring , stabilising and developing this sector in Europe .
This is why it is important to take into consideration the measures which each Member State is going to adopt .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that Bulgaria can only partially accept the proposals to amend Regulation 1234 .
We insist that it is explicitly recorded in the draft that the opportunities to manage national milk quotas will be exercised at Member States ' discretion .
It is important that the option is retained to choose the existing scheme for buying up and redistributing milk quotas through the national reserve .
We can ill afford either to hold back or collect payment from producers as the Bulgarian sector is in the process of being modernised .
Otherwise , Bulgarian producers will not be competitive even after 2015 .
( PL ) Mr President , we are , of course , pleased to accept these new solutions , which are intended to help farmers , including farmers in Poland .
However , it should also be remembered that when we are talking about money - and it is money which we are talking about - the way in which the money is actually distributed is important .
It should reach those who are feeling the effects of the crisis the most , because I will not agree to a policy under which we give everyone an equal amount , which means a small amount , so that , in fact , quite literally , we do not help anyone .
Secondly , I would like , if I may , to refer to history before turning to the future in a moment .
I am sure we remember the wonderful years , over a year ago now , when the farmers were getting a very good price for milk .
At the same time , they were benefiting from large EU subsidies for modernisation of the dairy sector .
Therefore , it is important that we plan the future based on this experience , and that we draw conclusions from our mistakes , because mistakes were certainly made .
It is equally important for us to think about how to plan the development of this sector , since money is available both as direct subsidies and also for the development of rural areas .
In addition , we have the instrument of milk quotas at our disposal .

( PL ) Commissioner , I would like to ask you this question : What does the Commission want to spend the EUR 280 million on ?
On further restructuring , or better , perhaps , as 21 Member States wanted , on an injection for the market , on market mechanisms ?
In fact , the farmers want the money to be used for support mechanisms .
Currently , they are not able to take out further loans or to improve productivity .
They are not able , at the moment , to continue with modernisation , because they have lost liquidity .
They do not want to buy refrigerators or milking machines now , this is not the time for further investment .
The EUR 280 million works out at not quite EUR 2 per tonne of milk produced in the European Union .
When the European Commission proposes what it calls a ' mechanism for management of the quota system ' , it really wants to limit production .
We should consider whether we will not see a repeat of the situation which followed reform of the sugar market , and which has meant that we now have problems with the supply of that resource .
Is now the time for restrictions on the production of milk or cereals ?
I am sure that is not what we want .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am pleased , Commissioner , that , just a few weeks after this House adopted a resolution on milk , you are here bringing forward measures to meet our demands .
I agree with your proposal , in respect of Article 186 , including with the time limit , which seems reasonable to me .
I am also in favour of the differentiated granting of quotas that you propose .
I have to say that the proposal concerning the buying back of quotas leaves me more perplexed .
You yourself said over weeks and months that the current crisis was not caused by the quota system and , with that in mind , personally I do not think that this buy-back proposal is completely coherent .
Finally , I would also like to say that this cannot be the end of the line just yet .
We must continue to take steps , and specifically as regards the dairy sector in difficult areas , in mountain areas , where there are simply no alternatives to dairy farming .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to offer my sincere thanks for the EUR 280 million .
I really hope , above all , that the full extent of this money reaches our 40 000 Austrian dairy farmers , as they really need it .
You are surely aware of the situation in mountain regions and the situation in small-scale family farms .
Commissioner , Austria was always against the phasing out of the quotas .
OK , you have chosen your path and followed it consistently .
We will , of course , attempt to prepare our farmers for it and to help them with it as much as possible .
With the best will in the world , I cannot understand your proposal for a voluntary quota buy-up programme .
If we apply this , it will result in an appreciation in value and price of exactly the quotas that you are phasing out .
How are we supposed to explain that to the farmers of Austria ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , having listened carefully to the discussion here tonight , I think you might get the impression from some speeches that this is the first step we are taking to help the dairy sector within the European Union .
Nothing could be more wrong .
I am quite sure that at least some of you know what has been going on since January this year when we started on the public and private storage , we started intervention , and we started export refunds .
We have been taking lots of different measures over the summer so I think we should devise a special study to tell the new Members of this Parliament exactly what has been going on since last January .
On the specific points on the two proposals here today , I have to repeat again that the buy-up scheme is not a new scheme .
It is already there for Member States to use if they want to help specific dairy farmers out of business .
It is an offer , and that is why I do not want to make it compulsory ; it is a possibility for helping farmers out of business .
The quota they buy out can be kept in the national reserve and distributed at a later stage if Member States so wish .
This was one part of the discussion .
The other part , which has aroused by far the most interest today , is Article 186 .
The reason for introducing dairy farming into Article 186 is the fact that we need to be able to react fast .
By the way , I do not see any reason why dairy farming should not be part of Article 186 , as areas specifically within the meat sector are already there .
And , in general , those who fear that the Commission will get a blank cheque and do whatever they want should keep in mind that Article 186 is normally by nature a very positive scheme where it is possible to try to help people who are in difficulties by reacting very fast .
So it is not a blank cheque .
It will be discussed , as you probably know , in the Management Committee .
I have listened to your ideas concerning a more limited period of three or four years .
I think it would disqualify dairy farmers - but of course I have listened to what you say .
Then I think there are lots of mistaken ideas going round .
This EUR 280 million is not for restructuring .
It simply offers a possibility of paying out very quickly as soon as we have the formalities in place , with the acceptance from the Ecofin meeting in November and the signing of the budget for 2010 .
This means we can act immediately , which would not be the case if we do not have Article 186 in place .
So it is not restructuring .
As I said before , it gives Member States the possibility of paying the most needy from this national budget .
How should it be distributed ?
I have clearly said it has to be on the basis of production .
I can hear that there may be other ideas but if we start discussing internally how to distribute , then I think it would take at least to the end of next year because there would be so many great ideas we would never be able to find a common line on this issue .
I will reply to some of the specific questions .
I would like to say that producer organisations are an excellent option .
It is actually necessary .
I have said that clearly in plenary before , specifically when discussing the fruit and vegetable scheme .
If farmers spend their time and efforts competing against each other instead of competing with the strong retail sector , I know who the winners and the losers will be .
Therefore I say : do work together to be a much stronger body in the whole food chain .
I completely agree with you that we have a global problem , that we have one billion people starving , not being able to get what they need to eat every day .
That is why I was hurt to see European farmers spreading milk all over the fields in a situation where we are facing starvation problems globally .
That is not the best image for European agriculture .
I have to say that I am very impressed at the way in which two Members , Mr Bové and Mr Häusling , managed to gear their speaking time .
I noticed very carefully how it was done .
I do not know if it is a new procedure of the House that one speaker can substitute for another who then goes in to speak under catch-the-eye .
It was quite smart , I would say .
( Applause )
That concludes this item .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Commissioner , having long struggled to have these measures put forward by the Commission , we are in no position to reject any contribution you may bring us at this very difficult time for dairy farmers and their families .
Unfortunately , the Commission has taken a long time to act .
It has only done so when faced with intense pressure from dairy producers , the European Parliament and 21 Member States .
I would make the following points on the measures that you have presented here :

1 : The fund of EUR 280 million is too little compared with the amount of EUR 600 million unanimously deemed necessary by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which is the committee with both technical and political expertise in this matter .
This policy statement was approved by the European Parliament itself .
We cannot , therefore , consider less than half the sum that Parliament deemed essential only a month ago to be sufficient .
2 : The inclusion of milk in Article 186 gives the Commission an operational tool that can be deployed instantly , but that does not mean that Parliament will no longer monitor the issue .
We still need instruments to regulate the market .
We should maintain the quota system and introduce transparency into the milk marketing chain .
Without these two instruments , it will be impossible to restore and guarantee stability in Europe 's rural areas .
I welcome the measures proposed by the European Commission to help Europe 's dairy producers .
However , these measures can only alleviate the crisis , but cannot end it altogether .
In order to do this , the decisions regarding the milk quota increases should be dropped .
However , neither the European Commission , nor Mariann Fischer Boel personally , is inclined to acknowledge that wrong decisions have been made .
I agree with the European farmers ' demand to drop the quota increase .
I also oppose the permanent abolition of the quota system scheduled for 2015 .
I concur with the point of view of the largest European farmers organisation COPA-COGECA , which is that the dairy market requires regulation after 2015 as well .
The important lesson to be learned from the current crisis is that the dairy market needs to be regulated .
Without this , prices will become unpredictable .
European dairy producers cannot endure the losses caused by large-scale price volatility .
On the subject of the current emergency measures , I would like to draw attention to the fact that the increase in the minimum subsidies from EUR 7 500 to EUR 15 000 may cause problems for Member States in a more difficult budgetary situation .
What I am afraid of is that in these countries , such as Hungary , the governments will not provide the maximum support .
As a result , farmers in these countries may end up at an even bigger competitive disadvantage .
I am confident that during the vote on the 2010 budget taking place on Thursday , the European Parliament will support the proposed amendment , submitted by a number of Members including myself , which would increase support for the school milk programme .
The rallies that milk producers have been carrying out for weeks in a bid to save their crisis-hit sector have been answered by the European Commission with the creation of a EUR 280 million ' milk fund ' .
Mrs Fischer Boel has therefore succumbed to the pressure after turning a deaf ear , for weeks on end , to the distress of farmers on the brink of bankruptcy .
However , this financial measure is derisory and is intended merely to calm the producers down for a while .
It will do nothing to solve the problem of a sector that is on its way out with the planned end of milk quotas .
Milk producers do not want charity or handouts , they want the market to be regulated so that they can sell their milk at prices that will allow them to live a dignified life from their efforts and to guarantee their children 's future .
Through its stubborn desire to impose the dogma of free and fair competition , the European Union is going to leave thousands of farmers at the mercy of the law of the market , and that alone .
This is the same ultraliberalism that each month makes thousands of industrial workers unemployed .
The carnage must be stopped now as a matter of urgency .
I welcome the agreement in principle reached by agricultural ministers at their council meeting in Luxembourg on providing specific aid to the dairy sector of EUR 280 million .
At EU level , this amounts to an additional one cent in aid per litre of milk , which is absolutely negligible .
After putting up bold resistance for several months , the European Commission gave in slightly to the pressure exerted by farmers , 21 Member States , including Hungary , and the European Parliament , which already demanded additional resources for the sector during their informal meeting held in Brussels last Monday .
In spite of the tardy measures from the EU , the Hungarian Government has acted quickly to support dairy farmers and has done everything to help them , taking into account the budget resources available .
Hungary has helped the dairy sector by using all the sums that can be reallocated as part of rural development resources and the European Economic Development Programme .
Apart from us , only Latvia and Malta have such outstanding indicators .
Hungarian dairy farmers will receive directly around EUR 3.3 million from the EUR 280 million envelope , roughly equivalent to HUF 890 million .
The Hungarian government can freely decide how to use this money .
The Commission only made the suggestion that the most needy producers should receive this special aid , which coincides with Hungarian objectives .
Following approval of the 2010 budget , this sum will be paid out at the start of next year .
Documents received : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 21.10 )
Opening of the sitting
Preparation of the European Council ( 29 and 30 October 2009 ) ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on preparation of the European Council .
Mr President , next week , we have a meeting of the European Council .
We have a comprehensive agenda , which includes many issues that affect the welfare of us all .
We will be discussing the issues of combating climate change , finding ways to lead the EU out of the financial and economic crisis , promoting energy security and dealing with the problem of illegal migration .
The European Union will be best prepared to tackle all of these issues if we have clarity on the issue of the Treaty .
It is important for the Treaty of Lisbon to enter into force as soon as possible so that , among other things , we can continue the work of appointing the new Commission .
That is why the European Council will also look at these issues .
I will begin with the issues in which I know there is a strong interest in the European Parliament .
At the end of next week , the Heads of State or Government will attempt to obtain clarity on the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon and how the process will proceed .
The overwhelming ' yes ' vote in Ireland and the signature of the Polish President have given the work renewed vigour , but , as you all know , the Treaty cannot enter into force until all of the Member States have ratified it - 26 of the 27 have done so , but we are still waiting for the Czech Republic .
The country 's lower house and Senate approved the Treaty , but then 17 senators petitioned the Czech constitutional court to examine whether the Treaty of Lisbon is compatible with the Czech constitution .
We must , of course , respect the democratic process in the Czech Republic .
On 27 October , in other words next week , the country 's constitutional court will hold a public hearing on this matter .
We believe that the court will give its ruling very shortly afterwards , but we still do not have a date for this .
As you know , President Klaus has also stipulated certain conditions for signing the Treaty .
We are waiting and attempting to find out exactly what these requirements and conditions will be .
The debate in the European Council will therefore depend to a large extent on what happens in the Czech Republic .
The statement by the Czech constitutional court and the subsequent procedure will be crucial for determining when the Treaty of Lisbon can enter into force .
In the European Council , we will also be discussing the preparations that have so far been made to ensure that the entry into force of the Treaty goes as smoothly as possible .
In this connection , the Presidency will present a report describing the state of play with regard to all of these issues .
In this report , we will present the Member States ' views on issues relating , for example , to the European External Action Service - an issue that we will debate here this afternoon - the scope of this Service , its legal position , staffing and financing .
I have read Mr Brok 's report , which was adopted in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs on Monday .
As I said , we will discuss this in more detail this afternoon .
I can already say that , for next week 's meeting , this report will provide guidance for the High Representative 's considerations to enable him or her , once the Treaty has entered into force , to very quickly produce a formal proposal for how the European External Action Service will function .
The Council should be able to adopt this proposal very quickly , hopefully some time during the next few months .
We have discussed many of these issues with the European Parliament and we hope that this will continue over the coming weeks .
The major issue at the European Council meeting will be climate change .
Our aim is for the Council to take appropriate decisions , including on the issue of financing , so that the EU can continue to play the necessary leading role and thereby contribute to a successful outcome in Copenhagen .
At the Ecofin meeting yesterday , there was a long and involved discussion of the financing issue .
The Presidency did its utmost to reach an agreement , but it decided in the end that this matter has to be decided by the European Council .
Further debates are needed in some Member States to enable us to make progress in this regard .
It is extremely important that we agree so that this process does not falter .
At this stage in the international negotiations , we are well aware of the difficulties we are facing .
Therefore , the EU , with an agreement on the issue of financing , could bring us a good deal further on in the negotiations .
The European Council meeting comes at an opportune time , shortly before the negotiation session of the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in Barcelona and the meeting of the G20 finance ministers in St Andrews .
We will only reach agreement in Copenhagen if all parties take action .
Right now , the EU 's environment ministers are meeting to discuss the conclusions concerning climate change .
The aim is to be able to give a comprehensive picture of the EU 's position on the issues that are currently under negotiation .
An important part of the Environment Council 's conclusions will be to clarify the EU 's strategy for a long-term reduction in emissions and to attempt to reach an agreement that may facilitate our decision regarding raising our emissions reduction target from 20 to 30 % compared with 1990 levels .
The Environment Council 's conclusions will also deal with the question of a decision concerning the EU 's proposal in the negotiations on emissions reductions for international aviation and maritime transport , develop the EU 's strategy for measures in developing countries with regard to measurement , reporting and verification of investments and the role of sectoral mechanisms , and will further develop the EU 's strategy to combat deforestation and forest degradation in order to speed up the negotiations .
The European Council will also evaluate the progress made in creating a new framework for the EU 's supervision of the financial markets .
As you know , the Heads of State or Government reached a very ambitious agreement in June with the goal of setting up a special body that will be responsible for the macro-supervision of the EU 's financial system and three European supervisory authorities for the banking , insurance and securities markets .
At the end of September , the Commission tabled its package of legislative proposals .
This is one of the Presidency 's absolute top priorities and we have established an ambitious timetable .
Our goal is to have an agreement on the whole package by the end of the year .
I am therefore very pleased that the Ecofin Council was yesterday able to take a major step forward and reach a broad political agreement on setting up the new macro-supervisory body without pre-empting the debate in the national parliaments .
The Swedish Presidency was also asked by the finance ministers to continue the dialogue with the European Parliament .
We have had very good experience of this dialogue and we think that it works well .
It is now important to take the opportunity to push the work forward as quickly as possible .
We need to show that we are doing our utmost to prevent future crises and that we are shouldering our shared responsibility by ensuring that consumers and investors regain their trust in the financial system .
I would also like to say a few words about employment in Europe - an issue that I know the European Council will discuss .
Recently , we have noticed cautious indications of a recovery in the economy .
However , the situation on the labour markets is expected to get worse yet and we will still need stimulus and support measures .
One issue that it is important for the European Council to highlight is how we will be able to deal with the consequences of the crisis while , at the same time , meeting our long-term goal of increasing the labour supply .
A high level of employment is required for sustainable public finances .
A high level of employment is also necessary for economic growth , for people 's welfare and for a socially more cohesive Europe .
In this connection I would also like to remind you of what we said regarding exit strategies .
The finance ministers confirmed that the recovery is real , but fragile .
It is therefore important for us to continue with the expansive financial policy .
Talks at the Council meeting led to an agreement to formulate strategies on the basis of the principles discussed by the finance ministers at their informal meeting in Gothenburg .
I would also like to say something about energy security .
In line with the conclusions from June 2009 , the European Council will next week assess what has been achieved with regard to energy infrastructure ( interconnections ) and crisis mechanisms .
We have prepared a report on the progress made since January .
The European Council will take note of the report .
The European Council will also adopt the EU Strategy for the Baltic Sea Region .
We had a very rewarding debate on this during Parliament 's plenary sitting in September .
The Heads of State or Government will approve the Presidency 's conclusions , which are to be adopted at the General Affairs and External Relations Council on Monday .
This strategy forms an integrated framework for dealing with the challenges we face and contributing to economic , social and territorial cohesion within the EU .
I am convinced that this strategy can serve as inspiration for other macro-regions within the EU and , in so doing , strengthen European integration .
The EU strategy for the Danube region is already taking shape and will be ready to be presented in time for the Hungarian Presidency in 2011 .
It is with great satisfaction that the Swedish Presidency can now present the result of this initiative , the inception of which , of course , took place here in the European Parliament .
We hope that the European Council will be able to urge all of the relevant players to start implementing the strategy very quickly .
That is absolutely necessary if we want to start tackling the serious environmental problems and achieve the objectives of the strategy .
The European Council will also evaluate the progress made in implementing the conclusions relating to the migration situation in the Mediterranean .
The Council will welcome the measures that have been taken in the short term - the launch of the pilot project in Malta , for example - as well as the progress made in setting up the European Asylum Support Office .
It will also be noted that the EU and Turkey have resumed talks on migration .
We expect the European Council to call for further efforts to deal with the current situation in the Mediterranean region and to continue the work towards long-term solutions based on solidarity between the Member States .
We also expect the Council to emphasise the need for increased efforts to implement the EU 's Global Approach to Migration .
The Council will be urged to strengthen Frontex and to introduce common rules for Frontex operations at sea .
Finally , there will also be a debate on external relations .
In June , the institutions were asked by the General Affairs and External Relations Council to review how the EU can further engage in Afghanistan and Pakistan .
A first draft was discussed at the informal Gymnich meeting in September and the Member States are currently discussing a detailed proposal in the working groups .
At the foreign ministers ' meeting next week , the EU will adopt a plan to strengthen our engagement in Afghanistan and Pakistan .
The plan will focus on strengthening state capacity and the institutions in both countries .
It is extremely important for it to be possible to implement this plan immediately .
Extensive international measures are needed if we are to be able to turn developments around in Afghanistan and Pakistan .
Military solutions alone can never lead to a sustainable solution .
Without security and control , the economic progress will be lost .
We also need to invest in establishing democratic institutions and strengthening civil society .
The EU has an extremely important role to play in this regard in both countries .
There are common problems as well as regional aspects and , of course , the approach varies between the two countries .
We will be discussing this at the European Council next week and I will , of course , be available to listen to any comments and questions from the Members of this House .
( Applause )
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I broadly agree with the lines expressed by Cecilia Malmström on behalf of the European Council .
Let me highlight two main issues : the Lisbon Treaty and all institutional matters on the one hand , and the fight against climate change and the prospects for Copenhagen , on the other .
First of all , I think this European Council should be able to take the final decisions to see the Treaty of Lisbon pass into force .
For many years , we have known that the ratification of a new Treaty is not an easy business .
We have had many setbacks and some disappointments , but every time the overriding case for the Treaty has won through - the compelling case for a democratic and effective Europe .
I am confident that this will continue to be the case in jumping this final hurdle to seeing the Treaty enter into force after the strong support given to the Lisbon Treaty by the people of Ireland .
After the conclusion of the ratification process in Poland , we can now say that all Member States have democratically approved the Lisbon Treaty .
We only need to see the process of ratification completed in the Czech Republic .
Of course , the constitutional procedures under way in the Czech Republic must be respected , so too must be the need to respond to the democratic will to see the Treaty enter into force .
That democratic will was clearly shown by the Parliament of the Czech Republic , so I hope that no artificial obstacles and no artificial delays will now cause more difficulties before full ratification .
I have already set out to this Parliament the importance of minimising delays in the nomination of the European Commission .
However , we must do all we can to have a Lisbon Treaty Commission as these are critical times for Europe .
We need to be able to push ahead with an agenda this Parliament supported when it elected me President for a new term .
To achieve this and to have the institutions working properly , we do need ratification of the Lisbon Treaty if we want a strong , coherent and effective European Union .
So , I again make it clear that the European Council must assume its responsibilities and there must be a recognition of urgency and a realisation that there will be a real cost to Europe as long as the European institutions cannot work properly .
At the same time , it is right to push ahead now with the work on implementation and to be ready for the entry into force of the Treaty .
I know that this Parliament is fully committed to this work .
I am pleased to be cooperating with you to ensure that the benefits of the Treaty will come into play as quickly as possible .
There are many areas in which this Parliament has already begun its work and has made a major contribution , crystallising ideas in areas like the European citizens ' initiative .
I know that this afternoon , you will be debating Elmar Brok 's report on the European External Action Service .
The report starts from exactly the right basis to ensure that the service , like the rest of the Treaty 's innovations , makes our Community system even stronger and better performing .
I know there have been concerns from the outset that the EAS will be some kind of intergovernmental body floating outside the European Union system , but the service should be firmly anchored in the European Union system .
It should inevitably work very closely with all the institutions , the Commission first and foremost .
The decisions it prepares will be taken by the Commission or by the Council in CFSP matters .
In fact , I am convinced that its success will depend on this to ensure that the European Union 's external action is more than the sum of its institutional parts .
If it can work with the democratic underpinning of this Parliament , the Council 's connection with national administrations and the Commission 's expertise and European vision , that service can truly become a powerful tool for the European Union to achieve its goals on the global stage .
A communautaire European external service , a service based on the Community method , will be a strong service for Europe and a strong tool for a united Europe projecting its influence in the world .
At the same time , the European Council must take forward an active policy agenda .
It must maintain the momentum of our work to address the economic crisis , mainly its impact on unemployment .
We must carry forward the work we agreed at the G20 .
We must do everything we can to see that the proposals made by the European Commission on financial supervision enter into force as soon as possible .
We must push on with our programme to address energy security .
The most important issue in policy terms in the Council will be Copenhagen .
A successful outcome at Copenhagen remains a primary concern for Europeans and a major task for the global community .
There are less than 50 days to go to Copenhagen .
Progress in the negotiations remains slow .
It falls again to the European Union to show leadership and to keep up the momentum .
The targets we have put on the table have provided an inspiration for others to step up their actions , but we all know that to galvanise real global action , we need to take a further step .
We need to help developing countries with concrete ideas on finance , as the European Commission proposed last month .
We estimate that by 2020 , developing countries will need an additional EUR 100 billion or so a year .
Domestic finance , namely from the large emerging economies - developing but emerging economies - and the carbon market should cover a large part of this , but large-scale international public finance should also be forthcoming , with the European Union paying its fair share .
The Copenhagen agenda is not just about climate change .
This is , of course , the main target , but the climate is also a question of a development , and we should not forget that very important dimension .
This will be a major commitment , especially at a time when public budgets are already under pressure , but we all know that the longer we wait , the higher the costs will be .
The task for the European Council is again to find creative solutions , to show that the European Union is united behind the need to fight climate change .
First , Copenhagen must show that the drive to cut emissions is on its way ; second , it must show that we are prepared to help those ready to take that step .
This is the best way to make the case for the kind of active Europe that the Lisbon Treaty brings - driving ahead with an agenda that shows that the European Union brings concrete benefits for its citizens .
To have an ambitious agenda , we need to have an effective institutional framework , and I come back to my first point .
The Lisbon Treaty is the first Treaty of the enlarged Europe .
This generation , particularly among our friends in central and eastern Europe , remembers well when Europe was divided , but we are not here for ever .
Institutions will last , so we need to have institutions for the enlarged Europe .
The Lisbon Treaty is the Treaty for the Europe of the 21st century , with strong institutions which are able to deliver concrete results in the Europe of 27 and more members in the future .
Institutions alone , however , are not enough .
We need a strong political will to achieve our goals , and I hope that the European Council at the end of this month will show that will for a strong ambitious outcome at Copenhagen .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) expects the next European Council to bring to an end the overly long period of uncertainty over the European institutions and to provide the necessary impetus to establish the new Commission and also the stable President of the Council and the High Representative planned in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Above all , the Council must take the required measures to boost the recovery of growth and to put Europe in the best position to create employment , since the crisis will endure for as long as social cohesion is not re-established .
Firstly , on the institutions , I would like to remind everyone that the Polish President 's decision to sign the Treaty means that every country but one has cleared the way for Europe finally to move forward without wasting time .
On 27 October , two days before the European Council , the Czech constitutional court will study the compatibility of the Treaty with the country 's constitution .
Of course , we will respect that decision , whatever it may be .
On the other hand , my group deplores the fact that the Czech President , although his parliament has as such adopted the Treaty of Lisbon , has produced a new pretext for delaying his signature , since everyone well knows that this is just a pretext .
I find it regrettable that other countries are following in his footsteps and , in their turn , demanding assurances on this or that aspect of the Treaty .
We must not surrender to the temptation to open this Pandora 's box and I congratulate the Presidency for stating this clearly .
The PPE group expects the European Council to indicate clearly that the European Union will not accept any delaying tactics .
Everyone in Europe has , directly or indirectly , supported the Treaty and now we must move ahead .
Each of us knows that , as long as European public debate is monopolised by the institutional issue and as long as Europe does not have the tools needed to make decisions both democratically and effectively , the real political , economic , social and ecological issues will not be addressed with the speed and seriousness required .
We can well see that currently , we are in a stalemate .
Parliament must be able to proceed with the hearings of future Commissioners as quickly as possible and it must be able to decide on the appointments for all the positions available at the Commission and the Council before the end of the year , if possible .
The PPE group also expects from the European Council some clear guidance on economic policy , drawing conclusions from the G20 Summit in Pittsburgh , which produced mixed results , and we are already seeing in the press that it is as if nothing happened .
Europe must do everything it can to enable its businesses to return to a sufficient level of activity to recruit but also to invest in research .
Europe must also do everything it can to create a fair commercial environment .
Finally , on climate , I expect the European Council to produce a strategy suited to the situation , that is , the weakness of our partners ' commitments so far , less than two months before Copenhagen .
I ask this clear question : what pressure are we going to put on the United States , China and all the emerging countries ?
Moderate and polite pressure or maximum pressure ?
As much as I congratulate myself that Europe is a pioneer on this issue , it cannot be the only party to make the efforts required to combat global warming .
There are only 50 days before the Copenhagen Summit - 50 days is not much , but it is enough if we know how to be convincing , and therefore I ask you , Mr President of the Council and Mr President of the Commission , to tell us how you intend to use these 50 days .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the October session of the European Council will be a key moment and it will show whether or not Europe is aware of the urgent need to act on the economy , on social questions and to overcome institutional quarrels .
My group , the PPE , appeals to the sense of responsibility of each of the EU 's 27 Member States .
( Applause )

Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Mr Barroso , before I look at the institutional issues , I would like to make a brief remark about Copenhagen .
You are completely right , Mrs Malmström , and Mr Barroso has reinforced this , that one of the essential decisions which we now have to make concerns Copenhagen .
We need binding objectives , not general statements .
This will not be easy to achieve , because the Americans have not yet completed their legislative process .
We will also have to take some decisions after Copenhagen during the course of next year .
However , there must be binding objectives in place at the end of the process .
That is absolutely essential .
Secondly , as far as the financial markets and the economic situation are concerned , the bonuses which are currently being paid are both outrageous and provocative .
This applies particularly to America , but it will also be the case in Europe .
This is not the central problem , but it demonstrates how many managers still do not understand what the new regulation of the financial markets involves and what responsibilities they have to the population as a whole .
Mrs Malmström , I admit that you are right that the question of employment policy in particular must be given priority .
It is not just about retaining the stimuli which were put in place as part of the economic recovery plan .
It is also about introducing new measures to stimulate employment .
Yesterday , the President of the Commission gave a positive response to Stephen Hughes 's request .
I am very pleased that we have at least been able to reach a consensus that employment policy must lie at the heart of our activities over the next few years .
Now I would like to say something about Lisbon .
Firstly , with regard to the lack of a signature from Václav Klaus , I am assuming that the constitutional court will make a positive judgment .
I find it unacceptable that the Beneš Decrees are being used in this way , that this issue may perhaps be reopened and that the signature may be delayed .
I would like to remind my fellow members from the Czech Republic that before their accession , we commissioned a report on the Beneš Decrees - Mrs Malmström , you will remember , because at that time you were one of us - which investigated whether the Beneš Decrees presented an obstacle to the accession of the Czech Republic .
The majority opinion at the time was that they did not .
The decrees do not have a different impact now , but they did have an impact at the time that they were drawn up .
When we say that the Beneš Decrees were not an obstacle to the accession of the Czech Republic , this means that it is unacceptable now to use the same decrees in order to refuse to sign the Treaty of Lisbon .
We must make our opinions quite clear in this regard .
The Treaty of Lisbon has two main objectives : on the one hand , more democracy in Europe , which includes more parliamentary democracy , in particular in the European Parliament
( Protests )
you do not want that because you are not in favour of more democracy - and , on the other hand , more efficiency .
Mrs Malmström , it is now a very important task for you to ensure in the next few weeks that the institutional issues and the staffing issues do not stand in the way of this .
Yesterday , Mr Barroso rightly said that we need a Council President over whom we have no influence , but who can work well with the Commission - and I would add here with the Parliament - and who believes that the community method lies at the heart of the decision-making process .
That is very important .
We do not need a Council President who shows off , dazzles everyone and tries to pull the wool over our eyes .
We need a Council President who can work with us effectively .
Of course , we need an External Action Service , not only for the reasons mentioned by the President of the Commission and to provide effective regulations concerning unity and a common foreign policy , but also for reasons of parliamentary control .
It is not acceptable for items suddenly to be removed from the Treaty of Lisbon , which is intended to give more parliamentary control , with the result that we ultimately have less parliamentary control , if the External Action Service is to be completely independent .
I know that we must find a compromise .
However , you must be aware that we - together with Mr Brok , the rapporteur - fully agree with the President of the Commission that we need a clear structure .
The decisive factor for us is once again parliamentary control , including control over the External Action Service and the foreign policy drawn up by the High Representative , although , of course , we acknowledge the role of the Council .
As you were once one of us and have fought for this in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , we see you as a fellow combatant in this area .
I hope that we can implement the Treaty of Lisbon in the way in which it was intended in order to bring about more democracy , more parliamentary control and more efficient foreign policy .
( Applause )
( HU ) Mr Swoboda , you mentioned that the Czech Republic was reassured at the time of its accession that there was no need for concern about the Beneš Decrees as they were not valid .
Are you aware that the serious consequences of these decrees are still valid ?
Therefore , if we have rule of law here , and we regard the whole of Europe to be governed by such , in this respect , the Czech Republic still has outstanding business with both the Sudeten Germans and Hungarians .
Mr Swoboda , could you comment on that ?
Mr President , I have become heavily involved in this issue , because many Sudeten Germans live in Austria and I recognise their rights , hardships and worries .
However , we must finally lay the ghosts of the past and look to the future .
The future is not about the Beneš Decrees .
It is about a free Europe with free citizens whose rights are based on the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
That is my vision of Europe .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , ' the train has already travelled so fast and so far that I guess it will not be possible to stop it or turn it ' .
That is a quote from President Klaus and it is probably the only time that I agree with him , that the train has already travelled so fast and so far that it is not possible to stop it or turn it .
This is a major quote from President Klaus , because apparently , it seems that he has accepted the fact that nothing can delay the Lisbon Treaty any longer .
I think it is normal that if 27 Member States have ratified it , and have approved it , we can also now have his signature .
I think that this change in his attitude can only be explained by our and your determination to go forward with the whole process as foreseen in the Lisbon Treaty , and we have to continue doing that in the coming days and weeks .
I hope days , not weeks .
In other words , the best way , in my opinion , to secure President Klaus 's signature and the final ratification of the Treaty is simply , Mrs Malmström , to go forward with the whole process and with implementation .
He is saying that the train has travelled so fast that it is impossible to stop it , so you have to continue with the train .
In that respect , it is absolutely necessary that the Council speeds up the procedure for the nomination of the new Commission , and puts forward as fast as possible the package for the President of the Council and the High Representative .
I repeat that this is the best way to show President Klaus that he is right , that the train is running faster and faster every day , and that there is no other option for him than to put his signature under the Treaty .
If you wait , he will wait .
If you go forward , he will sign .
That is my opinion .
My second point is about the External Action Service .
I hope that the Council can reach agreement on that , but not any agreement .
We should avoid duplication .
My fear is that we are creating two parallel structures at the moment : one is the Commission and Union delegations , as in the new Treaty , which today amounts to more than 6 000 people , local staff included , working for the Commission and the President of the Commission .
The other is a new External Action Service with several thousand people working for the High Representative .
At the end of this whole process , it is absolutely clear and necessary that we have only one structure dealing with external affairs and not this parallel structure of Commission delegations on the one hand , and external action services on the other .
I hope that we have an agreement in the Council , but I also hope that it will be an agreement in which it is very clear that there can be no duplication in the Commission structures , with Commission delegations on the one side and the External Action Service on the other .


Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Mr Barroso , on the subject of the Czech Republic , I would first of all like to say that I feel that Mr Klaus is a very bad loser and that his actions represent a particular kind of political impertinence .
I would like to ask you very , very urgently not to respond to a bad loser who obviously does not even respect Czech law , because he does not respect the constitutional majority which voted in favour of the treaty in the Czech Republic and who disregards the legislation in the Czech Republic , when he demands an opt-out for the Czech Republic concerning the validity of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
In my opinion , that would be one step too far in relation to this Czech troublemaker .
The citizens of the Czech Republic , who have done so much for the reunification of Europe when the Germans fled there , deserve something better .
That is all I have to say on President Klaus .
( Applause )
On the subject of climate change , Mr Barroso , you have rarely heard me agree with you as much as I will today .
I am very , very enthusiastic about the fact that you have once again said here how important it is for the Europeans to make a clear commitment to contributing a specific sum to the international fund for climate protection measures for the developing countries .
Yesterday , I was ashamed to read that the German state secretary for finance , who was taking part in negotiations in Luxembourg , compared the negotiations to a game of poker .
He said that when you play poker , you do not tell anyone what you have in your hand .
However , the preparations for Copenhagen are certainly not a game of poker .
As Mrs Merkel and other leading politicians in the European Union have repeatedly said , this is the biggest challenge of all .
This is the most important challenge for the community of people who live together on this planet .
I believe that this must be taken seriously .
From 2020 onwards , EUR 100 billion should be available to help the developing countries to meet the obligations concerning climate protection that they must then take on and to carry out their adaptation measures .
This would amount to around EUR 3 billion from 2020 onwards for a country like Germany .
In comparison to what we are currently making available in economic recovery packages or to rescue the financial sector , this is peanuts .
I am ashamed that failure in Copenhagen and this dreadful , embarrassing poker game are being accepted .
The way in which the European Union negotiated yesterday in Luxembourg demonstrates that it is not the driving force .
It has not taken on the leadership role in international climate protection .
Instead , it is one of the major blocks to progress .
You must realise that all of the negotiations today in Luxembourg and next week in Brussels are being followed throughout the world .
I can only call on Mr Barroso urgently once again to ensure that the Commission stays on course .
The financing for this international fund must be transparent .
We have been talking about this for two years , ever since Bali .
Mrs Malmström , I believe that the Swedes are doing the correct thing in the negotiations .
You must remain consistent and respect the vote in Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
The objective is to reduce CO2 emissions by 30 % by 2020 .
If we lower our sights , we will never achieve the two degree goal .
I have a major problem with the credibility of the Swedish Presidency of the Council .
I believe that you should finally convince your state-owned company Vattenfall not to invest consistently and unrestrictedly in coal throughout Europe and , in particular , not to invest primarily where no certificates need to be purchased .
This strategy on the part of Vattenfall goes against your good reputation in the preparations for the world climate negotiations .
I would also ask you to ensure that the legal proceedings initiated by Vattenfall against the Federal Republic of Germany to bring about changes in Germany 's environmental law in favour of Vattenfall 's coal-fired power stations are dropped .
I believe that unfortunately you have a small , but growing black spot on your otherwise spotless reputation .
You should ensure that everything is in order before you go to Copenhagen .
Colleagues , please keep to the allotted time .
Your speeches are very important but nevertheless , I have another request for a blue-card question .
I am not going to take every blue card because we must go ahead with our discussion .
In a few minutes , there will be another request ; if it is a Rule 149 ( 8 ) request , I will take it .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , may I first of all congratulate the Swedish Government on its Presidency in general and particularly on the way it has attempted to advance the very important issues of climate change and dealing with the economic and financial crisis that faces us .
I think Mr Reinfeldt and his government deserve our thanks for the way they have done this but , as has been the situation in many Presidencies , they have also had to accommodate a lot of internal institutional distractions - in this case , in relation to the Lisbon Treaty .
Institutional theology is not the priority of the citizens of Europe .
What we need , of course , is the Lisbon Agenda , not the Lisbon Treaty .
The Lisbon Agenda has a noble objective : an objective of creating the most dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy in the world , capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs , greater social cohesion and respect for the environment by 2010 .
Now that should have made a real difference in the lives of millions of people and provided a firm foundation for our economic future and yet , as Mr Reinfeldt himself said , the Lisbon Agenda has been a failure .
Why can we never actually get results that matter to our citizens ?
The laudable aims in the Laeken Declaration were not then put into practice , and now the Lisbon Agenda faces the same lack of purpose and achievement .
So near , Mr President , but so far , and again initiatives relating to the economies of Member States must be clearly understandable to ordinary people .
Job creation should not be about creating jobs for former Prime Ministers to be President of the Council , or for globetrotting aficionados to be High Representatives for Foreign Affairs .
Those two jobs will hardly help hard-pressed small and medium-sized businesses in any of our countries .
They will not ease the crisis being borne by millions of families right now .
And institutional changes do not help with climate changes .
The greatest threats to our world need confronting , and practical and workable solutions need to be found .
Thousands of pages of text , most of it too complicated for our citizens ever to understand , simply consumes the trees that we need to protect .
Let us put pressure on the world community to come together to save the planet for future generations , not on those who do not fully share the enthusiasm of some people for the European institutions .
Despite all this , I do hope that the Swedish Presidency is able , in the time remaining to it , and indeed at the summit , to focus the attention of all European leaders on the major issues that concern the people - those issues they concentrated upon at the start of their Presidency regarding the economy , Europe and indeed climate change .
I wish them well in the remaining time and thank them for their work so far .

Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Mr Barroso , there has been much speculation over staffing issues during the last three months and over the possible entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , which my group has rejected for three good reasons .
In simplistic terms , firstly we want priority to be given to a social Europe rather than to a radical market orientation .
Secondly , we want disarmament instead of the development of military capabilities and , thirdly , we want more direct democracy rather than a Europe made up of elites .
We should at long last be dealing with specific issues of content .
While we are arguing over names and positions , more and more people are losing their jobs .
The banks have , of course , been rescued .
At the same time , Mr Barroso is calling for us to bring an end to the economic recovery plans soon - yesterday the deadline was set for 2011 - and for the budget deficits in the Member States to be reduced quickly .
This will mean reductions in salaries and pensions , cuts in public services and social security provision , higher value added tax and a lack of collective agreements .
One current example of this can be found in the German commercial cleaning industry where workers have been on strike for three days .
These are the problems which are affecting people in Europe and these are the problems which the Council should be dealing with .
Instead of this , the main subject of concern is adding clauses to the Treaty of Lisbon to encourage the Czech President to sign it .
If this is really as simple as it seems to be in practice , I would ask the Heads of Government to think more carefully about a social progress clause in the Treaty of Lisbon .
That would be much more appropriate .
At the beginning of the parliamentary term , a series of positive proposals were made concerning a more social EU policy .
This did not just relate to the social progress clause .
It was also about a new economic recovery plan for Europe in order to create and retain jobs and about increased investment and sustainable environmental growth .
A European Employment Pact for more and better jobs , for equal pay , for more rights for employees and better working conditions was called for .
There were discussions about increased solidarity among the Member States and ensuring the sustainability of the social security and pension systems .
I have not yet identified any strategy within the policies of the Member States or the policies of the Commission which might lead us towards these objectives .
Of course , the Council must now consider the appointments to the new Commission and the possible changes to the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , the focus must be on the problems I have referred to and on their solutions .
My group 's vote on the College of Commissioners will be dependent on this .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , Mr Barroso said this morning that all Member States had democratically ratified this Treaty .
That is not true .
The British people have not had a say on this , despite being promised it , and until we get a referendum on this , I will refuse to recognise the legitimacy of this Treaty .
( Protests )
Now all eyes are on President Klaus and what he may or may not do next week , and it is interesting .
I know that you all hate President Klaus because he believes in national democracy .
( Protests )
But what he is doing here is that he is standing up and defending the Czech national interest .
He fears German claims over Sudeten properties and , having listened to German politicians on this subject , I think he is absolutely right to be fearful .
So , hang on , President Klaus ; if they do not give you what you want , do not sign the thing .
If they do give you what you want , it will need to be reratified in 25 Member States , which will mean that the British will have a referendum , and I am sure , as democrats , you would all like to see a British referendum on this Treaty .
I certainly would .
And I wonder , at the end of this summit , are we really going to have a new European emperor ?
Is it going to be Tony Blair with his Empress Cherie ?
Well I have reached the conclusion that I want Tony Blair .
Please do appoint Tony Blair , the man that gave away GBP 2 billion of the British rebate in return for nothing ; the man who promised us a referendum on the constitution and refused to give it to us .
It is perfectly clear that , in this European Union , the prize for national betrayal is a high one indeed .
So please appoint Tony Blair .
It will bring home the truth to the British people that it is not the elected representatives that matter in this European Union , it is people that give away national democracy in favour of the European Union that win the top jobs .
Please , please , give us Tony Blair as the first President of Europe .
Mr President , it is disappointing - but not unexpected - that the Council and the Commission are determined to push ahead with the Lisbon Treaty .
I know that it might not be popular in this House , but it is my genuinely-held belief that in the United Kingdom , there should be a referendum on the Treaty .
I do not understand why both Conservatives and Labour are unwilling to give that .
However , this morning I want to direct your attention , Minister , in particular , to the financial crisis that continues to dog Europe .
Last night , Mr Mervyn King , Governor of the Bank of England , indicated that UK lending to the banks was close to GBP 1 trillion .
Indeed , he indicated that never before had so much money been owed by so few to so many people and with so little real reform .
Mr King went further to indicate that regulation of the banks was not enough , but that there was a moral dilemma at the heart of this banking crisis in that financial and banking institutions knew that they were too big to fail and that the taxpayer , whether in the United Kingdom or in any of the other regions of Europe , would always have to help them out , no matter what the crisis .
This is a very serious charge , Minister , and comes from one of the banking world 's own leading members .
There must be a will to tackle this moral dilemma at Council meetings , and this House would be interested to know what that will is and how it will be done .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to make a few comments now , even though I will , of course , remain here until the end of the debate .
I would first like to address Mr Verhofstadt .
No , I do not think that it will be possible to stop the train either .
I hope that the train will enter the station very , very soon .
I can assure both Mr Verhofstadt and the honourable Members that the Swedish Presidency is in very close contact with the Czech Republic and we hope very soon to be able to give a more exact and definite answer to the question of what is to happen with the Treaty and when .
Like you , we are keen for everything to fall into place as quickly as possible , with regard to both the posts that are to be filled and the list of commissioners that is to be presented to the European Parliament for the hearing that you are to hold .
During the summit , we will take all the necessary decisions that it is possible to take .
We will have all the preparations in place for the Treaty of Lisbon to enter into force as soon as we have all the ratifications .
I would also like to express my thanks for the huge amount of support that Members from all groups have shown for the Presidency 's absolute top priority , namely to reach an agreement in Copenhagen .
This is extremely important .
There is a huge amount of responsibility resting on Europe 's shoulders to settle the issue of financing so that we can show that we are taking our share of the global responsibility and can send out the appropriate signals .
Mr Daul , we have very intensive contact with other players .
In only a few weeks ' time , we have the summit with Russia and China , as well as the US , and climate and energy issues will , of course , be given priority in discussions with all of these countries .
We also have the working group meetings and the Barcelona Summit in ten days ' time .
In addition , the finance ministers will meet in St Andrews , so there are many opportunities to talk about this .
I am not satisfied with the results so far , but I remain totally optimistic that we will still be able to reach an agreement in Copenhagen .
People all over the world are expecting us to do so .
I also believe that it will be a very good thing if the EU can show results with regard to the handling of the financial crisis .
Even though we are now seeing some positive signs , we still must not forget that we need to have the new supervisory bodies in place so that we can be better equipped to avoid similar crises happening in future and to be able to recognise them in time .
I therefore hope that monitoring systems and the macro-supervisory body can be established as soon as possible .
Institutional issues are extremely important .
It is important for the European Union to be able to take decisions and for this to be done democratically and in an effective manner .
In this regard , the Treaty of Lisbon is an important instrument .
At the same time , the European Union will never win the trust of its citizens if we do not deliver results on specific issues .
The handling of the economic crisis and environmental issues are what people the world over , not least in the European Union , are concerned about .
If we can move forward and achieve results at the summit and later in the autumn , then I believe that it will create a very good basis for increased legitimacy and trust in the European institutions .

Mr President , I think that the Chairman of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , Joseph Daul , and Mrs Harms have asked some very important questions .
How can we ensure success at Copenhagen , especially when other partners are not making the same effort ?
In fact , there are difficulties , because there is a clear lack of ambition on the part of some developed countries in terms of a concrete commitment to reduce emissions .
The largest economies in the developing countries are also unwilling to integrate their national plans for mitigation with the global agreement and , at the moment , there is no credible financial plan .
So , what do we do in this case ?
Firstly , I believe this is not the time for Europe to rein in its ambition .
That would provide an excuse for the negative elements not to make any effort .
Consequently , it is our job to continue to demonstrate ambition and leadership but , at the same time , and here I am replying in concrete terms to Joseph Daul , to say that our offer , especially our financial offer , is a conditional one .
We are prepared to help those countries which are making genuine efforts to reduce emissions .
It is therefore important to make a conditional offer in financial terms , but to rein in our ambition would be a mistake .
I believe success is still possible in Copenhagen .
There are also positive aspects .
The United States has re-entered the negotiations .
It should be recalled that a few years ago , the United States was not really participating in the process but they are now committed to the negotiations .
It should also be recalled that Australia and Japan have announced ambitious goals - not yet in binding terms , certainly , but at a political level .
Even China , Mexico , Brazil and South Korea have announced ambitious national plans but have not yet agreed to integrate them into a global agreement .
Let us , therefore , emphasise these positive aspects and create this dynamic and I hope that the European Council at the end of this month will not supply the sceptics and the Cassandras , who are already saying that we need a plan B , with ammunition . I have already said that there is no plan B , because there is no planet B. What we need to do is concentrate and not miss this historic opportunity afforded by Copenhagen .
My final point is to express my surprise .
I would never have expected a British Member of this Parliament to question that great institution that is the British Parliament .
One of the greatest contributions of Britain to civilisation was , and is , the British Parliament .
( Applause )
Let us be clear .
The British Government has negotiated the Treaty .
The British Government has signed the Treaty .
The Parliament of Britain - the House of Commons and the House of Lords - have approved the Treaty .
Her Majesty the Queen has ratified the Treaty .
The instruments of ratification of the UK are deposited in Rome .
So the United Kingdom has ratified the Lisbon Treaty and I hope that everybody - particularly the British Members - respects the British democratic system .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Farage is now leaving .
I hope that there is no one in this Chamber who hates what he has implied about us .
Hate goes against the European ethos , and egoism , protectionism and nationalism are the greatest enemies of the Community of the European Union .
Secondly , I hope that there is no one in this Chamber who is playing off parliamentary democracy against the citizens and who sees a dividing line between us and our job as representatives of the citizens , as he has implied .
We have all seen the sparks flying in the run-up to the summit and we are hoping for a decisive , liberating judgment from the constitutional court .
We expect the Council to fulfil its responsibility to Europe , not to allow itself to be held hostage by one person and to take the necessary decisions concerning staffing , the institutions , the schedule , the content and the finances .
However , I also call on the governments not to look for the lowest common denominator when selecting and nominating the commissioners , but instead to find the best solution for the Community of which we are all a part .
I call on the governments not to play the familiar old party political games when selecting the commissioners , but instead to put common European responsibility at the heart of the selection process .
I call on the President of the Commission to produce an ambitious set of requirements for the commissioners and the Member States .
My second point concerns supervision of the financial markets .
I welcome the proposals for macro-supervision , but they do not go nearly far enough .
We also need micro-supervision and , in my opinion , the Commission proposal represents the lowest common denominator , the minimum .
We must go further .
We must put in place a supervisory body for the European financial markets which has the authority to take the necessary measures , similar to the European Central Bank .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , the demand from Václav Klaus for an addition to the Charter of Fundamental Rights is both arbitrary and superfluous .
However , it is easy to oppose , because the charter refers only to EU law and applies only to the future .
Therefore , if necessary , the Council should make a political declaration .
In a few weeks , the ratification of the treaty , which we have been waiting nine years for , should then take place .
The European Council must make the necessary preparations , but should not jump to any hasty conclusions .
This applies also to the European External Action Service .
The High Representative is responsible for proposing a concept for the service , not the Council bureaucracy .
I would therefore ask the Council Presidency to ensure that the service is not in a position off to one side , but can integrate itself into the community system , as Mr Barroso has said .
This treaty gives us the legal basis for a common energy policy and for a common climate protection policy .
I can only hope that the fog lifts before Copenhagen , because we must not leave these questions open until the conference .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has made clear demands , including with regard to financing .
I hope that there will be agreement on a financing concept next week at the summit .
Furthermore , we need internal burden-sharing within the EU .
Germany and other countries must give way , as we need a fair deal both within the EU and between the EU and the developing countries throughout the world .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to ask three questions .
Firstly , there is the issue of climate change .
Everyone can see that the European Union has a special duty to lead the nations of the world in Copenhagen .
To do this , we must be demanding and ambitious as far as goals are concerned , but we must also acknowledge the debt we have to developing countries .
Each country must agree to make an appropriate financial effort .
If we cannot demonstrate solidarity , this will not work .
My second point concerns the issue of migration .
It is obviously good to improve the operations of Frontex , but if we really want to help the countries of southern Europe , then we must move towards harmonising the right to asylum , review the Dublin Convention and , most of all , finally draw up a genuine immigration policy .
I believe this is the only way of addressing this issue in a calm and responsible way .
Finally , the third issue is foreign policy .
The Council is going to take the issue of the External Action Service forward .
So much the better !
We are probably going to have a High Representative .
So much the better !
Yet what would be better still would be to speak with a single voice , at least on the conflicts shaking the world .
I am thinking particularly about Afghanistan , where I want to note that the number of European soldiers committed is almost the same as the number of US soldiers .
There will be an EU-US Summit on 3 November and the Europeans have a special responsibility .
They must propose a strategy that is not exclusively military .
If we do not do this , no one else will .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon is on the home straight and it is now time to look to the future .
We must make Europe more social , more environmentally friendly and more democratic .
We have a lot of catching up to do in these areas in particular .
I would like to see a Europe in which the citizens regard themselves not just as observers or as the object of the European Community , but as its subject .
I would like to see a Europe which people feel is a Europe for citizens , but we have a lot to do in order to achieve that .
I said that the Treaty of Lisbon was on the home straight , but it is here in particular that it can easily be thrown off course .
I am frustrated by the fact that shortly before the completion of the ratification process , we are seeing an increasing number of blatant violations of the European ethos and of European law .
One individual European president is attempting to hold his people , his country and the whole of Europe to ransom .
Now he suddenly explains that the Charter of Fundamental Rights should not apply in his country .
If what I found out yesterday is true , then he has even been given assurances of this kind .
This would really be outrageous and I would be pleased if the situation could be clarified and a clear explanation given that assurances of this kind have not been made .
Otherwise , it seems that we are returning to the Middle Ages , with despotic rulers granting their subjects only those rights that they are prepared to allow .
However , we are not in the Middle Ages , we are in Europe and Europe is a community based on law , a democracy .
The Czech parliament and senate have already voted in favour of this treaty , without making demands of this kind .
They have , of course , done this for good reason , because they want the Charter of Fundamental Rights to apply in the Czech Republic .
It lies at the heart of this treaty and we should not allow the heart to be torn out of the treaty without good cause .
The fundamental rights are the inalienable rights of all citizens , which should not be available only to some of them .
Europe is a community based on law , a democracy .
It is not a bazaar .
This means that we should prevent dreadful deals of this kind being done with the Charter of Fundamental Rights and we should not , under any circumstances , allow it to be qualified or called into question .
We should not permit things of this kind to become negotiable and Europe to be turned into a bazaar .
These events are a demonstration of how important it is for us to strengthen democracy in Europe .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( CS ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to respond to the previous speech .
It is absolutely clear that the next meeting of the European Council will be dominated by institutional questions and the process for ratifying the Lisbon Treaty .
In the debates on the future direction of the EU , we should , in my opinion , behave towards each other with an appropriate sense of humility and , at the same time , we should calmly respect the sovereign decision-making mechanisms of the various Member States and their constitutional actors .
I would now like to return to my own topic .
I personally consider macro-regional strategy to be no less an important item on the Council 's discussion agenda .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it was already agreed during the last parliament that the Baltic Sea region was suitable for a pilot project aimed at implementing an internal EU strategy for the macro-region and I am therefore pleased that this particular Council decision will most probably be ratified .
At the same time , I believe that the time has now come to begin starting thinking about the issue of how to replicate this pilot strategy .
If we take a look at the map of Europe in this context , we will see that the greatest differences , whether economic , social or cultural , still persist along the borders between the former socialist bloc and the West European capitalist states .
These differences are apparent here in Parliament as well .
Twenty years after the fall of the Berlin Wall , we are still talking about the old and the new Member States .
Twenty years after the Velvet Revolution , we are still applying exceptions to the free movement of persons when we make use of transition periods for the free movement of workers .
These are absolutely clear barriers which should be systematically dismantled ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( EL ) Mr President , the statements by the Council and the Commission on the forthcoming European Council summit signal an escalation in the anti-grassroots policy of the European Union and of the governments of its Member States , with a new all-out attack on the working classes .
The primary objective of the European Union and the governments of its Member States , be they centre right or centre left , is to safeguard the continuing profitability of the monopolies by shifting the burden of the capitalist economic crisis on to the working classes throughout the European Union .
While the European Union has supported the monopoly behemoths with a package of hundreds of billions of euros , and a new round of funding for them cannot be excluded , in this new phase , the faster promotion of capitalist restructurings planned within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy is being favoured .
At the epicentre of the anti-labour attack is the abolition of the eight-hour day and collective agreements , and the generalised application of flexicurity and temporary flexible and badly-paid jobs , by strengthening the institution of local employment agreements and internships .
Social security , health , welfare and education systems are being laid on a Procrustean bed , with sweeping changes being made to the detriment of workers , further paving the way for the penetration of monopoly business groups in these wealth-producing sectors for capitalism .
At the same time , mass redundancies , over five and a half million last year , employer terrorism and intensification of work have created mediaeval conditions in the workplace .
One typical example is the long-standing crime being committed against the workers of France Telecom , where 25 workers have been pushed into suicide by unacceptable working conditions and the intensification of slavery .
Mr President , the big problem for the Member States is , as Mr Bisky said earlier , the crisis in jobs .
Youth unemployment is 24 % in France , 25 % in Italy and 39 % in Spain .
Nevertheless , we can be sure that the European Council meeting will be saturated with a colossal triumphalism in the context of mass unemployment .
This triumphalism is improper and distasteful , and it will be there because the elite assume that they have got their Lisbon Treaty .
All the moves so far towards your European superstate have taken place by stealth or manipulation and , in the case of the Lisbon Treaty , the manipulation has been so shameless and so blatant that the Treaty lacks democratic legitimacy .
From that , there will be consequences .
To quote , ' They are ringing the bells now ; very soon they will be wringing their hands . '
( HU ) Mr President , Mrs Malmström , ladies and gentlemen , any debate about the signature of the Treaty of Lisbon is superfluous until we have clarified with each other what our most fundamental values are .
Allow me to give you a few examples relating to the largest disenfranchised minority in Europe , which is the Hungarian community living outside the Carpathian Basin .
Are you aware , for example , that territorial self-determination for the two-million-strong Hungarian community in one of the European Union Member States is still not on the agenda even to this day , although we all know that territorial autonomy is a European legal institution ?
Are you aware that in the same country , Romania , several tens of thousands of Csango Hungarians cannot , even to this day , worship and be taught in their mother tongue ?
We then have a state which is younger than me , Slovakia , with its Slovak language law , which we can rightly say brings shame on Europe .
To top it all , there are despicable politicians who are using the inhumane Beneš Decrees as a basis for negotiation .
What kind of dictatorial , racist Europe do we live in then , where the Beneš Decrees can be regarded as a basis for negotiation ?
We have had enough of having dictatorships being forced on us , always under the guise of democracy .
We Jobbik MEPs would like to live in a Europe without the Beneš Decrees , without a Slovak language law and without a Treaty of Lisbon , where there is not a single Hungarian persecuted on account of their ethnic origin and mother tongue .
I would like to ask Mr Swoboda then : if he said that the Beneš Decrees are not valid , when were the victims compensated ?
( RO ) There are certain speakers in this Parliament who , regardless of the topic being discussed , talk on the same subject , not always in an appropriate manner .
The first priority during the European Council meeting must obviously be to find a solution so that the Czech Republic can finalise the procedures for ratifying the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , this solution must be a fair one for all the other Member States .
At the same time , we must not forget the current economic crisis which we are still facing and which we must also find immediate solutions for .
The economic and financial crisis , along with the special financial measures adopted last year , have destabilised in an alarming way the public finances of the majority of the European Union 's Member States .
So far the Commission has 17 of the 27 Member States in its sights for having an excessive deficit , with estimates showing that another three Member States will soon be in the same situation .
Regardless of their economic power , Member States have exceeded the figures committed to as the crisis has caused a sharp drop in budget revenue and growth beyond the public expenditure planned for .
There are actually clear conditions for an economic recovery in the near future , which is why we can initiate the discussions on reducing the financial incentives in certain areas .
However , we need to take into account the specific situation of each Member State separately and the European institutions must acknowledge that we are not yet at the point where public support can be waived completely for all economic sectors .
Member States must agree on continuing the recovery strategy and on suitable instruments for supporting this , including stepping up structural reforms which may , in the medium term , reduce the fiscal deficit and naturally contribute to economic recovery .
If the post-recovery period is not managed properly by Member States , it may destabilise the European Union 's internal market .
Therefore , the decision in favour and permission to continue providing public support must be made based on the specific conditions from one state to the next .

( FI ) Mr President , I agree with Mr Marinescu that the forthcoming Council should find a solution to two issues .
One is completing the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , and the other is new cures for the economic and financial crisis .
We are presently living through the deepest crisis in Europe 's economic history .
This crisis will mean a thorough shake-up of people 's opportunities , income , pensions and jobs , and we must be aware of that .
The European Union began its recovery very well .
We should thank the Commission for that .
The Commission and the European Central Bank even acted so quickly that the United States of America followed Europe 's example .
Then things rather oddly began to slow down and people started to say that the crisis was over .
The crisis , however , in fact lies ahead , because a four-bladed guillotine hangs over the European Union , in the shape of growing unemployment , indebted national economies , an ageing population , and the huge structural change which will take place in the forestry industry , the car industry , and so on .
Actually , the only good thing about this economic crisis is that policy is required to resolve the problems .
As for the new financial architecture , the Commission is being quite unambitious about this .
Hopefully , the financial crisis work group that Parliament has set up will be a new source of guidance .
The objective must be the regulation of the financial markets .
Over-regulation , however , must not be allowed to prevent growth and employment .

( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Mr Barroso , Mrs Wallström , I am guessing , Mrs Malmström , that you have so many subjects to discuss that you would rather have two weeks than two days for the summit next week .
These are subjects which are of genuine importance to the citizens of Europe , such as the economic crisis and how it can be overcome , highlighting opportunities to create new jobs and , of course , Afghanistan .
These are not new subjects .
However , what is new is that this time , it is possible to discuss everything from the perspective that the EU will really be able to function more effectively and that we will have a new treaty .
This is an exciting prospect and , therefore , you should now act quickly to implement a common supervisory structure for the European financial markets , to put in place a common foreign policy and to prepare for the summit in Copenhagen .
You should also clarify quickly what the future leadership structure of the EU will be and bring an end to this self-absorption .
What we need is less navel-gazing and more reports of success from the European Union .
For this reason , I wish you success , luck and all the authority you need .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to point out that I am unable to make my speech in Catalan since it is not yet an official language , even though it is the language of more than 10 million European citizens .
For that reason , I am speaking today in Italian .
The Finnish Government recently recognised the right of all citizens to have a broadband Internet connection as a universal service .
This service is , in fact , an element of economic development , social justice and territorial balance , because it guarantees access to information , thus preventing the digital divide .
In the same way , affordable broadband access is crucial when it comes to building the knowledge-based economy laid down in the Lisbon objectives .
Will the next European Council adopt measures to ensure that the European Union as a whole sets the world an example in this area too ?
Mr President , there will be many important issues discussed at the European Council , but from my point of view , one of the most important is the future of the Lisbon Treaty .
Many speakers in this debate have spoken , without any apparent irony at all , of the Lisbon Treaty bringing increased democracy and accountability to the EU institutions , forgetting that they deliberately took a view that there should be no democracy or accountability in the progress of that Treaty itself .
There was active collusion between the Heads of Government to avoid any referenda taking place on the Treaty lest the people were inconvenient enough to actually say they did not want it .
I listened with great interest to Mr Barroso 's comments earlier .
Let me explain to him why people in the UK are so angry about this .
In the 2005 UK general election , all three main political parties committed themselves in their manifestos to a referendum on the European Constitution , as it then was .
It subsequently became the Lisbon Treaty , effectively the same document .
In the vote in the House of Commons , two of those parties then reneged on those promises and refused people a referendum , so it is a matter of basic trust and accountability in politics .
People want the referendum that they were promised .
If they had not been promised it , then Mr Barroso 's comments would have been correct and there would have been the normal parliamentary ratification process in the UK .
I supported Mr Barroso in his re-election , but we do not need lectures from him about trust and accountability in politics when , at the same time , he seeks to support those who would deny people a referendum .
So that , in short , is why people in the UK feel so strongly about this referendum .
They look over the water to Ireland and see that the people of Ireland have been asked to vote twice on the document when we have been denied the possibility to even vote once .
You cannot , on the one hand , argue that it will bring increased democracy and accountability to the EU whilst , at the same time , denying the electorates of the EU any say whatsoever on this document .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to make a few points which , in view of the possible entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , must be developed , and also , I would say , above all , in the light of the very significant effect of the German constitutional court 's recent judgment on the Treaty of Lisbon .
I should like to concentrate in particular on the issue of the lack of democratic legitimacy as a result of two aspects : the inadequate representation in the European Parliament , and also in the various European institutions , of countries with the largest populations , and the lack of consideration shown for the national parliaments with regard to the exercising of sovereign powers at European Union level .
I should like to mention another , in my view significant , shortcoming of the Treaty of Lisbon , which is that the role of the regional parliaments is basically ignored .
While little consideration is shown for the national parliaments , I would say that the principle of subsidiarity has been dealt a kind of death blow by the Treaty of Lisbon as it stands today .
The judgment by the German constitutional court , precisely because of its authority and its strength , should have led , and should still lead , to a comprehensive legal and political debate in this House that specifically deals with the dangers , the risks that may arise as a result of the European Union federalisation process introduced by this treaty .
I also wish to mention the rights of stateless nations , from Padania to Brittany , Corsica to Valle d 'Aosta .
There are dozens of stateless nations that should be mentioned , bearing in mind the fact that what the founding fathers wanted to build was a Europe of the nations , not a federalist Europe or a Europe of the biggest interests .
( DE ) Mr President , with regard to the subject of illegal immigration in the European Union , I would like to point out that there has been a significant and very serious increase over the last year .
According to the Commission , the number of illegal immigrants recorded has risen by around 63 % .
In 2008 , 62 000 sets of fingerprints of illegal immigrants who had been apprehended were entered in the EURODAK database .
We cannot even guess at the number of immigrants who were not caught .
The geographical situation of Austria , where I come from , makes it a particularly popular destination and this has had disastrous consequences .
For example , 58 of the 64 Kurds who were apprehended recently disappeared into the reception centre and immediately submitted applications for asylum , which involves a long-winded procedure .
The burden represented by the constantly growing number of illegal immigrants - I would like to emphasise the word ' illegal ' here - is becoming unbearable for the citizens of the EU .
If we do not solve this problem quickly , we should not be surprised by the growing scepticism about the EU and the sense of resignation among our citizens .
I therefore ask the European Council to consider this subject on 29 and 30 November .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Wallström , Mrs Malmström , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon must now enter into force and be implemented quickly .
More than ten years of debates among the institutions are enough .
Now , at last , we need these instruments in order to be able to help the citizens of Europe .
Particularly during this economic crisis , we must do something for the citizens in the fight against unemployment and similar problems .
For this reason , we should rapidly bring these debates to an end .
This is why I am asking President Klaus to clear the way for the treaty which has been ratified in all 27 countries .
In the Czech Republic , the constitutional court has said ' yes ' to the treaty on two occasions and it will do so again for a third time .
It is also perfectly clear that the Charter of Fundamental Rights is only applicable in the context of European law .
Land regulations are exclusively a matter of national authority .
The law in force before Community law will not be invalidated by Community law .
These three safeguards are in place , so he has no need to worry .
If necessary , the European Council will have to clarify this once again by issuing a declaration .
In this context , I would like to make another comment .
The implementation of the treaty must reflect the three principles of the draft constitution and the Constitutional Convention : efficiency , transparency and democracy .
At this point , I would like to mention the External Action Service in particular , as we will be debating this subject again this afternoon .
Transparency , democracy and , in particular , the principle of community must not be sacrificed in order to achieve efficiency .
The necessary safeguards must be put in place .
We could say that part of the Commission has a sui generis character , but it is possible to discuss all sorts of issues here .
For this reason , Mrs Malmström , I would like to ask you to drop your government 's current plans and not to draw up guidelines for the External Action Service during the meeting of the European Council next week , which would limit the scope for negotiation , but instead to come to final decisions on this subject together with the new High Representative so that we have a common , fair basis for negotiation .
Mr Brok , you mentioned 10 years of debates about the Lisbon Treaty .
Has it occurred to you that , in the 10 years of debates , you and your colleagues have simply failed to convince enough people , and that is why you and your colleagues have had to resort to the blatant manipulation to which I referred earlier to get the Treaty through ?
( DE ) I would like to say to my fellow Member that the institutional changes resulting from the Treaty of Nice , the Constitutional Treaty and the Treaty of Lisbon have always had the broad support of the people of Europe and the broad support of the majority of European states .
There have always been individual states which have made different decisions , partly for internal political purposes .
Now the decision has been made in the parliaments of 27 states - and parliaments are not a second-class form of democracy - or in referendums as in Ireland .
As a result , a vast majority is now in favour of the Treaty of Lisbon , including the majority of your own people .
( CS ) I would like to make a few comments ahead of the European Council meeting concerning the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty in my own country , the Czech Republic .
The Czechs have given a clear ' yes ' to the Lisbon Treaty through their elected representatives in both chambers of parliament .
All of the public opinion polls indicate that they want President Klaus to sign the Treaty quickly .
The Czechs also want to be guaranteed the same human , civil and social rights in Europe as other Europeans .
It is for this reason that they also gave a clear ' yes ' to the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
President Klaus is known for his long-standing opposition to the Charter , and particularly its social sections .
Now , under the pretext of the so-called Sudeten threat , he is attempting under pressure of time to negotiate an opt-out for the Czech Republic .
The European Union must not play this dishonourable game .
A majority of Czechs want the Charter in its entirety , including the social sections .
It is sad , regrettable and demeaning to the role of the Czech President to drag the Sudeten Germans into this game 65 years after the end of the Second World War .
Both the Czechs and the Sudeten Germans have experienced more than enough horror and suffering through war and displacement .
I firmly believe that both the Czechs and the Sudeten Germans have learned from this tragic experience and that the Czechs , Germans and Sudeten Germans want to live together and build a new united Europe together in peace and cooperation .
Mr President , the Swedish Presidency and the Commission both refer to the importance of an EU agreement on the financing of climate change measures for developing countries .
I agree .
But the offer on the table from the Commission is a smoke-and-mirrors proposal which developing counties have every reason to question .
Mr Barroso said just now that the carbon market in emerging countries will cover most of the EUR 100 billion a year estimated cost of climate change mitigation and adaptation .
But there is no certainty that the international carbon market will deliver EUR 38 billion a year in financial flow to developing countries .
We have seen how unstable the carbon price has been in the EU ETS and how long it is taking for a proper carbon market to emerge .
A further major flaw is the assumption that developing and emerging countries will be happy to fund their own energy efficiency measures .
That is absurd .
What is blocking energy efficiency in our own Member States is the lack of up-front funding mechanisms , yet we are assuming that developing countries can find their own money .
We need to have extra finance .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to make three comments on the forthcoming Council meeting .
Firstly , the Irish ' yes ' vote is , in my opinion , primarily a result of the financial crisis , while the banks were rescued a year ago with taxpayers ' money .
Now the bankers will once again be receiving record salaries .
The EU will certainly be measured by the extent to which it can bring an end to the disappearance of billions of euros of tax payers ' money into this black hole .
Secondly , new faces are filling the top positions within the EU as a result of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Their professional qualifications are definitely second-rate , because the majority of the candidates are failed politicians who have been voted out of power in their native countries .
Who will represent the EU now ?
The Council President , the High Representative or the Commission President ?
There is certain to be chaos .
My third comment , Mr President , is as follows .
If President Václav Klaus of the Czech Republic signs the Treaty of Lisbon , on the condition that a footnote is included which ensures that the Beneš Decrees remain in force , in other words , decrees which run contrary to international law and human rights , then there will be two types of fundamental rights : those for Germans , for Sudeten Germans and for all the others .
That cannot be allowed to happen !
Mr President , with the Lisbon Treaty approaching , we expect the October European Council to make progress on one of the priority issues - the European External Action Service .
The European Parliament has consistently called for the creation of a genuine common European diplomacy .
The EAS has the potential to ensure the unity and consistency of our external action , which is most needed if the Union is to act with one voice and meet external challenges such as energy security in an efficient manner .
To seize the opportunity offered by setting up the EAS , we expect the Council to take into consideration the position of the European Parliament adopted this week in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , and especially the following .
To have a strong external policy , we need to equip the new head of European diplomacy with proper instruments to enable him or her to strengthen our foreign policy .
The EAS should be based on the Community method with the clear involvement of the Commission and the European Parliament .
The scope of the HR 's competence needs to be large , involving such CFSP-related policies as enlargement , neighbourhood , trade and development .
The condition for a strong , coherent foreign policy is democratic legitimacy , which can only be provided by the strong involvement of the European Parliament .
This involvement should be considered at two stages : ex ante consultation of the Parliament during the process of setting up the service , and ex ante consultation of the Parliament in setting foreign policy goals .
Once the High Representative and the service are in place , the European Parliament should have a strong mandate to play an active role in the scrutiny of the EU 's foreign policy and the service .
In the implementation phase , we should not allow the Lisbon Treaty-based foreign policy provisions to be diluted .
The democratic legitimacy of the new service also depends on its composition .
The geographic balance of the Union should be taken into account .
Fair representation of all Member States in the EU institutions is a core principle , and the EAS should be no exception .
( FR ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , more than four months after the election of this European Parliament , you are going to convene a European Council at a time of indecision for the European Union , with a Commission which is still in place to deal with day-to-day matters .
If we do not want to drive European citizens completely to despair , it seems to me that this European Council could send out two messages .
The first is that , one year after the solidarity shown by all European states regarding the banks , you must start a European debate on the tax on financial transactions or on the contribution that the banks must make to Member States ' budgets to ensure solidarity in return .
Mrs Malmström , on behalf of the European Commission , the President of the Commission yesterday told us that he was supporting the budget as set out today and that , one year after the recovery plan , nothing new would be included .
However , over the last year , the situation on the employment front and the debt front has become considerably worse .
The budget proposed to us today is a budget which will not even finance the second part of the recovery plan that you designed a year ago .
So this is the advice that the European Council must act on : taxation of financial transactions , solidarity of the banks with regard to Member States ' budgets and a real recovery plan , as it was initiated a year ago , even though we criticised it at the time for not going far enough .
Mr President , firstly , I am pleased to see my former colleague Cecilia Malmström here , particularly in light of the convincing ' yes ' to Lisbon in Ireland , followed by the signature of the democratically elected Polish President .
I think these two further endorsements will , I hope , facilitate the Swedish Presidency to preside over the full ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
However , most European citizens are far more concerned about what the EU is doing to deal with the current economic crisis rather than the detail of Lisbon .
So I say to my Eurosceptic friends : ' Get over it ' .
Before the Irish ' yes ' vote , 27 million EU citizens voted ' yes ' , 24 million voted ' no ' .
That is democratic legitimacy .
So let us deal with the real world .
In this context , I want to speak about the Progress Microfinance Facility , which will give those who are unemployed a chance of a new start and open up the way to entrepreneurship .
This facility will provide EUR 100 million and could leverage a further EUR 500 million of microcredit .
But I am saying to the Commission and to the Council : this is not nearly enough .
This is a real opportunity for the EU to be responsive to the real needs of its citizens , but we need greater investment .
( NL ) Mr President , it is good that the European Union is savouring the success of the Irish referendum for a while .
We should also count our blessings that an important step has been taken towards the Treaty of Lisbon .
Of course , we are all concerned about the Czech Republic .
We shall await the court ruling with respect , but please do be patient and sensible in your dealings with Mr Klaus .
If we hit out at him , it could well be counterproductive .
Copenhagen and the success of this conference is a source of hope , not only for Europe but also for the world .
Sustainability is a source of technological development .
Important technological developments in Europe , for example , CO2 storage , can also help to combat the economic crisis .
This brings me to my third point : the economic crisis .
We want a citizens ' Europe .
More attention should be devoted to employment , and the Council 's plans are good in that respect .
Yet these plans are still very remote to many citizens , who are largely unaware of them .
Financial supervision of banking institutions is also very important , and I hope you are able to make progress on this , too , next week .
Finally , the approach to the asylum issue .
I strongly support the intentions of the Swedish Presidency , but tangible results , including from the Council deliberations , have failed to materialise .
Last week , at the meeting of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , the complaint was raised that the Commission , the Council and Parliament are still achieving too few tangible results .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the time has come for this House to stop the endless debate on the Treaty of Lisbon , which we have still heard going on today .
I believe that we must respect the wishes of this Parliament , of the great European countries , of the 27 and of the 26 that have ratified this treaty in various forms , but democratically , and thus the offences to the treaty and its democratic content must also be rejected .
I also believe that the Council meeting at the end of the month will be an important opportunity to reaffirm the need to revive the idea of Europe beyond Lisbon and to revive the economy , as well as to ensure that Europe does not back down over the major issue of climate change .
From that perspective , I believe that what we have heard lately from the President-in-Office , but also what we have heard today , is insufficient .
Europe beyond Lisbon is failing to interpret the strong content of the new treaty and is failing to comply with the terms of the Lisbon Agenda .
Therefore , if we 500 million Europeans want to remain the world 's biggest economic power , a power that is preparing to become a major political player on the international stage , I urge the Commission to fully carry out its mandate of proposing European legislation on the major issues relating to the economy , the economic recovery and the labour market recovery , and I urge the Council to turn a long list of headings into an actual policy to help resolve the economic difficulties .
This is what I believe we are lacking .
We are lacking a major economic recovery plan , we are lacking in major areas such as the revival of the infrastructure policy with Eurobonds , and we are lacking a high-profile European approach .
This is what we expect from the European Council at the end of the month .
Mr President , it is extremely important to fight the economic crisis , and that also means helping the small and medium-sized enterprises .
We must be committed to the outcome of the Stoiber Committee , and I want to hear from both the Commission and the Council whether they are committed to this process and what we are going to do , because we have to cut red tape .
Another point I would like to discuss is the Ankara Protocol .
The Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs said in a public interview in The Hague that Turkey will not ratify or implement the Ankara Protocol .
That is a statement in an authorised interview in de Volkskrant of 7 October 2009 .
What are we going to do ?
We cannot , as Commissioner Rehn said in the Foreign Affairs Committee , just kindly ask again .
The deadline is 1 November .
What action are we going to take ?
( SV ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , it is nice to see you here .
I would like to mention two things ahead of the European Council summit .
The first point I would like to raise concerns the climate .
I think it is important to go into the negotiations with the goal that the best solution to the issue is a solution that involves everyone making a joint commitment .
I say this because , in the debate , we sometimes talk as if it was a matter of formulating the best solution here in Europe or in a particular country .
However , that is not enough if we are unable to get China , India and a whole host of other countries that are currently not involved in the joint climate commitment on board .
This means that pragmatism and results must take precedence .
This type of solution must also be based on all countries being prepared to make a commitment .
It must not be the case that commitments and policies in other parts of the world are based on continued investments from Europe .
They must instead be based on a sound economy , sound growth and the sound development of new opportunities - with the help of Europe and other wealthy countries .
My second point concerns the financial markets .
I think it is important to emphasise that , more than anything else , stability on the financial markets requires what we call a stable macro-economy , in other words , stable public finances .
This means that the debate about getting away from the large budget deficits is much more important than what individual financial market regulations should look like .
However , it is also the case that stable financial markets require us to have stable growth , stable investments and the creation of new jobs .
This means that , when we legislate on the financial markets , that legislation needs to involve better supervision , cross-border measures and transparency , but not so many regulations that investments and growth happen in other countries .
That would put the stability of our own economy and our own financial markets under threat .
( ES ) Mr President , the positive outcome of the Irish referendum makes the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty more plausible and imminent than ever .
This is good news , as it means that we will finally have institutions that are able to take action .
First of all , they will be able to help us emerge from the crisis and address its social dimension , namely the matter of generating employment .
However , in addition to this , climate change , energy and the rules of fair trade should also be on the agenda .
The Summit also provides an opportunity to provide the initial , decisive momentum required to determine the membership of the new Commission , and we have already heard President Barroso make predictions concerning the selection criteria .
I would like to highlight the importance of two things .
Firstly , as a member of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I think that the membership of the Commission should be balanced .
The S & D Group has mentioned how significant it would be for the High Representative to be a member of this political family , but there is no doubt that it is also important to ensure a gender balance .
On the other hand , the group also mentioned the distribution of portfolios and referred to one which is important to me as a lawyer who is committed to freedom , and as Chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , and which is related to the subdivision of the Directorate-General for Justice and Home Affairs into a DG dealing with matters concerning justice and fundamental rights and another dedicated to security matters .
I think that this is not the right solution .
The right solution does not involve subordinating justice to the importance of security or setting them up against each other , but rather in creating a Directorate-General for Justice and Fundamental Rights , a second Directorate-General for Home Affairs and a third one which does not link security with immigration but instead separates them , thereby creating a Directorate-General for Security and another for Immigration , Asylum and Refugees , which includes the field of fundamental rights .
Mr President , in our debates about these summits , you will find if you go back over 10 years that many ideas , many similar plans or proposals have come forward from Members within this House , from members of the Council and also from Commissioners , and , if anything , the last year has proven one thing to me , namely that when the Union acts together in solidarity with big plans and big ambitions , it moves the world .
Maybe now is the time for greater plans and bigger ambitions as regards how we move forward .
Many have spoken about the scourge of unemployment which has come upon so many people in the last number of months , and have said that now is the time to take serious action to remove the dead wood of regulation and get rid of the dead wood of blockages to businesses and to entrepreneurs creating those businesses .
Could I say that when we speak about solidarity , it is not about the big against the small , and one fear that I have is that the new G20 could impact negatively on small countries and medium-sized countries which are emerging in these new markets .
Finally a word to the President-in-Office : you might put the issue of copyright term extension on the agenda for the Council as well under the Swedish Presidency .
Mr President , with the Lisbon Treaty about to enter into force , this is an historic moment to concentrate first of all on Europe 's common future and common good .
I am afraid that it is not the best opportunity to use these last moments to advance national interests , playing on the nerves of other partners .
Global challenges to Europe cannot be solved without efficient common institutions and common policies .
However , today 's Europe needs more than ever the far-sightedness , moral commitment and perception of common European values that inspired our founding fathers to break the vicious circle of history and national egoisms .
That is why we need for Europe 's progress and credibility in the world not necessarily good conductors of affairs but real statesmen , strong democratic leaders having a vision and authority to bring about a change also in Europe .
Therefore we need a clear commitment to , and practical implementation of , European common institutions .
We need not only a common foreign and security policy , with an external service , but also a common energy policy .
The European Council will also approve the Baltic Sea Strategy .
I would like to thank the Commission and the Swedish Presidency once again for taking it on board .
Now , the task of the Council is to implement it without losing time .
I hope that the Baltic Sea Strategy will get the attention it deserves , also from the Spanish and Belgian Presidencies .
I support the idea of Minister Malmström that the Baltic Sea Strategy can be seen as a model pilot project for other macroregions of Europe .
Nevertheless , no EU strategy will be taken seriously without having sufficient resources for its implementation .
The existing budget line needs some money and some credibility .
( PT ) I would like to make two brief points .
The first is about the Treaty of Lisbon : following the ' yes ' vote in Ireland and the signing by the President of Poland , it is expected that the Constitutional Tribunal of the Czech Republic will deliver its opinion and President Klaus will do what he should , and sign the Treaty .
The Council cannot give in to the blackmail of the President of the Czech Republic .
The Treaty of Lisbon is essential for the better functioning of the European institutions , in addition to providing other benefits , such as strengthening the powers of the European Parliament and the rights of citizens .
That is why it is imperative that the Treaty of Lisbon comes into force soon .
The Council and the Commission should give President Klaus a deadline for him to start behaving like the President of a democratic country that is a member of the European Union .
We cannot entertain the thought for one moment that the whim of some leader can prevail over the will of the majority .
My second point is about the Copenhagen conference .
Ladies and gentlemen , the world needs a global agreement to fight climate change ; both developed and developing countries need to stop the planet from overheating , and so they need to pool their efforts and make a courageous decision .
Copenhagen is our big opportunity to avoid catastrophe , as the scientists say .
There is no argument to be had in invoking the financial crisis as a reason to delay or scale down the plans for Copenhagen , and such attempts are not to be taken seriously .
We need a sense of ambition if we are to save the planet .
Mr President , within a generation , the population of the European Union will be about 6 % of the world 's population .
We are not far beyond that now , which is why we simply cannot continue to rotate the presidency of the European Council every six months and have up to five different people speaking on foreign affairs-related issues for the Union .
But also within that generation , the population of the world will have increased by about two billion people .
Ninety per cent of that increase will be in what is now the developing world , where up to 11 million children die each year , about five million of them for want of medicines that have been available in what we call the West for over 30 years .
In that context it is not only important that we are well organised to run Europe internally ; it is also important that we are equipped to deal with situations like this in the developing world , which is why I want to make a case for a strong , independent , separate Commissioner for development aid who will have his or her own clear budget and remit and who will be accountable to this Chamber through our Committee on Development .
It is crucially important that the High Representative , Minister for External Affairs , whatever title you want to give that person , will have a lot on his or her plate , much to do , but there is one single issue which commands and must command our particular attention .
I want to advocate strongly that not only do we continue to have an office of Commissioner for Development , but that this portfolio is given to somebody who is equal to the task and determined to ensure that these , our neighbours who are a short journey away from the European Union , are treated with respect , this for selfish as well as selfless reasons .
( SK ) The most important item for the forthcoming Council meeting will be to complete the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty and to bring the Treaty to life .
The process ushered in by the Lisbon Treaty will strengthen the Union both internally and in a global context .
Strengthening the position of the Union is closely connected with strengthening cooperation in the area of the current third pillar .
The Union will be more open , more effective and more democratic .
The main challenge and priority is to secure fundamental rights and freedoms as well as integrity and security in Europe .
The way to achieve these objectives is full support , effective implementation and sufficient respect for existing laws and instruments relating to the protection of human rights and civic freedoms .
The Stockholm Programme emphasises the assertion of these rights , especially in the areas of justice and security .
We must give precedence to mechanisms which facilitate the access of citizens to the courts so that their rights and lawful interests can be enforced throughout the Union .
It must also be our strategy to strengthen police cooperation and the enforcement of rights as well as improving security in Europe .
The internal security strategy must be developed with a view to combating mounting extremism in the Member States , eliminating the tension stirred up by irresponsible politicians and through concrete solutions over such sensitive questions as , for example , immigration , asylum policy or the issue of the Roma and national minorities in such a way that these issues are not exploited by right-wing extremists .
Properly organised migration can benefit all of the parties involved .
Europe will need a flexible immigration policy which can respond to the needs of society and the labour market in the various EU Member States .
In relation to securing a credible immigration and asylum policy which is sustainable in the long-term , we must , however , pay close attention to the problem of illegal migration , which is a serious concern for our citizens .


( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , be brave , be brave , be brave , that is the recommendation that I feel like making ahead of the Council meeting and , for this reason , when it comes to debating the nominations for the new commissioners , the new European Union Foreign Affairs Minister and the President of the European Council - thus the people who , together with President Barroso and the other commissioners , will have to oversee European policy in the near future - the only method of decision making to be used is that of considering the best possible interests of European citizens .
Therefore , the people who should be chosen are those who have depth as politicians and human beings , whose national and European political efforts have been distinguished by a concern for the common good .
These must be the foundations on which we continue to address the major issues such as climate change , investigating further perhaps the requirements of the various economies and the economic crisis , with the aid of courageous initiatives such as the Eurobonds , which we should also put on the agenda of the next Council meeting .
To conclude , I should like to cite the words uttered by Pope Benedict XVI the other day - which I would be delighted , just once , to see upheld in the next European Council too - because they are words that provide a timely reminder of the responsibility shared by all citizens and by all political representatives , which is to fulfil the request that we seek in unity and in the common search for truth , that crucial incentive that we need to start building something important for ourselves and for future generations .
Progress and civilisation are born of unity , and Europe was great when it conveyed these fundamental values that it derived from the Christian faith , turning them into the nations ' cultural heritage and identity .
For this reason , I believe that it is clear which path we must follow in order to be able to overcome the crucial challenge of relaunching Europe as a global power .
( CS ) Mr President , the Lisbon Treaty is a key issue .
The jurisprudence of the Czech Constitutional Court is consistent and I do not believe that the Court would have found next week that the Treaty was inconsistent with the Czech constitution .
I doubt , however , that the President will end his obstruction .
The Czech Republic , however , does not have a presidential system and the government can bring an action against such a president for exceeding his authority .
It is a fact that Václav Klaus refused for years to appoint a particular lawyer as a judge simply because he had lost a dispute with him in court , nor does he respect the decisions of the Supreme Administrative Court .
Along with this lawyer , 500 million European citizens have become hostages to the whims of our President .
The damage is not inconsiderable .
At a time of crisis , the appointment of a new Commission is being held up , Parliament lacks the powers to resolve the budget , the national parliaments cannot , in the meantime , issue yellow or red cards and we are not making use of new powers to combat epidemics , energy crises , terrorism and organised crime or the new principles in civil defence and humanitarian aid .
It is possible the Charter may be rejected , all because of the defunct Beneš Decrees .
This is simply absurd , not only because of the timing , but also because there are no legal grounds for it .
Article 345 of the Lisbon Treaty even states explicitly that it does not apply to ownership issues in the Member States .
The Charter does not create new legal possibilities over and above those that already exist for ownership disputes in the Czech Republic .
In addition , Regulation 44 on the recognition of judgments does not take ownership issues 50 years back into the past .
The Czech media are nonetheless seething with doubts .
What is really going on in the Czech Republic ?
It is clear that the next presidential election in the Czech Republic will be hard fought and Václav Klaus is endeavouring , through this piece of theatre , to cultivate the image of a powerful leader who can take on the entire EU single-handedly and defend the property of Czechs against foreigners .
I appreciate the fact that the EU did not put any pressure on the Czech Republic , and I would like to call for patience until the democratic deficit caused by our President is resolved at home , well ahead of the elections in the UK .
In conclusion , I would like to call again on the Council to stand by the Czech Republic in opposition to the one-sided introduction of visa requirements by Canada against Czech citizens and to take a decision on joint sanctions .
( EL ) Mr President , my speech will concentrate on three points .
First point : the economic crisis .
The crisis indiscriminately hit all the economic systems , both the strong and the less strong .
If we interpret ten years ' experience of EMU in light of the economic crisis , it is clear that economic policy needs to be more europeanised .
It is also clear that economic risk needs to be europeanised .
Trust is good , control is even better .
Second point : climate change .
The European Union is rightly at the vanguard of global ecological diplomacy .
I absolutely agree with the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , that , in the run-up to the Copenhagen Summit , there is no plan Β .
The ecological debt burdens everyone without exception .
I support the idea of creating a global climate bank , which will have funds from the Emissions Bank to finance efforts by developing countries to create environmentally-friendly development standards .
Third point : immigration .
Obviously we need to proceed more quickly in adopting a common immigration policy .
However , there are also foreign policy aspects to immigration .
We must proceed as quickly as possible in establishing effective foreign policy relations with third countries , because there is a great deal of pressure on countries , especially in southern Europe .
I wish to say quite clearly that Turkey 's stance is provocative .
I was pleased to hear the Swedish Presidency point that out .
The European Union 's message to Turkey - and to other countries - must be loud , clear and effective .
This framework forms part of the Community acquis and everyone must respect it .

( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Malmström and Mr Barroso have covered the subject of climate change and the preparations for Copenhagen .
I agree with everyone who says that the Council must draw some ambitious conclusions .
However , I would advise against looking only at the industry which has been covered by the Emissions Trading System since 2005 , when considering both financing and the issue of who must bring about the reduction .
We need more industries to shoulder the burden .
More than 50 % of emissions are not yet included in the Emissions Trading System .
We need more industries to take responsibility in order to achieve our objectives and to guarantee financing .
I am referring to the air transport and shipping industries .
I have been disappointed by the actions of the Council and the Commission up to now .
During the preparations for Pittsburgh , this subject was not included in the Council 's conclusions .
If we want to be successful in Copenhagen , it is essential that we speed up what we are doing .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety did this on Monday .
I would ask the Council and the Commission to look at this in more detail .
Secondly , I would like to say that I know that the discussions will be very informal , but the Council must also be discussing the composition of the new Commission .
In all modesty , I would like to make a suggestion .
For historical reasons , pharmaceutical legislation has come under the supervision of the Directorate General for Industry and the Commissioner for Industry .
Of course , pharmaceutical legislation is a matter for industry , but it is also a health issue .
In all the Member States , in the European Parliament , even in the US , this area forms part of health policy .
Therefore , perhaps it is now time to try a change in this area .
Please ask the Commission President to take a look at this issue .

Mr President , President Barroso mentioned here yesterday , in his nice response to Mr Farage , that in the EU we need the President of the Council to be a true European .
I am sure both of you and many here share that view .
Do we also need somebody in that position who would be a true ' Gazpromian ' , like Gerhard Schröder , Paavo Lipponen , etc . ?
Or maybe you think those qualities are pretty compatible , so a good ' Gazpromian ' , especially if they voted for friendly and bribing relations , is the best European .
That way , we could speed up the current development of the EU towards becoming the ' GU ' - the ' Gazprom Union ' - and so avoid the situation in which Russia totally ignores the EU while working exclusively on splitting it .
What is your opinion about ' Gazpromians ' for the Presidency ?
( PL ) Mr President , the Treaty of Lisbon has not yet been ratified , and is still only a draft political document .
This means that , in the European Union , we remain bound by the principle of unanimity .
Every country has the right to declare reservations .
The President of the Czech Republic , Václav Klaus , is acting within the framework of established rules .
Putting pressure on the President in fact affects not only him personally , but also the many millions of citizens of the countries of Europe who have announced serious reservations about this document .
At the forthcoming European Council , the leaders of the Member States of the European Union should think deeply about the advisability and the consequences of consciously by-passing the will of the citizens whom they represent .
( RO ) The European Council will be invited to adopt the strategy on the Baltic Sea region .
I believe that this provides a good model for the European Union 's future strategy on the Danube region .
The Danube region covers 10 states , six of which are Member States of the European Union , with a population of 200 million .
This number includes 75 million people who live in areas bordering the Danube .
This is why I think that it is important for this model to be used for the Danube strategy as well , which will need to have an action plan and action programme for the coming years .
Still on the subject of the European Council 's programme , I also think that it is of paramount importance for us to adopt at European level the financial instruments required for the development of an ' eco-efficient ' economy .
I am talking , in this case , about energy efficiency in buildings and sustainable transport in particular .
( FR ) Mr President , Minister , Madam Vice-President of the European Commission , my question concerns the application of the Treaty of Lisbon , especially the promise made to the Irish people to have one Commissioner per country .
In December 2008 , it was agreed that the European Council would take the appropriate legal measures to ensure we have one Commissioner per country .
Mrs Malmström , what are these legal measures ?
Information is being circulated that there would be an amendment to the Treaty of Lisbon with the accession treaty of Croatia , or are there other appropriate legal arrangements ?
Could you provide us with this information ?
How do you also envisage increasing the number of MEPs by 18 , since there are 18 extra MEPs who should constitute the next European Parliament with the next Treaty of Lisbon ?
( PT ) Mr President , this coming Council should give absolute priority to changing the liberal policies that have led to the severe economic and social crisis .
This should be the time to face up to the poverty experienced by around 80 million citizens of the European Union , including more than 30 million workers whose wages are so low that they and their families merely survive , and are unable to escape from their state of poverty .
This should be the time to commit to tackling the severe unemployment which continues to rise , and which could reach 30 million within the next year if we do not take appropriate measures immediately .
This Council 's main challenge , therefore , is to break with the neoliberal policies of the Lisbon Strategy and the Stability Pact .
These should be replaced with a real programme for progress and social development that will promote high-quality public services , support production and micro- , small and medium-sized businesses , valuing those who work , and creating more employment with rights , including jobs for women and young people .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , according to some rumours I have heard , there is an idea going around about how to possibly get the Czech Republic 's President Klaus on board , which is to somehow incorporate the Beneš Decrees into the Treaty of Lisbon afterwards .
I would like us to guard against this kind of legal jiggery-pokery and nonsense for three reasons .
Firstly , I believe that we would create a dangerous precedent whereby any constitutional expert would feel that they can interfere in a contract retrospectively and , as we can see , this is dangerous because the Slovak government has already stated that if Klaus can do so , they would like to as well .
Therefore , I think that this would be a dangerous precedent .
Secondly , it is wrong to cite the Irish as an example .
What the Irish were asking for was also originally included in the Treaty of Lisbon , and they were not objecting to what was not in it .
Therefore , their request did not encounter any legal obstacle .
Thirdly , the content of 13 of the 143 Beneš Decrees disenfranchised Hungarians and Germans .
I believe that the European Union cannot allow reference to be made to such documents .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to continue with the argument from my speech yesterday on the preparations for the Copenhagen summit , and then mention yesterday 's Ecofin meeting , which was not hugely successful .
I was questioning you on the responsibility we have as industrialised countries to behave in such a way that developing countries can follow us in our efforts to combat climate change .
At Copenhagen , we cannot act as if we all have the same capabilities - this would mean that we were all starting from the same place , to arrive nowhere in the end .
Therefore , to convince our partners in development to join us , we must obviously address the question of the aid they should be given and not wait for the results of the Copenhagen Summit .
At the next European Council and in the important context of climate change , the 27 absolutely must agree on the way the European Union thinks about aid to developing countries .
Yesterday , as I said , the Ecofin Council of Finance Ministers did not manage to reach a common position on this set of problems .
However , we know that this issue is absolutely central .
The European Commission had already made its proposals and I very much hope that we can take the initiative and carry our partners with us to achieve the global solidarity required to overcome the problem of climate change .
( FR ) Mr President , my question is aimed at the Presidency-in-Office of the Council .
You know that the central issue regarding the future Presidency of the European Council is knowing whether he or she intends to prefer the Community method in all circumstances .
Do you think this criterion should be made a precondition of the appointment of the President-in-Office of the Council ?
Recently we have , from time to time , witnessed intergovernmental drift .
I think it is time to close this period and return to the beginning of the European integration process and to stay faithful to the legacy of Robert Schuman and Jean Monnet .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we always talk about the ' economic and financial crisis ' in quotation marks .
Why do we not refer to a structural crisis ?
All of this began with a genuine banking crisis which included the investment banks .
This is one industry , but the entire world economy suffered as a result .
( SL ) Ladies and gentlemen , the conference in Copenhagen will soon be upon us and yet we have only moved a small step forward since last year 's conference .
We ought to have achieved a great deal more and acted with greater determination .
We find ourselves struggling , not only with the financing , but even to make a commitment on individual countries ' emission reduction targets .
Industrialised countries need to play a more visible role on this score and we need to send a clear message to the United States of America .
The specific difficulty which we face with the United States is that we know that they will not even have passed the necessary national legislation by the time December comes round .
I think that we should clearly voice our expectation that President Obama deliver on one of his most important pre-election pledges , i.e. that America would play a proactive role in countering climate change .
Likewise , we should clearly voice our expectation that President Obama take advantage of his appearance in person to bring about a successful conclusion to the conference .
( CS ) Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council is undoubtedly an important body and it should therefore resolve fundamental issues .
The number one issue is to provide work that can ensure people a decent standard of living .
I am surprised by the succession of meaningless speeches which betray a lack of knowledge and foolishly mix together a bizarre goulash of revanchist demands and extreme liberal methods .
The European Council should reject such voices out of hand and , at the same time give , a clear signal that its primary aim is to get industry moving again and to resolve the critical situation in agriculture .
If , instead of this , it accedes to cuts in the social area , along with relief for banks and the most wealthy , then no positive impulse can be expected , especially if there is an insistence on abstract criteria of financial stability .
In conclusion , I would like to say to all those who have desperately resisted ratification of the Lisbon Treaty by referendum : put your own house in order , and if you are unable to explain what is good about this Treaty to your own citizens , do not lecture others .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to mention the challenges we must face and overcome in the Area of Freedom , Security and Justice , namely , establishing a proper , joint migration and asylum policy ; effective control of our external borders ; an effective integration and repatriation policy , a Eurojust that is credible and trustworthy ; a Europol to serve the Community , under the control of the European Parliament ; progress in terms of harmonising the field of civil and criminal justice ; effective transatlantic relations , especially with the United States , based on trust and equality ; an equitable solution to the issue of SWIFT data ; an effective data protection policy ; better protection for the euro against counterfeiting and active promotion of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
( FR ) Mr President , my question is very simple .
We have a newly-appointed President for the new Commission , but when will we have this new Commission ?
In these difficult times , it is impossible to work with a Commission half of whose members are already packing their bags .
We need a new impetus in Europe - we need this new Commission soon .
Mr President , one of the lessons to be learnt from the recent referendum in Ireland is that a good PR campaign makes a big difference .
In June 2008 , the Irish people voted against the Lisbon Treaty .
A little over a year afterwards , they voted by a two-thirds majority in favour .
Did the European Union have a much greater impact on their lives in the interim ?
No .
But the message of the European Union was sold far better by the ' yes ' side in the second campaign .
Particularly now with the Lisbon Treaty coming into being , I think it is important with the new competences that much good work will be done .
However , the Commission must also engage in a proper PR strategy to bring that good work home to the citizens .
So I would ask the Commission what plans they have in that regard so that future referenda will be passed much more easily than in the past .
( RO ) Mr President , my name is Luhan , not Luman .
I warmly welcome the fact that the political groups are in support of promoting the ratification process .
To ensure that the European Union can operate efficiently , we need the Treaty of Lisbon and we need it to come into force as soon as possible .
At the moment , the Czech Republic is the only Member State which has still not ratified the Treaty .
As the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has already said , we are calling for President Klaus to show a responsible attitude and ratify the Treaty by the date of the European Council at the end of October .
Otherwise , we are going to remain stuck in this institutional debate and we are not going to be able to focus on the real problems which ordinary citizens are facing , such as the economic and financial crisis , unemployment and social inclusion , nor are we going to be able to reinforce the European Union 's image as a genuine global player .
I believe that we have discussed the merits of this Treaty so much that there is no point in us reviving this debate .
What we are interested in now is that at the next European Council , we can confirm that the ratification process has been finalised in all Member States so that we can move on to the next stage of establishing the College of the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your questions and comments .
We often talk about a citizens ' Europe , the people 's Europe , and then we interpret this to suit our own political purposes .
There is actually nothing wrong with this , but if we ask the citizens ' what do you want from Europe ? ' , then the citizens of all the European States say ' we want cooperation in Europe that is based on a number of values and that solves our common problems - the economic crisis , unemployment , the climate issues , international crime , the migration problem and so on ' .
That is what we are here to do .
Many of these issues will be discussed at the summit in ten days ' time .
Of course , we will not succeed in solving all of them , but hopefully , we will be able to take some important steps in the right direction and thereby create more of a ' citizens ' Europe ' .
We must take these decisions in a way that is democratic , open and allows transparency .
We may each have different views on the Treaty of Lisbon .
The view held by the Swedish Presidency and the Council and , I believe , the majority in this Chamber , is that the Treaty of Lisbon will bring Europe closer to the citizens .
We will take decisions in a more efficient and democratic way and we will also lend increased strength and weight to the European Union in our global relations .
It is therefore important to get the Treaty in place and I can guarantee that we will do our utmost to ensure that this happens as soon as possible .
There is still no solution with regard to the Czech President .
I have heard that there is some speculation here , but nevertheless there is still no solution .
We are in intensive talks with our friends in Prague and we hope very , very soon to be able to present to you a proposal for resolving this issue .
I would like to point out that we must , of course , await the ruling of the Czech constitutional court before we can go any further .
In the meantime , preparations will continue with regard to codecision with Parliament and to the European External Action Service , which we will discuss this afternoon .
I will return to many of the views that have been expressed and other questions relating to the Treaty of Lisbon .
We have had very constructive cooperation with your President , Mr Buzek , and his colleagues concerning how Parliament , the Council and the Commission can cooperate once the new rules are in place .
A few questions have been asked about Afghanistan .
Yes , Mrs de Sarnez , we hope to be able to make progress in discussions on a more unified European view with regard to Afghanistan , based both on the military presence that the European Union has there and on increased support for civil society and the democratic , state-building processes .
Intensive discussions are being held right now on how we can support the election that is to take place on 7 November .
That is very soon .
It is difficult to put European election observers in place in such a short space of time , but we will , of course , do our best to achieve this .
The European Union 's long-term goal , which we support , is to have a common asylum and migration policy .
We will not manage this by the end of the year , partly because we need the Treaty of Lisbon to enter into force first .
However , I do agree with you that it is important .
In the meantime , we are working on the Stockholm Programme and one of the things we are discussing in this connection is migration-related issues .
They are very complex issues , of course , and concern cooperation with third countries , trade , aid and the possibility of introducing a framework so that we can also have legal immigration into Europe .
They also concern solidarity and reception systems .
The Commission will report on the progress that has been made in this regard .
We will then take further decisions in December .
Mr van Baalen , the issue of the Ankara Protocol is important .
We often say to our Turkish friends that they must ratify and implement the Ankara Protocol .
This issue will not be discussed at this summit , but we will discuss enlargement later in the autumn , with a possible decision being taken in December .
Therefore , I will certainly return to this issue again .
With regard to the number of commissioners , the European Council has , of course , decided that each State is to have one commissioner .
Under the present Treaty , it would be possible to change this in 2014 .
As soon as the Treaty is in place , we will have time to review any legal adjustments that may be required to guarantee that every State can retain its commissioner , and we will do this .
We are in talks with the various legal bodies to see whether further amendments to the Treaty will be necessary or whether it is sufficient for the European Council to decide this unanimously .
The same applies with regard to the 18 extra MEPs .
As soon as the Treaty is in place , we will begin preparations for this .
A number of States have already made preparations in order to be able to send the Members in question here quickly .
Mr Audy , the national voting system is a bit more complicated in some States .
It may , therefore , take some time .
I hope that the preparations get underway as soon as possible .
I am very pleased that the European Parliament has allowed these Members to be observers while they are waiting to formally become MEPs .
Together with the forthcoming Spanish Presidency , we will do our best to ensure that this goes as quickly and as smoothly as possible .
Finally , I would like to express my thanks , not only for this debate , but also for the extremely strong support that this House is giving the Presidency with regard to the issue of the climate .
We will do our utmost to make it possible to take decisions on European funding at the European Council meeting , based both on the European contribution and on our contribution in relation to the developing countries , thereby allowing us to send out a strong signal and to give the international negotiations a boost to make them as successful as possible in Copenhagen .
It is the most serious and important task facing our generation to take appropriate , concrete steps to combat global warming and put in place a global regulation .
I am very grateful for the support and commitment that the European Parliament is showing in this regard .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , thank you very much for this lively and interesting debate .
It is very clear that the sense of urgency about the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty is tangible in this House and in this debate .
As you will understand , the Commission , like Parliament , is eagerly awaiting the entry into force of this new Treaty .
We all know that the political process of approval has now been concluded in all Member States .
It is , of course , for each Member State to finalise the ratification process and , in so doing , they have to respect their internal procedures , but it is also clear that no individual Member State acts in a vacuum .
Their decisions or delays will have an impact on all .
We of course hope that the Czech Republic will very soon be in a position to ratify the Treaty .
I would also like to remind everybody here about the loyal cooperation that is one of the principles and main features of the European Union .
I think it is of crucial importance that Member States can trust each other on the commitments made .
May I also comment on the fact that many of the Members of Parliament here have made a distinction or a divide between reality - with unemployment and an economic crisis - on the one hand , and the text of the Lisbon Treaty on the other , but of course , the whole idea is that the text of the Lisbon Treaty is there to deal with the context and that we will be better equipped to take effective decisions on immigration or asylum policy , on energy security , etc .
This is the whole idea , and we have to link them instead of dividing them , but we hope that we will very soon come to the end of this eternal debate on institutional issues and be able to use these new effective instruments .
The Commission is now working actively to prepare for implementation when the Treaty enters into force .
I know that this afternoon , you will be devoting a specific debate to the External Action Service .
This is therefore not the time to enter into a full discussion on that issue .
But I would say that we are facing a real challenge here .
It is a challenge to draw together the different players in the field of external relations , and the overall aim has to be to achieve a diplomatic synergy .
A certain degree of creative thinking is necessary while respecting the interinstitutional balance .
We also need the Service to be fully accountable to this House - to the European Parliament .
I strongly believe that the setting-up of the External Action Service can be a success if Council , Parliament and the Commission work closely together .
We must also respect the fact that it is for the High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission to make a proposal in agreement with the Commission .
On another important issue , the European Citizens ' Initiative , the Commission intends to launch a Green Paper in mid-November .
We intend to hold a broad consultation with citizens , civil society and all stakeholders in order to launch the legislative proposals very soon after the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
The consequences of the economic and financial crisis will appear high up on the Council agenda .
We heard this particular theme evoked often during the debate .
I agree with those who said that there is no room for complacency .
It is true that the policies in response to the crisis are starting to bear some fruit - financial markets are starting to consolidate and confidence is improving - but we are far from full recovery and the consequences of unemployment are , and will remain , very severe .
Political efforts must also continue to support active labour market policies .
The Commission of course - and I say this in response to some of the questions raised during the debate - stands by its budget proposal .
We hope that Parliament will also confirm our ambitions by your vote .
As President Barroso said yesterday in the Question Hour , what has been done so far is not enough .
The employment situation is such that we all need to do more at European , but also at national , level .
Unemployment is our first concern today and we hope that we can count on the European Parliament in continuing work on this , and also to put pressure on the Council , and at national level , to approve our proposal on easing the management of the structural funds , because that could definitely help .
Another issue raised concerned the administrative burden .
This Thursday , the Commission will adopt a very far-reaching Communication on administrative burden reduction .
That Communication will set out what has been achieved so far and what still remains to be done .
It also builds on the important work done by the Stoiber Group .
According to this particular report , the picture is very positive , and the proposal for how to deal with the administrative burden reduction is on the table .
Unfortunately the majority of these proposals are pending before the Council , so again we hope that the European Parliament will help us to put pressure on the Member States to actually move forward on these issues .
I would also like to say something about financial market supervision which has , of course , regularly appeared on the Commission agenda over recent months .
A complete new supervisory framework must be set up at EU level , and we are pleased to see that some progress has been achieved .
There is broad agreement in the Council on the Commission proposal on the Systemic Risk Board for macro-prudential supervision .
We hope Parliament will give its support to this .
Much more effort is needed when it comes to the supervisory authorities for micro-prudential supervision and , again , we count on the will of both Council and Parliament to arrive at an ambitious and efficient solution as soon as possible .
Finally , let me say something about the topic which also features at the top of the Swedish Presidency 's agenda , namely climate change , because we only have a few weeks to go to the Copenhagen conference .
I think several of you have touched upon what will be the core issue which will determine success or failure .
I would call it climate justice , because this is about the relation between developing and developed countries and the will to present a credible proposal for the financing of both mitigation and adaptation measures and the way we also show our willingness to lead the way .
The Commission - and it is the only body to have done this - has presented a proposal for financing .
It has been criticised by many as not being enough .
I am sure it will not be enough , but it is the first step , and hopefully it will also make the others come up with their own efforts and put something on the table that we will be able to negotiate in Copenhagen .
We will , of course , continue to be fully active and not lower our level of ambition , but instead encourage all other parties and partners to take a full part and take a seat at the table - including the United States , for the first time - so that we can respond to all the concerns of citizens .
I can assure you that we have no intention of lowering our ambitions , but instead will make sure that we work proactively for a good deal in Copenhagen .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - There is fevered speculation that Tony Blair may be appointed the first President of the European Union under the Lisbon Treaty / European Constitution .
Nearly thirty-eight thousand people have signed a Europe-wide petition opposing his presidency .
It is easy to understand why .
As Prime Minister of Britain Mr Blair has shown himself to be a liar and a fantasist .
On a relatively modest Prime Minister 's salary , he has mysteriously managed to become a multi-millionaire .
In the MPs expenses scandal now engulfing the House of Commons , only one MP 's expense records have unaccountably gone missing .
They are Mr Blair 's .
I share the revulsion of those opposed to Mr Blair 's presidency .
But who in fact would make a better presidential candidate than Mr Blair for this Union founded as it is on deceit , lies and corruption ?
Mr Blair brought Britain to the edge of ruin .
He could do the same for the EU .
The EU and Tony Blair deserve each other .
Mr President , we assume that the agenda of the forthcoming European Council will also include the economic crisis , in particular the situation with Opel .
The acquisition of Opel and the massive national State aid promised in this connection is more than a test case for Europe ; it is about the credibility of the European Commission , which must ensure that no unlawful State aid is granted .
It is unacceptable for healthy , profitable plants to be closed because the Member State in which they are situated is unable to provide as much State aid as another - larger and more powerful - Member State .
We must also learn lessons from the Opel affair : it is not yet too late to launch a coordinated European strategy for the automobile sector .
CARS 21 was , and remains , a praiseworthy plan , but it is far from sufficient .
Europe must produce a vigorous plan for the future that drastically accelerates the development of the sustainable electric car .
To do so , we need to bring European car manufacturers together round the table , and to focus resources from the Seventh Framework Programme on this .
It is time to creep out of our defensive position and to give all the workers in the largest industry in Europe a positive signal .
One of the prime objectives of the next European Council will be to ensure the success of the UN Conference on climate change , which will take place in Copenhagen in December .
The Council 's conclusions on the EU 's position in the Copenhagen conference are fundamental for ensuring that the EU speaks with one voice .
It is important to keep an ambitious negotiating position .
The EU should demonstrate that it is united and set an example of leadership , especially by helping developing countries , which will face costs of about EUR 100 billion per year from 2020 in order to adapt to the impacts of climate change and reduce their emissions .
Establishing the structure of a funding system for developing countries , particularly the least developed , is of paramount importance , along with defining the sources and amounts of this funding , so as to ensure an agreement in Copenhagen .
This agreement will allow a protocol to come into force that will replace the Kyoto Protocol from 1 January 2013 and will ensure an effective reduction in greenhouse gas emissions , while allowing European industry to remain competitive in global markets .
We are hoping that by the final October session of the European Council at the latest , the final obstacles will have disappeared preventing the Treaty of Lisbon from coming into force .
This agreement may , in many respects , inspire the European Union to have a more efficient decision-making process .
I would like to highlight one example : energy security .
One sign of progress is that , unlike up until now , energy policy has been given a separate section in an EC Treaty .
Based on the events of the last few years , I think that the new chapter will set out the guidelines in the EU 's energy policy .
The objectives to be supported include the development of energy efficiency , support for the use of renewable sources and the interconnection of networks .
As an MEP from a new Member State , I am particularly pleased that the concept of solidarity also features in the new energy chapter .
However , the Treaty of Lisbon does not in any way , at least when it comes to energy policy , present us with a ready-made solution .
The inclusion of the new chapter acts much more as a warning : Europe needs to take urgent steps to reduce its dependency and promote its environmental views .
The Treaty of Lisbon in itself offers absolutely no guarantee , just an opportunity .
This is an opportunity for Member States to consolidate the foundations of a common EU energy policy , while being aware of their own interests .
The development of alternative supply routes , the interconnection of networks or even the provision of protection against external purchases cannot be conceived in the future without a suitable degree of political determination and cooperation from Member States .
The impact of Ireland 's approval of the Treaty of Lisbon is making itself felt across the whole European continent .
The purpose of this Treaty is obviously to simplify the decision-making process after the EU 's expansion towards the east .
Against this background , the message conveyed by our partners in Ireland is in support of solidarity among Europe 's citizens .
We are also talking about one of the last European Councils to be held under the EU 's rotating presidency system .
This fact is all the more significant in that the selection has to take place of the occupants of the main posts that will be held in the coming years .
This is an issue which has triggered lively debates , involving countless political sensitivities .
In my opinion , our task is to deal with an issue where clear-cut principles must take priority over any feelings of pride of the moment .
It is our duty to offer the European Union consistency , efficiency , a long-term future and balanced development for all regions so that it can face up to the challenges on the global political stage , whether we are talking about the economic crisis , climate change , our common identity , etc .
Indeed , the European Union will acquire the strength it deserves only when we are on the same wavelength at a global level and when we can be identified as an entity that takes united action .
( The sitting was suspended for a few minutes )
1 .
Freedom of information in Italy and other Member States of the European Union ( vote )

( PT ) Mr President , I would like to ask for the floor under Rule 157 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure in order to speak about the second draft amendment , presented by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , to the joint motion for a resolution on freedom of information in Italy and other Member States .
This proposed amendment brings shame on the European Parliament and , in the name of the truth , it should not be debated , still less voted upon .
Its premises are false and are based on a mere fallacy dreamed up by Portuguese political parties during the electoral campaign .
They were given the correct response by Portuguese voters .
However , an unquestionable truth ( and I have the evidence here to prove it ) is that the MEP who has tabled this amendment showed his intolerance and inquisitorial mindset yesterday on his website , by calling for the writer José Saramago , the Nobel Prize-winner for literature , to renounce his Portuguese nationality .
It seems pretty clear who is attacking freedom of opinion .
Mr President , in accordance with Rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure , I should like to remind you that , in the debate on human rights in the world in 2007 , this House decided not to do as the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) proposed and make reference to persons who represent high civil or religious institutions for the purposes of strengthening political arguments .
We therefore ask you to adopt the same measure with regard to the amendments to our resolution tabled by the PPE Group , which make explicit reference to the President of the Italian Republic , Giorgio Napolitano .
Mr Sassoli , you raised the issue of inadmissibility , under Rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure .
As a result , the Presidency , namely President Buzek , has examined this matter in depth , as you can imagine .
He has based his analysis on the following principles .
First of all , the amendments to which you refer , namely Amendments 7 , 8 and 9 , are directly related to the text which they intend to modify .
Secondly , they do not aim to delete or replace the entire text .
Neither do they alter various paragraphs in the text nor can it be claimed that they do not affect all the language versions .
Therefore , in strict application of the provisions of Rule 147 , the President is of the opinion that they fulfil all the relevant admissibility criteria .
Thus , the President has decided that they are admissible .
With respect to the reference to President Napolitano , who is a former , much-loved colleague , there is a precedent which allows us to include the names of people , of politicians , in our texts .
Mr Sassoli , if you wish to proceed with your request , there are , of course , other courses of action open to you , under the Rules of Procedure , such as an oral amendment or , of course , a vote against the above-mentioned amendments .
Mr President , I fully agree with the Presidency 's interpretation regarding the amendments .
I have an oral amendment , therefore we will keep all of the amendments and propose that we simply delete the name and surname of the President of the Italian Republic .
Therefore , in accordance with our standard practice , my proposal is not to include the reference to individuals and to delete ' Giorgio Napolitano ' , leaving the amendments and the option to vote on those amendments .
I feel that this will enable us to convey in some way the sense of respect that we have for the President of the Italian Republic , who clearly said what he said and who was referred to in the debate by all of the speakers from all of the political groups .
Mr President , having noted the Presidency 's decision on the admissibility of these amendments , I would simply ask the authors of these amendments to withdraw them for the sake of political expediency .
I do not believe that failing to mention the name and surname of the President of the Italian Republic will change a great deal , given that it is the President of the Italian Republic who is the subject of these amendments .
I think this is something of a ritual where our work is concerned ; I have never seen MEPs from other countries cite the Queen of England or the President of Germany in our resolutions for what may appear to be exploitative reasons .
Therefore , I would simply ask that Amendments 7 , 8 and 9 to the resolution be withdrawn .

Mr Sassoli , given that you asked this question , and that Mr Mauro has put forward a proposal in response to yours , would you like to take the floor , in order to reply ?
Mr President , we are in favour of deleting the name and surname of our Italian President .
Naturally , we will vote against those amendments .
In that case , we will withdraw the name and surname of the Italian Head of State .
- Before the vote on paragraph 3 :
( PT ) Mr President , my oral amendment is as follows : regrets and deplores the influence wielded by the Portuguese Socialist Government , which has led to the decision to terminate the programme Jornal Nacional on the Portuguese television channel TV1 , and notes that this decision is now under investigation by the Portuguese Regulatory Authority .
Mr President , I would like to remind the House that the European Parliament should not accept resolutions which apply double standards .
This is why I am quoting an example from my country - from Hungary - where the Finance Minister filed criminal proceedings against a journalist because he did not like what he was writing about him .
This is why I think that mentioning the Italian Prime Minister in your text filing lawsuits against Italian and European newspapers and not mentioning this case - I think what happened in Hungary is more serious - applies a double standard .
So I would call on our colleagues on the Left here not to vote against this amendment because that would only demonstrate and make clear that your activity is nothing but a show - a show bullying the Prime Minister of a country where there is no Left .
( Applause )
The Government is not from your family , but you do not accept the same standards when there is a Socialist government .
So the amendment follows along the right lines .
( Applause )
' whereas the European Parliament shall not accept double standards ; whereas , in order to put political pressure on journalists disclosing corruption cases linked to high-ranking officials and ruling party politicians , the Government administration in Hungary has recently introduced steps to launch criminal proceedings against such members of the media ; ' - namely Mr Tamás Pindroch , the journalist from the Magyar Hírlap - ' whereas bearing in mind in particular that criminal proceedings were launched against the journalist who was investigating the scandals of a high-ranking former member of the government and one of the candidates for European Commissioner ; whereas this has resulted in an atmosphere where the press is under political pressure in Hungary ' .
I ask you to support this amendment in order to keep your credibility .
It might make it clear that you are not bullying a particular person whom you do not like and who does not share your political views , but you really are supporting the freedom of the press in Europe .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
That concludes the vote .
( IT ) Mr President , I have taken the floor to inform you of a very serious event , which has nothing to do with this vote and on which I call on the Presidency of Parliament to obtain information as quickly as possible , so that we may take action to defend our prerogatives and immunities .
This morning , officers from the Italian police force forced their way into the private residence of a Member of our delegation , while he was here in Strasbourg .
He therefore had to hurriedly leave Strasbourg to return to his residence on the order of the Italian courts , which ordered the search of an MEP , that is to say of the private residence of an MEP , in clear breach of the fundamental aspects of our prerogatives and immunities .
I am simply asking for Parliament and the Presidency to verify whether the initiative taken by the courts and the Italian police force with regard to Mr Mastella constitutes a disrespectful act and an extreme violation of the terms of our immunity .
The Presidency will address this issue in order to unequivocally defend our privileges and immunity .
Mr President , I hope that a previous unfortunate vote on a Lithuanian law that has yet to come into being has helped many colleagues understand the danger , which has to be prevented , of the European Union turning into the Soviet Union .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote

( ES ) Mr President , I hope that Mr Berlusconi will be prosecuted by the judicial authorities for the crimes he has committed , and that his domination of the press will end .
Certain MEPs , who did not vote in favour of the conviction , should stop turning a blind eye , as what is happening in Italy , with respect to freedom , is a very serious matter .
It affects and concerns all Europeans , whatever the outcome of the vote today .
( LT ) I voted for the resolution drafted by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats together with other groups , because freedom of information , freedom of expression and diversity of opinion must be ensured in all of the Member States of the European Union .
Freedom of information is the foundation of a free democratic society and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , it is laid down that every person has the right to freedom of expression , and this right includes the right to have one 's own convictions and to obtain and distribute information and ideas without the interference of government institutions .
Therefore we , Members of the European Parliament , must support the development of independent media and fair competition at national level .
In order to ensure effective freedom of the press , government institutions must be prepared to defend freedom of expression and to foster its development , which is the most important thing ensuring the fundamental values and rights of the European Union .
( IT ) Mr President , ' what a caterpillar calls the end of the world , the entire world calls a butterfly ' .
That thought by a Chinese philosopher is of relevance in this debate , if we consider that President Obama won the Nobel Peace Prize despite attacking the hostile television coverage he received , and here we are discussing allegations of a lack of freedom that are motivated by one thing only : the culture of hatred against Mr Berlusconi .
The culture of hatred , as demonstrated by that photomontage of the Prime Minister behind bars at the street demonstration on press freedom , where red flags and insults of all kinds prevailed .
The culture of hatred for which this Parliament must assume responsibility if it is to prevent the disgraceful anti-democratic attack of a Jacobin left .
It may be that Europe , which has always struggled to tolerate a strong and decisive Italy , is pretending to be unaware of all this in order to downsize Italy 's power .
The Italian people will not allow this ; they will not allow devious European powers to try to rationalise Italy due to the culture of hatred of those in Italy who merely want to overturn the centre-right 's democratic electoral win .
Of the newspapers with the highest readership figures in Italy , 18 are against or are not aligned with the government , and only five can be ascribed to the centre-right , and we hear all kinds of insults .
That is the truth , and in the interests of democracy , it is time that this House talked about an Italian left that is anti-democratic and addicted to the culture of hatred .
( HU ) Let us send a message to those liars in Hungary who claim that Jobbik has and can have no place in the European Parliament , saying that the votes of the three-member Hungarian Jobbik delegation determined that Italy could not be condemned here today by the unjust , discriminatory forces present .
This is the first thing I wish to say .
Secondly , we did not do this based on political group discipline , but according to the benchmark of justice .
We also took into account , first of all , that they would have tried to use double standards .
Indeed , I complained to Mr Barroso yesterday that in Hungary the socialist-liberal government had violated the freedom of opinion , not through the concentration of press or media , but by shooting people in the eye , putting them in prison , torturing them in prison and conducting a series of sham trials .
Mr Barroso said in response to this that it was an internal matter .
How can this be an internal matter , when the case in Italy is not an internal matter ?
Jobbik will not allow such double standards to be applied in Parliament .
( IT ) Mr President , Europe , too , has noticed that the Italian opposition has become delirious , imagining things that do not exist .
Of course , we cannot rejoice at this because we would have preferred to have come to Parliament and talked about the real problems for which people are asking us for solutions , but we can take comfort in the fact that at least Europe has given a verdict that not even Antonio Di Pietro will be able to question .
In fact , this already happened in 2004 , with the central figure again being Mr Di Pietro , supported by other Members , and now he has sent the others here to do the same thing , but there has been no kind of rejoicing on the part of this movement .
Moreover , the Italian electorate wanted to remove communists from the parliamentary arena , and they no longer sit on these benches .
Freedom of the press in Italy is nothing more than an attempt by publishing groups , magistrates and politicians to delegitimise the Prime Minister and his government .
However , this gives rise to a situation where manhunts exist and where only one man is targeted obsessively , and to a civil war that , fuelled by a certain left-wing element , may result in very serious consequences .
( ET ) There are several ways to destroy media pluralism and feed biased information to the population , and to prevent diversity of opinions .
One possibility is to monopolise the media economically through ownership , but this is not the only one .
Monopoly of information can be achieved , for example , by filling appointments in leading public media bodies with members of a single party - that is , with members of the ruling party - and by blocking other opinions .
There are other examples , and we in this Chamber have heard about them in the course of the discussion on this subject .
Those were probably facts .
All of this gives evidence of the fact that if Europe wants to be democratic , it needs rules , it needs directives in order to create media pluralism .
For this reason , I supported the resolution put forward by ALDE , the socialists and the greens , which makes proposals of exactly this type .
( IT ) Mr President , first of all I wish to correct my first and second votes - I meant to abstain , but I made a mistake because I acted in haste and pressed the wrong button .
My first two votes are abstentions from the whole day 's votes .
The statement I am making is this : there is a grave original sin in the proposal that has led to today 's debate and it is a sin that has already been pointed out by the President of the Italian Republic .
Added to this sin is the opportunism of choosing the Italian Prime Minister 's legal action against certain newspapers - a process that is clearly in full compliance with the rule of law - as a means by which to attack him .
Therefore , we have not voted for the proposal by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , and so on , but nor have we voted for the motion by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) because , although it deserves recognition insofar as it safeguards Italy 's dignity , it totally overlooks the problem of the balance between the media and the other state powers , which exists in Europe and which is a serious problem in Italy too .
This does not just concern the Italian Prime Minister 's conflict of interests in this area ; it concerns other problems too .
At national level , on the other hand , my party , the UDC , is continually challenging the majority on this .
I believe that we , too , must send out a message of support by abstaining .
( IT ) Mr President , this debate has shown us how the Italian left is increasingly far removed from the sentiments shared by our people .
There has not been an uprising among Italians ; there has been a political manoeuvre by a judicial , publishing and political elite to invalidate a verdict legitimately delivered by the people a few months ago .
Ladies and gentlemen , those who have said in this House in the last few days that Italians are concerned about press freedom being threatened by Mr Berlusconi are lying , and they know it .
All honest Italians recognise that in Italy , there are newspapers , radio stations and TV channels that operate freely ; that many of those newspapers have an editorial policy that is opposed to that of the Italian Prime Minister ; that if there is a lack of pluralism it is within the only - and I stress the only , ladies and gentlemen - trade union recognised by Italian journalists , which is shamelessly biased towards the left ; and that programme makers , commentators and comedians whose views conflict with those of the Italian Prime Minister can easily find jobs and work within state-run television channels or within television channels owned by the Italian Prime Minister , without their freedom being threatened .
If Italians do have some worries and fears , then , like those of all Europeans , Mr President , they concern the crisis , illegal immigration , jobs and pensions , but certainly not freedom of information , which has never been under threat and which , on the contrary , is under attack every day from the partisanship of the left .
Mr President , I will quote John Stuart Mill and then I will continue in Swedish .
' If all mankind minus one were of one opinion , mankind would be no more justified in silencing that one person than he , if he had the power , would be justified in silencing mankind . '
( SV ) Italy is part of the European cradle of democracy .
It is therefore regrettable that the Italian media is in the situation it is in today .
Respect for fundamental human rights in all countries in Europe is the heart of EU cooperation .
It is totally wrong to claim , as the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is doing , that this is not the case .
The PPE Group is hiding behind these arguments and in so doing , is serving the cause of Silvio Berlusconi .
Diversity in the media involves many different players having the opportunity to operate without the State interfering in their content .
In order for us to have a vibrant democratic debate in Europe , we need independent media in all Member States .
How this is achieved is not a matter for the EU .
Ensuring the freedom of the press , on the other hand , actually is a matter that should be dealt with at EU level .
I therefore regret the result of today 's vote on the resolution on the freedom of the media in Italy .

( NL ) Mr President , I am not impressed by Mr Berlusconi 's political and moral leadership and , unfortunately , Italy is not top of the list of countries when it comes to freedom of the press .
However , freedom of information and of the press is primarily a matter for Italy itself .
The Italians themselves must take action on this .
Fortunately , they are indeed doing so , for example , by lifting the immunity of the Italian Prime Minister .
In addition , the recent launch of the newspaper Il Fatto Quotidiano shows that there is a critical press in Italy and that it has room to manoeuvre .
Therefore , I call on the Italians themselves to remain vigilant for any attacks on freedom of the press in their country .
I hope it is not necessary for the Brussels bureaucracy to interfere in this .
After all , we do not want ' more Europe ' but rather a Europe that focuses on its core tasks .
Only then can Europe gain the confidence of the electorate .
( FI ) Mr President , freedom of information is a very important issue and , for my part , I voted in favour of it .
We must remember , however , that freedom also entails responsibility , and we in Europe need critical and transparent communications .
We need to ensure that this is also the case in the future .
European history shows what sort of horrors have resulted when the media has been closed off and information has not been allowed to flow freely .
On this matter , I think that we in the European Parliament need to look at the whole of Europe , and not just at an individual Member State .
That is why we need to extend the issue and establish principles that we adhere to , whether it is socialists , liberals or the right who are in power .
The same rules have to apply to everyone and in all cases , we must act to ensure that freedom of information will be preserved .
That is one of the fundamental freedoms that I hope the European Union will also preserve in the years to come .
I also hope that everyone will be treated according to the same standards .
Mr President , the European Union claims to embrace fine principles about freedom and democracy , and they are all restated and reinforced in the Lisbon Treaty , but time and again we turn a blind eye to blatant transgressions taking place in one Member State or another .
We do not point the finger at those who fail to support the principles upon which the European Union is based .
We do not like to rock the boat , but we had the chance today to take a stand and to say that control of the press by the Italian Prime Minister is a clear abuse .
There are problems in other Member States , but in Italy it is at its worst .
Thanks to the votes of the UK Independence Party and the British Conservatives , we lost today by one vote : there was one vote in it .
The Conservatives in Britain say they want to repatriate social and employment policy from the European Union .
They do not say that they also want to prevent the European Union having any role whatsoever in standing up for the basic freedoms that support democracy across Europe .
( NL ) Mr President , I , too , am delighted that the resolution has been voted down , as it is unacceptable for this House to be misused to conduct a political witch-hunt against a specific politician .
It is equally unacceptable for this House to style itself a kind of European Big Brother on this , an inquisitor-general who directly interferes in an issue that is purely and simply a matter for the individual Member States .
Those striking out here at a supposed threat to freedom of information in Italy , a threat that is wholly imaginary , are the first to advocate muzzling laws purely and simply aimed at the political elimination of dissidents .
This left-wing hypocrisy is abhorrent .
Indeed , if there were even half as much freedom of information in Belgium as there is in Italy , we would already have made considerable progress .
Mr President , it reflects no credit on this House that the whole of our agenda today , the whole of our vote , should have been taken up with a matter that ought never to have come to the floor .
It lies beyond the purview of this Parliament and is within the prerogatives of one of our Member States .
I hold no particular brief for Silvio Berlusconi .
I am delighted that the British Conservatives no longer sit with his party in the European People 's Party , but I cannot have been alone in being put off by the Pharisaical self-righteousness that we have heard from the other side during this debate .
They complained about Mr Berlusconi having immunity from prosecution without mentioning that they , as MEPs , have a similar immunity .
They complain about his domination of the media , without mentioning the tens of millions of euros of public money that this Parliament spends on promoting itself .
This resolution , and the fact that it came before us at all today , reflects no credit on anyone - no credit on the Italians , who took to this Chamber an argument that they had lost in their own nation state , and no credit on the rest of us for presuming to get involved .
Such issues ought to be properly determined through the national democratic mechanisms and procedures of the Italian Republic .
Let me repeat my call for the Lisbon Treaty to be put to a vote .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !
Mr President , I think all of us in this Chamber are concerned about media pluralism .
We all want to see greater media pluralism right across the EU .
I have concerns about media pluralism in a number of Member States .
I have concerns about media pluralism in a number of countries outside the EU , but about which the Socialists often never raise this issue , for example , Cuba and North Korea .
The Socialists keep rather quiet about media pluralism in these countries .
But there is a very important principle here .
The Rolling Stones once said ' You can 't always get what you want ' , and when you can 't get what you what , what you do is rely on the democratic process in your country to persuade the people to remove the government you do not support .
You do not decide to go to the European Parliament and try to get democratic decisions overturned there .
This is a principle that the Conservatives hold dear , and this is why I am proud that the European Conservative and Reformist Group played its part in voting down this despicable resolution .
( IT ) Mr President , I believe that this Parliament 's democratic vote has unquestionably demonstrated something that everyone knows to be true , namely that there is freedom of information in Italy .
You see , what the left were trying to do was to look for topics to raise objections about - why ?
Because , as I already said in Brussels , they have so many newspapers in Italy , but they do not know what to write , and so the only thing that they could say - delaying this Parliament 's work for a month in the process - was that they support the notion that there is no freedom of information in Italy .
In their many newspapers , they cannot write that , in Italy , a government has moved the earthquake victims of Aquila out of the tent cities and back into proper houses in the space of four months ; in their newspapers they cannot write that , in three months , a new Berlusconi-led government in Italy has removed the rubbish from the streets of Naples that they had allowed to build up for years ; they cannot say that , according to the OECD , Italy is the country in which there have been the fewest job losses , despite the economic crisis ; they cannot write in their newspapers that , in Italy , no banks have collapsed and no savers have lost their money , despite the economic crisis ; they cannot say it , no one reads them , no one believes them , and they lay the blame on the alleged lack of freedom of information .



Do you know what we say in Italy ?
We say that they are like those who have opened the ring , let the bulls escape and are looking for the horns : they have lost the bulls , the votes , the numbers in Italy ; they tried - I shall finish here , Mr President - to recover them in Europe , where they also had a majority , but where they also lost that majority .
With all due respect to those in Europe who wanted to demonstrate that the opposite is true , democracy has shown once again that freedom of information is alive and well in Italy .
Mr President , I am very pleased with the outcome of today 's resolution because Italy is a Member State of the European Union and to include it individually in a motion before us would be somewhat superfluous .
However , I hope that in the future , we have an opportunity to discuss freedom of information , freedom of the press , and the freedom of individual journalists , within the organs they work for , to express their opinions .
And we should ensure that this applies right across the European Union , as we should not be discussing only one particular country .
Today 's result was a good day for the European Union and a good day for democracy .
( IT ) Mr President , as usual , we find ourselves discussing and voting on issues exclusively of national interest and relevance in the European Parliament , and thus not in the Italian Chamber of Deputies or in the Italian Senate .
Once again , after the immigration-related accusations made against the Italian Government in this House by those who are on the opposition not because of a strange conspiracy that they see themselves as the victims of , but because of the sovereign will of the people , an opportunistic , ridiculous and self-serving attempt has been made to distort the reality of the situation in Italy , with the sole aim being to denigrate the government and our country in the person of our Prime Minister , Mr Berlusconi .
Minority parties have tried to gain the upper hand in the elections with a one-sided publicity campaign , compensating for the lack of ideology and content in their political programmes with a campaign designed to cause systematic damage to our country within Europe .
Those MEPs who have supported the Italian opposition should focus on issues that strictly concern their own countries , without looking at the Italian situation through the deluded and deluding eyes of my fellow countrymen .
They belong to a party that has distinguished itself over the years by having a policy that consists of just one thing : the systematic and targeted abuse of the Italian Prime Minister , the leader of a coalition that was democratically elected by 17 million Italians .
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of the resolution by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament on freedom of information because I believe that press freedom is one of the pillars of the free and democratic society which I support , and whenever it is at risk , as in Italy at present , we must be ready to protect it .
In Italy , freedom of expression and freedom of the press are clearly at serious risk .
The fact that the Prime Minister controls , whether directly or indirectly , a vast empire of publishing houses , daily and weekly newspapers and three television channels is clearly incompatible with the political office occupied by Mr Berlusconi and with the requirements of a democratic state and a member of the EU .
Added to this are the attempts to pressurise and manipulate the public television station .
We should not forget that the current economic crisis has further weakened the media , making them more susceptible to pressure from advertising companies or public institutions .
It is imperative that the European Commission finally issues a proposal for a directive on pluralism and concentration of the media , clarifying the rules to be followed in all Member States on this issue , which is so vital for democracy .
I voted in favour of changing the title of the draft resolution on freedom of information in Italy , following the European Commission 's statement of 8 October 2009 , to delete the word ' Italy ' .
Even if the situation in Italy is extremely worrying due to a continuing conflict of interest between the ownership and / or control of the public or private media and some political powers , I share the opinion of many colleagues that the European Parliament should not point the finger at one or other Member State .
in writing . - Today we voted on a variety of resolutions and amendments .
In essence , there were proposals before us which condemned the running of media services in Germany , Portugal , Hungary and Italy .
As members of the leading party in the Irish Government , we have consistently opposed proposals put forward in the European Parliament which condemn the internal activities of individual governments and individual countries within the European Union .
We have consistently opposed political strategies since we joined the European Union whereby the European Parliament is asked to adjudicate on political divisions and arguments that take place internally within individual countries in the European Union .
That has been our policy stance in the past and that is our policy position now .
We have always been consistent .
We will always uphold the freedom of expression , which is a fundamental right of all citizens in Europe .
The surprising result of this vote will hopefully create scope for a real debate , a debate on the substance of the problems threatening media pluralism in Europe .
We wholeheartedly support such a debate .
We all know that freedom of the media is under pressure in several Member States ( see the most recent Press Freedom Index report , published yesterday by Reporters Without Borders ) .
However , it is essential that we take a fundamental approach to these problems and develop an instrument to improve the situation throughout the EU , so that journalists are able to do their jobs without pressure from private or political stakeholders .
Some Members of this House preferred to take a national tack and settle domestic national accounts , but it is good that that strategy failed , as it would have risked nipping the debate in the bud .
We must now move away from these national games once and for all and invest our energy in structural solutions to a problem that , in the longer term , constitutes a real threat to our rule of law and to democracy in Europe .
in writing . - The notion of there being any form of breach of the right to information in Italy is erroneous .
Firstly , it is not the case that the European Parliament should be used as the forum in which to discuss matters that should remain within the internal competence of the domestic courts and parliaments of Member States .
In addition , it is clear that the recent criticism of Italy was only initiated in an effort to attack the Italian Premier Silvio Berlusconi .
Hence , I have voted against the resolution .
The relationship between political power and journalism is a complex and delicate one , but it is clear to me that no one should have the right to impose his / her own ' truth ' , censuring ideas , persecuting journalists or limiting freedom of expression and information .
The freedom of information and expression is one of the basic principles which underpin the European Union , and it is essential in any democracy .
This also means that we should not trivialise this debate or use it for political gain .
In submitting a resolution on freedom of information in Italy , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament are confusing the European Parliament with the Italian Parliament .
They show that they have double standards when they refuse the proposal to include cases from other countries , such as Germany , Hungary or Portugal , where the unjustifiable cancellation of Jornal Nacional on TV1 was mentioned .
They are not interested in freedom of information in Europe , but only in Italy ...
Intriguingly , on this very day , we learn that Portugal has fallen 14 points in the rankings of press freedom published by Reporters without Borders .
Freedom of the press is essential in a democratic society .
Consequently , I believe that the need for a balanced media market must be supported by all Member States , which must commit themselves , both individually and jointly , to providing European citizens with the opportunity of obtaining the most accurate information possible .
I believe that it is absolutely necessary for all European citizens to exercise actively their rights and obligations so that they are properly informed , but can also understand and criticise the way in which they are informed by the European institutions , as well as by every Member State individually .
As an ex-journalist , I abstained from all the proposals and amendments put to the vote this Wednesday .
I wish to thereby express my strong criticism of the use for party political purposes of a debate as fundamental as freedom of the press , a fundamental right which , in essence , should not , under any circumstances , be the subject of political horse-trading and battles between the left-wing and the right-wing !
Italy is experiencing attacks on the freedom of the press and this is totally unacceptable .
However , have we heard from Bulgarian , Romanian or French journalists as well ?
Have we examined closely the political or economic interference that exists in other countries in the EU ?
How can we be sure that politics in our own countries is not interfering in editorial control and content ?
If we had extended our study with a new report , we could have supported our resolutions so that they hit , in the most appropriate way , their real target : freedom of the press in the European Union !
I think that this fundamental right deserves more investment than what has emerged in these texts - texts which have all missed the point .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution which calls for a directive on media concentration and the protection of media pluralism .
Unfortunately , the EU 's legislative framework on media pluralism and media concentration is still inadequate .
The European Union guarantees freedom of expression and information in Article 11 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
Indeed , Article 11 of the Charter explicitly states that ' the freedom and pluralism of the media shall be respected ' Media Freedom and pluralism are essential to a free , healthy and democratic society .
The increasing concentration of media in the hands of wealthy patrons clearly stifles open debate .
We need be very wary of wealthy business interests controlling the flow of information and pushing a self serving market driven , anti-regulation , and , often , anti-Trade Union agenda .
Equally , and for the same reasons of ensuring impartiality , public media operators should be independent and not subject to interference by governmental authorities .
The European Parliament is once more called upon to give an opinion on a national issue , that is , the threats to freedom of expression in Italy .
The Luxembourg members of the PPE group are of the opinion that , as a matter of principle , the European Parliament should not interfere in a conflict of interest , genuine or not , in a Member State .
Parliament should not demand European legislative measures each time a political or legal issue cannot be resolved satisfactorily in the eyes of all the parties concerned in a given Member State .
This is why we have voted against any attempt to legislate at the European level on a problem of conflicting interests in a specific Member State .
This being the case , we are in favour of a genuine European debate on the press and the problematic mergers that can exist in this area .
This debate should not focus on one specific Member State but address the issue in an objective and consistent way for the whole of the EU , so that the solutions to these problems can be based on existing Community legislation .
The Portuguese Socialist delegation in the European Parliament denounces and condemns the actions of certain Portuguese MEPs from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) who have tried to tarnish the image of Portugal and the Portuguese Prime Minister with the unfounded accusation of interference in the media .
This was carried out as part of a campaign to whitewash the attacks by Silvio Berlusconi 's Italian Government on freedom of expression and the media .
The Socialist delegation cannot but express its regret that certain Portuguese MEPs are dragging this debate , which was instigated by certain parties during the recent electoral campaign , and one to which the Portuguese electorate gave a resounding answer , onto the international stage .
Unlike those behind this campaign , the Socialists are not asking any Portuguese citizens to renounce their nationality , but we do denounce those who attack the good reputation of Portugal so as to fulfil possible commitments to Silvio Berlusconi .
Commissioner Viviane Reding has made an appeal to the Chamber for when it debates this issue , asking us not to use the European institutions to resolve problems that should be resolved at national level , as set out in our Treaties .
I could not agree more , and I deplore the use of such tactics by the European left , particularly the Socialists .
I recall that , during the previous term , the Spanish Socialists sought to manipulate the European Parliament by gaining outside support - which was scarce in their own country - for a disastrous anti-terrorist policy .
This unfortunate pattern of behaviour persists .
As the Chairman of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has complained , these attitudes are rife with bad faith and do nothing to build public confidence in the European institutions .
I wonder whether the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament would be as eager to hold a similar debate about Portugal and its government 's repeated interference in the media , which , within a few months , led to the replacement of the editor-in-chief of a noted newspaper ( O Público ) and the sudden termination of a television news programme ( TV1 ) , which has already been roundly condemned by the regulatory authority for the media .
We voted in favour of the resolution in defence of freedom of information because we believe in defending the freedom of expression and information , and pluralism rather than concentration in the media .
Nevertheless , we disagree with certain aspects of this resolution which verge on interference in the democratic life of the individual countries , and we have major doubts about a possible directive on this matter , especially given the current composition of the European Parliament .
Our struggle for freedom of information and expression , the rights of journalists and other media professionals , for universal access to information and guaranteed pluralism in the media cannot be used to provide cover for partisan schemes whose prime objective is the European Parliament 's interference in countries ' internal affairs , through the use of double standards , depending on which political entity has an interest in a particular issue .
Therefore , we have also abstained from voting on the proposals of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) on issues relating to TV1 in Portugal , although the Portuguese Communist Party is known to be critical of this situation in Portugal .
I regard the debate on the freedom of the press as very important .
The situation in Italy is worrying , but it is the task of this European Parliament to debate the subject in general or for all countries which pose a problem in this area .
To only mention Italy while knowing that problems also exist in other countries , for example , Romania , Bulgaria , Portugal and Hungary , creates a partisan debate which does not contribute to freedom of expression and of the press .
I voted today against the joint resolution proposed by the PPE , the ECR and the EFD on freedom of information in Italy and other Member States , as well as against the amendments tabled by these groups to the joint resolution proposed by the left and the united centre , since they were essentially aimed at stripping the Italian Prime Minister of his responsibilities to comply with the principle of pluralism that is a fundamental value of our democracies .
They also scandalously attacked the President of the Italian Republic , Giorgio Napolitano .
I strongly supported the joint resolution co-signed by my group , because I fundamentally support freedom of expression and am in favour of European legislation on media mergers , despite the opposition of the right , which has already been demonstrated several times .
We should note the fears coming from Italy following the recent pressure exerted by Silvio Berlusconi on the Italian and European newspapers , as well as on the European Commission 's freedom of expression regarding the Italian authorities ' diversion of migrants at sea to Libya , in violation of the principle of non-refoulement .
I voted against the draft resolution because it is harmful and does not comply with European standards .
In the name of certain particular interests , the Left has infringed , among others , the principle of the application of uniform standards to all Member States .
The prevention of a vote on the oral amendment moved by Mr Szájer provides abundant proof that the true objective of the resolution was not to show concern for freedom of the media .
The real objective of the resolution was the desire to attack the Italian Government , and only the Italian Government .
This is because that government is disliked by the Left .
The Left is free to dislike the Italian Government .
I do not see any reason , however , to go along with this attempt at treating the European Parliament as a tool , and with this attempt at involving our Chamber in an ongoing political fight within a Member State .
Freedom of the media is also universal and important when it is under threat from Left-wing governments .
I am very glad that we have rejected the draft , which was only on the order of business so that the Left could attack its political opponents in Italy .
Mr President , freedom of expression and an independent media are the cornerstone of democracy and they have to be valued highly and protected .
Like many others here , I am worried about the developments we have witnessed in some Member States , including Italy and Hungary .
If this resolution had dealt with communication and its problems throughout the EU generally , I would also have warmly supported it .
This time I could not do so .
I support the principle expressed by our group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , that the EU should not interfere in any national affairs for which it has no legal mandate to do so .
I am therefore satisfied with the result of the vote on freedom of information in Italy and that all nine motions for resolutions were rejected in plenary today .
I share my group 's concern that , with its demands for Europe-wide legislation on media pluralism and ownership , Parliament would be doing more to destroy freedom of the press than to establish it .
The Member States of the EU each have their own proper institutions to find a solution to fundamental problems , and this problem of Italy 's must also be solved at national level .
That , however , does not mean that we should deny that the problem exists at all .
I myself voted in line with my group 's position on the joint motion for a resolution by the socialists , liberals and greens , except on one issue .
Our group 's Amendment 10 underestimates , or actually rejects , the problems of freedom of information in Italy , and so I could not support it .
Logic also prevented me from supporting our group 's own motion for a resolution , as it too yielded to the temptation to deal with a situation in just one Member State , and by way of striking a balance , it sought to underrate the problems .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , is it in Italy that the head of state threatens , takes legal action at the slightest criticism and becomes personally involved in a court case to kill a political opponent ?
Is it in Italy that the party in power treats the slightest non-sycophantic information as ' vileness ' , as an ' absolutely unprecedented campaign of violence ' , as a deliberate attempt to ' trip up ' the Head of State ?
Is it in Italy that the press is criticised when it spreads the news of affairs like nepotism benefiting the Head of State 's kid ?
Is it only in Italy that those in power have special links with the executives of the large private television channels and appoint the heads of the public channels ?
Is it in Italy that we change the law on audiovisual advertising in favour of our friends ?
Is it in Italy that a minister is invited onto a major television news programme to confess to having engaged in sex tourism , an act criminally punishable , except in this minister 's case ?
No , this is in France !
It astonishes me that the French socialists , communists and greens in this Chamber do not think it is worth using this debate to denounce the dubious practices of ' sarkozia ' !
in writing . - I voted against the resolution on the freedom of information in Italy and in other EU Member States mainly due to paragraph D mentioning the ' critical situation in Romania and Bulgaria ' , quoting a Freedom House report .
I have carefully read this report , especially the section related to my country , and therefore I can say that this sentence is not true .
The quoted report clearly says that ' The Romanian constitution protects freedom of the press and the government has become increasingly respectful of these rights ' .
Relating to the President of Romania , Mr Traian Băsescu , the report states that ' he has proven to be less controlling and manipulative of the media than his predecessors . '
Another strong argument to prove our freedom of expression is that ' Romania is considered a regional leader in high-speed broadband connections ' .
Through the Internet , all journalists can express themselves freely and get in touch with the public .
I therefore think that the reference to Romania and Bulgaria was used without taking into consideration the entire context .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the resolution , and strongly support calls to prevent media monopolies operating in Europe .
Freedom of information is a hugely important issue , and given the strength of feeling and close vote , I hope it is an issue we will return to .
I was disappointed that after the amendments were rejected , we were unable to pass the final resolution .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted against Resolution RC7 0088 / 2009 tabled by the Right , and in favour of the joint resolution RC7 0090 / 2009 tabled by the remainder of the Groups in the House , because I defend freedom of expression and information , as well as media pluralism , and because I am concerned by the situation in Italy , where there is a conflict of interest between the political , economic and media powers , as well as worrying media concentration , involving both public and privately-owned media .
The situation in Italy constitutes a serious attack on media pluralism and , in this respect , the actions of the right-wing government , led by Mr Berlusconi , have been unacceptable .
I think that it is right to remedy this anomalous situation , which could have serious repercussions for the whole of the European Union , and take steps to guarantee the independence of the public media channels and protect them from any kind of governmental interference .
I wanted my vote to explicitly reflect my disapproval of the Italian authorities placing any pressure on European national newspapers or intimidating them .
Today 's votes on the motions for resolutions are based on a debate which takes some beating in terms of its political one-sidedness .
The United Left has launched an attack on Berlusconi and taken its revenge on him .
It is true that there is a high media concentration in Italy , but the threats to freedom of speech and democracy have been exaggerated .
It is obvious that they will oppose everything which is not on the left .
In the joint motion for a resolution , the Greens , the Social Democrats , the Communists and the Liberals have asked for the EU to be given the authority to monitor pluralism of the media , as it is euphemistically called .
I strongly reject this , because the authority in this area must lie exclusively with the Member States .
I felt that I had to speak out against these party-political attempts to intervene and that I had to vote against the joint motion for a resolution put forward by the left , because for me and for the Freedom Party of Austria , freedom of the media and freedom of speech are among the most important aspects of democracy and they need to be defended .
Freedom of expression is one of the values forming the basis of democracy .
The institutions of the European Union must protect the freedom of expression through their actions , as well as provide , in this regard , a source of inspiration for the whole world .
However , the European Parliament cannot be involved as an arbitrator or lever in Member States ' domestic policy disputes , as is the case with this resolution and also with the resolution concerning the ' situation ' in Lithuania voted on during the previous sitting .
In view of these considerations , I voted against the motion for a resolution .
It is true that there is a significant lack of freedom of information in Italy , particularly because the Italian Prime Minister , Mr Berlusconi , has brought the majority of the television channels directly or indirectly into his sphere of influence as a result of his political position and his media empire .
However , this is not a problem which is specific to Italy .
For example , in France , constitutional reform has led to the establishment of regulations which allow the president of the republic to appoint the heads of the public broadcasting companies ( Groupe France Télévision , France 2-5 ) .
This has caused significant controversy in France .
( In addition , the chairman of the largest privately-owned television channel , TF1 , was Mr Sarkozy 's best man and therefore has a very close relationship with him . )
It is possible that this case , from the perspective of the European Union , is motivated more by party politics and by opposition to Mr Berlusconi , rather than being a genuine debate on the freedom of the media and the freedom of information .
For this reason , I have voted against this motion for a resolution .
Bearing in mind that three European Union Member States ( including Romania ) were classified by the organisation Freedom House as having a ' partially free ' media , I strongly believe that intervention is required at European level to ensure that one of the most important principles of democracy , namely , freedom of the media is respected .
I believe we must call on the Commission to guarantee pluralism in the media by implementing common standards at EU level .
I voted in favour of the European Union resolution and I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate the need to adopt a directive on the freedom of information .
in writing . - The Green / EFA Group , together with the S & D Group , ALDE and GUE , have tabled a common text .
Until the very last moment , all these groups proved their willingness to take on board other political groups in this House , including proposals by the EPP to include concern about press freedom in other Member States .
It turned out that these proposals were not serious attempts to find a consensus .
The price to pay for such an agreement was the deletion of any reference to Italy , as well as our call on the Commission to put forward a Directive on media concentration and pluralism in the EU , which constitute the very essence of our resolution .
The amendments tabled by the EPP only sought to dilute the text and were an attempt to divide the supporters of the text .
That is why the Greens had to vote against even if , at least for some of them , we could have reached an agreement during the negotiations .
That is not a constructive way of working on the part of the EPP .
We regret that the right-wing groups once again refused to ask for a European response to a European problem .
Freedom of the press is an absolute requirement .
A democratic legislative institution like the European Parliament obviously cannot question this benefit .
The protection and defence of freedom of information must be guaranteed in all circumstances .
Nevertheless , the European Parliament does not have a duty to be a supranational court of justice .
Pluralism and freedom of all media must be ensured in the European Union , but it does not behove us as MEPs to judge a country and its leaders on the nature of the relations between the press and the political world .
Interference by the European Parliament in this area is unacceptable .
What is our legitimacy for issuing any opinion whatsoever on the condition of the Italian media ?
This is an internal political debate of a Member State , a debate that must be held and resolved inside the frontiers of the State concerned .
The rejection of the amendment which intended to change the name of this resolution to give it a more Community-orientated feel demonstrates the targeted and purely political nature of this debate .
We must be careful we do not transform our assembly into a court .
We refused to take part in the final vote on a motion for a resolution which , on the pretext of controlling Berlusconi in the Italian media , promotes the more general interests of the plutocracy in order to concentrate the media at national and European level .
It calls for directives to be adopted which will essentially alter the right to information and freedom of expression on internal market and competition matters , by imposing the manipulations of big business on information and adjusting the public service to private-sector criteria and the rules of the free market .
The centre right and centre left supporters of the European one-way street are commending and are eager for outright intervention by the EU in the internal affairs of the EU of the Member States , are supporting the sovereignty of big business in the field of information and are jostling , with unsavoury confrontations and masked intentions , to see who will win the favour of the plutocracy to best serve its interests .
The major media contractors are attempting , in a vulgar manner , to manipulate the conscience of the workers , so as to impose the anti-grassroots policy of capital applied by the centre right and centre left governments .
The people are not deceived by the cockfights in the European Parliament and efforts to elevate it to the post of censor which , moreover , is the basic support framework for the interests of capital .
We support the joint motion for a resolution , but we do not wish to be associated with references to a proposal for a directive by the Commission on concentrations in the media and the protection of pluralism , because we consider that this competence , on such a serious and necessary matter , should be vested in the Member States .
in writing . - By voting in favour of the joint resolution tabled by the S & D , ALDE , Greens and GUE , I feel I have shown my support for freedom of the media in Italy .
As an elected representative , I believe it is my role to support moves to prevent an over-controlling media presence , not only in Italy but across European Member States .
I believe monopolisation of the media to be dangerous and think it is necessary to push for greater freedom in the media across Europe .
European citizens should not be subject to media censorship and selective news coverage .
Mr President , a little over a year ago , I took my seat for the first time on these benches and I was incredibly moved given the deep respect I have for the European institutions and for this Parliament in particular .
I deeply regret the fact that this House is being degraded by being forced to waste time on targeted attacks by political parties that are using and abusing it for their own national and regional interests .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is precisely the events taking place at the lowest , provincial level in Italy that are the greatest demonstration of freedom of the press and of information : think of all the local newspapers , the newspapers of the cities , large and small , that people read every day and see who they talk about !
Think of newspapers such as La Repubblica and of the entire left-wing press .
Today , the European Parliament has once again lost the opportunity to tackle a serious debate on freedom of the media in Europe , which is being held hostage by those who are using this House for the purposes of attacking the Italian Prime Minister .
I voted for this resolution criticising the deteriorating situation of the press in Europe , especially in Italy , and which thereby demanded legislation on media mergers .
Therefore , I find it absolutely scandalous that the European right - amongst them MEPs of the UMP - has spoken out against the protection of freedom of expression , thus aligning themselves with the position of the extreme right and Europhobe MEPs .
Through this vote , the European right has shown that its reflex action was to protect the Italian Prime Minister , Silvio Berlusconi , a member of the PPE and at the head of a media empire that is unprecedented for a political figure , Mr Berlusconi regularly threatens journalists and elected members who oppose his actions .
This is no interference to say that the fact that the Head of the Italian Government controls the transalpine media is an insult to the freedom of the European press .
Surely Italian democracy deserves respect , like all the EU democracies .
However , its representative has not shown himself worthy of it today .
It is in the name of our respect for the Italian people that we have a duty to censure him today .
in writing . - I voted for this joint motion due to my deep concern at the concentration of media ownership in Italy and across Europe .
In Ireland , we have a possible similar situation developing and I hope the European Parliament will explore this issue again .
These questions must be fully explored and a watching brief should be maintained by the Parliament in relation to these developments and trends in media ownership in Ireland and across the EU .
I also note my disappointment that Fianna Fáil TDs voted against this modest motion on media ownership in Italy .
in writing . - The issue voted on refers to issues of regulation of media ownership .
Many people refer to the democratic deficit of the EU ; however ; given the concentration of media ownership throughout Europe , the greatest threat to real democracy are the media barons of the world .
If people think owners do not influence newspapers think again .
Rupert Murdoch owns almost 200 news outlets throughout the world .
Only a minority of those had an anti-war stance on Iraq .
Democracy depends on the public being informed .
Concentration of media ownership means that enhancing the business interests of an elite minority can be disguised as independent editorial .
The public must always be given a choice when it comes to news dissemination .
In Ireland , we have our own problems with media ownership that we must regulate .
This House must support freedom of speech and freedom of media expression .
It is with regret that colleagues on the right differed .
Following the vote on the joint resolution on freedom of information in Italy and in the European Union as a whole , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is very satisfied .
What we needed to do was to set out clearly the role of the European Parliament : we are a legislative assembly and not a tribunal on the internal affairs of the Member States .
It would not have been appropriate for this disguised personal attack to have been supported by Parliament .
I am very pleased with the outcome of the vote .
Although it was very close , it re-establishes the value of the principle of subsidiarity within the European Union and its institutions .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Welcome
I am delighted to inform you that the delegation from the Parliament of South Africa have taken their seats in the distinguished visitors ' gallery .
I would like to extend a warm welcome to the South African delegation which is here to take part in the 14th inter-parliamentary meeting between the European Parliament and the South African Parliament .
The head of the African delegation , Mrs Joanmariae Louise Fubbs , Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Industry of the National Assembly of South Africa , is accompanied by the Chairman of the Committee on International Relations and five other colleagues from the South African Parliament .
As you know , Europe and South Africa share the same values , as far as democracy , human rights and multilateral cooperation is concerned .
The Republic of South Africa is not only a regional power but also a rising global power and a valued partner who will help us to solve the challenges of the global financial and economic crisis .
We firmly believe that we must deepen our dialogue and develop ever closer relations and cooperation .
Our two regions should act together , not only over efforts to find a way out of the current crisis , but also in the creation of a new global order that will be of lasting benefit to us all .
Once again then , Mrs Joanmariae Louise Fubbs and esteemed colleagues from the South African Parliament , I welcome you .
The institutional aspects of the creation of a European external action service - Creation of a European external action service : State of the negotiations with Member States ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on Elmar Brok 's report on the institutional aspects of setting up the European External Action Service - and the declaration of the Council and the Commission on the creation of a European External Action Service .
Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are approaching the time when the Treaty of Lisbon will finally be ratified and we are now beginning to consider how the treaty should be implemented .
We all know that the constitution must be turned into reality , which is just as important as the written words in a constitution or in a primary law , such as the treaty .
Therefore , I would like to remind everyone once again about the original intention , because our current discussions about the External Action Service , the High Representative and the Vice-President of the Commission represent one result of the Constitutional Convention , which was taken over by the intergovernmental conference for the Treaty of Lisbon .
The intention was to make the European Union more efficient by moving towards a situation where Europe speaks to the world with a single voice .
This is why we need this new type of High Representative and Vice-President , who must have a reliable service so that he or she can do justice to this task .
The second principle of the Constitutional Convention was transparency and the third was democracy .
These were the three starting points and it was clear to the parliamentary majority of the Constitutional Convention , which was made up in particular of national members of parliament , that the European Union is always better in areas where it acts according to the community method and is always relatively poor in areas where it acts according to the intergovernmental method .
In line with the spirit of these preparations , the implementation of the treaty must not lead to a strengthening of the intergovernmental approach with the result that the community method , which is democratically controllable , more successful and more transparent , is suppressed .
Therefore , I sometimes do not understand why the Member States are primarily interested in organigrams , but not in how these principles are put into practice .
We are of the opinion that we do not need a new bureaucracy located in the middle between the Council and the Commission which , in the long term , would consist of 6 000 to 8 000 people , would lead a life of its own and would become an independent kingdom outside our control .
Let us assume that this service will be assigned to the Commission as an administrative body and let us recognise that it must have a sui generis character .
It cannot be a normal office of the Commission , because in the area of foreign and security policy , the authority is divided between the Community and the Council .
Therefore , we must ensure that there is a safeguard in place for the Council so that its rights can be expressed in a reasonable way and so that a loyal approach is taken .
It is important to emphasise that the national experts in the Commission must be treated in a different way than was previously the case ; in other words , they must be given equal rights .
It must be made clear that Parliament 's scrutiny and budget rights must in no way be restricted , but instead should be strengthened .
Therefore , I would like to remind the Commission at this point in the debate that we not only have the right of consultation , but also that we parliamentarians have forced the Commission to give its consent .
We will not leave the Commission and the High Representative out of the hearings .
We must ensure that , in the case of changes relating to staff regulations and financial regulations , the European Parliament has the right of codecision in the same way as in the budget procedure .
Therefore , I would like to invite the two institutions to describe in their declarations the way in which the principles of efficiency , transparency and democracy can be combined with one another .
This is not clear to me from the earlier COREPER documents which I had access to .
( Applause )

Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Brok , honourable Members , the development of the European External Action Service is a matter that I know is of great interest to you here in Parliament .
I read with great interest and a strong sense of involvement the report tabled by Mr Brok and approved on Monday in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
Naturally , the Presidency is in complete agreement with what Mr Brok says in his report about the External Action Service in fact being key to our common work to make European foreign policy into an active and more cohesive instrument to enable European policy to be viewed in a better light around the world .
The intention is to bridge the gap that has existed between the Commission 's and the Council 's work so that the Union 's policies are moving in the same direction .
This is necessary in order for us to be able to be as effective as possible .
It is therefore important that we give the External Action Service as good a start as possible .
This is one of the greatest and most important challenges in the Treaty of Lisbon .
There are many pieces of the puzzle that need to fall into place and extensive preparations are therefore underway in the Council .
The objective is for the European Council to agree on a report that the High Representative , once he or she has been appointed , will be able to use as a starting point when he or she tables a proposal on the External Action Service .
During this work , the European Parliament will , of course , be consulted in connection with the tabling of the proposal by the High Representative .
Until this time , the Presidency will ensure that there is a regular dialogue with the European Parliament .
We have had this dialogue up to this point and will continue to do so .
It is important for the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission to have regular contact on these issues , not only between officials , but also at policy level .
Immediately after the Irish referendum - and we are very pleased that the result was positive - the Member States and the Commission began very intensive work to prepare the European External Action Service .
This work is progressing and I am absolutely certain that we will be able to present a number of usable ideas to the European Council next week with regard to the future High Representative .
Since it is the High Representative 's job to table the final proposal , he or she will , of course , be involved in the work as soon as he or she has been appointed .
This is very important in order to enable him or her to have some input into the proposal .
The Presidency will present an agreement on principles covering five major elements , namely , the scope of the External Action Service 's activities , its legal position , its staffing and financing and the EU delegations .
We have not completed this yet and discussions are still ongoing , but I will give you an idea of how far we have progressed hitherto , and in this regard , there appears to be a high level of agreement between the Council and the Commission , and I hope eventually with the European Parliament , too .
With regard to the scope of the European External Action Service 's activities , it is clear that we should establish geographical and thematic ' desk functions ' with collective responsibility for tasks that are currently handled by the Commission and the Council Secretariat .
The Commission will continue to have the main responsibility for matters relating to trade , aid and enlargement , even though it still remains to be established exactly where the dividing line between the Commission and the External Action Service is to go with regard to aid .
The Member States and the Commission also agree that the legal status of the External Action Service should reflect and support the unique role , sui generis , that it has within the EU system .
Whatever legal solution is finally decided upon , it must fulfil the principles of good administration and the prospect of accountability .
Staff will be recruited from the Commission , the Council Secretariat and the Member States .
This is clearly laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
All of these categories of personnel are to be entitled to take office on equal terms .
The EU delegations will be placed under the authority of the High Representative as soon as the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force .
One important matter in the setting up of the European External Action Service is contact with the European Parliament .
Once the High Representative has been appointed , he or she will regularly consult the European Parliament on the principal paths and the important choices of direction within the common foreign and security policy as well as the common security and defence policy .
I am sure that close contact with the European Parliament will also be fostered at the level of the officials .
The European External Action Service should therefore have a facility that is responsible for contact with Parliament .
This is roughly as far as we have got in the discussions .
I cannot go into more detail , as we have not finished our talks yet , but we will do everything we can to continue to keep Parliament informed of the progress made .
Of course , the High Representative has not yet been appointed , so these ideas are still just ideas , that is all .
Ultimately , it will be the High Representative who tables the proposal in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty .
With that , I would like to thank you for the opportunity to speak and I look forward to a constructive debate , during which I will , of course , listen very closely to Parliament 's views and answer any questions you may have to the best of my ability .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , we are , I hope , on the very last lap of the process of bringing the Treaty of Lisbon into force , completing a process which has taken eight years of discussions and negotiations .
After the decisive result of the Irish referendum , we all hope that the Czech ratification can finally follow very soon .
If we achieve this on the 20th anniversary of the reunification of Europe , it will be a great day for Europe and its citizens - not least because we will be able to focus all our attention on the pressing challenges and policy concerns that lie ahead of us .
As we reach the final stages , allow me to congratulate Parliament , and particularly the Constitutional Affairs Committee , with Elmar Brok as rapporteur , on delivering its opinion on the key element of the Lisbon Treaty which is the External European Action Service .
The creation of the EEAS offers the European Union and all its component institutions the chance to achieve what we have long hoped for : to have a common voice in the world and to strengthen the EU 's influence in the world .
Mr Brok 's report recognises this great potential .
Together with this important debate and many other consultations with Parliament representatives , it provides vital input to our work with the Swedish Presidency , but also with the Member States and the Council Secretariat , over the coming months .
I am happy to confirm that the Commission strongly supports Parliament 's overall approach .
I agree with the principles of transparency , democracy and coherence that you have just mentioned .
It is obviously important that all the institutions work together to help the newly-appointed High Representative Vice-President in his or her task of preparing the decision on the creation of an EEAS - a decision which , as you know , requires the consent of the Commission and the consultation of Parliament .
Firstly , let me mention the status of the EEAS .
Indeed it will be sui generis as there is no model to follow .
We are building something new .
It will neither be intergovernmental nor purely based on the Community method , but we must ensure that the new system has a genuinely European approach inspired by and grounded in the strengths of Community policies , as again was mentioned .
The key question for us all is what the EEAS should be able to deliver .
This should be our objective .
By bringing together the various actors in the field of external relations , we can ensure that our relations with the outside world are clear , coherent and driven by a single set of policy goals .
It must carry authority as the core of EU external policy , the place where policy is developed and coordinated .
It must also be seen to be such , both from inside and from outside the European Union , and the EEAS will only be effective if it works well with other institutions and fully respects the interinstitutional balance .
This is why I think it is very important that the EEAS should be set up in a way which allows it to work very closely with the Commission and the Council and to respect the need to be fully accountable to the European Parliament .
For the Parliament , the bringing together of external action responsibilities into a single service will , I believe , mean a step change in Parliament 's capacity to fulfil its role of scrutinising Union policy .
Like the service itself , the way in which Parliament relates to the service and to the High Representative Vice-President will also , in a way , have to be sui generis .
The creation of the EEAS will require a variety of decisions , probably including changes to the Financial Regulation and the Staff Regulations , both of which require a Commission proposal and adoption through codecision .
The High Representative Vice-President needs the authority to manage the service , but the service also needs to serve the EU system as a whole - most obviously , the President of the European Commission and the President of the European Council , as well as the other Commissioners with a role in external relations .
It must be able to offer its assistance , both in Brussels and in third countries , to the European Parliament and to its official delegations which travel abroad .
The close involvement of the Member States in the new service is one of its key innovations .
The COREPER ambassadors are looking at how best to ensure that high-quality Member States ' diplomats can be brought into the service early .
We in the Commission are examining how this may be done pending the modification of the Staff Regulations , and appointment to the service should be through selection procedures based on merit , with appropriate account being taken of the need for a geographic and gender balance .
This very much meets the wishes expressed in the report .
We also believe that all members of the EEAS , whether officials of the EU institutions or Member States ' officials on temporary contracts , should enjoy the same rights .
They will be equal in every sense .
As for the scope of the service , it needs to have a comprehensive overview of the Union 's relations with the rest of the world , so it needs geographical desks as well as horizontal services to cover questions such as CFSP and CSDP , human rights and relations with UN bodies .
The aim is to prevent duplication and to ensure that all those responsible for delivering EU external policy work effectively together , and the Commission will also continue to have services responsible for trade , development policy , aid implementation , humanitarian aid and enlargement .
It will also , of course , continue to drive the external aspects of the Union 's key internal policies , and a central question in the current debate is how to manage the programming of external assistance .
I can assure Parliament that the EU 's development policy , including poverty eradication , will be a central part of the Commission 's external activities .
The High Representative Vice-President and the Commissioner for Development will work extremely closely together on this .
The fact that the new High Representative will also be a Vice-President of the Commission , responsible for coordinating all of the EU 's external action , will help .
The service will also be responsible for the administration of delegations , though the people inside delegations will come , as now , from different services - not just the EEAS , but also the Commission services and maybe other institutions and bodies of the European Union .
From the entry into force of the Treaty , Commission delegations will become EU delegations .
This will give them new responsibilities , but it will not diminish their role in representing the full range of Commission activities .
The EU delegations should be responsible for representation , coordination and negotiation as from the day the Treaty comes into force .
In most places , this procedure will go quite smoothly .
However , in some , where the workload is particularly heavy , it will be necessary to organise a form of burden-sharing , not only with the rotating Presidency but also with other Member States .
The creation of an entirely new external service is a major undertaking .
It will , as your report says , evolve over time .
We will learn together .
Our first aim must be that during the period between the entry into force of the Treaty and the coming into being of the EEAS , the effective delivery of the EU 's external policies is maintained .
We and the Council Secretariat will work together with the High Representative Vice-President to ensure that there is no gap .
But we need to look further .
We will be bringing together officials and diplomats from the different institutions and all the Member States .
As we know , a common foreign policy is not just the sum of 27 national policies .
We need people within the EEAS who , while not losing their distinctive national ties , think European .
We therefore need to create an EU diplomatic culture and an EU esprit de corps .
For this , training is essential .
The report raises the promising idea of the creation of a European diplomatic academy .
In the meantime , we can make good use of the Member States ' diplomatic academies .
I very recently attended the 10th anniversary of the European diplomatic programme , which has anticipated and shown the way .
It is worth remarking that since the 1970s , the Commission has already organised training seminars for more than 5 700 diplomats .
One of the tasks of the EEAS will be to establish a training strategy to ensure that all members , whatever their background , will be equipped to carry out their tasks .
Heads of delegations , in particular , will have to be able not only to carry out their political role , but also to handle all the Commission activities that are such a substantial part of a delegation 's mandate .
Mr Brok 's report also raises the question of whether consular services might be covered by the EEAS .
The Commission is open to this idea even if it may take some time to develop .
These are matters for the future .
For the present , it is a challenge for us to ensure that the EEAS functions well and in the interests of all : the European citizens , the Member States and the European Union .
The Commission supports the creation of the EEAS , wants it to succeed , and will contribute in every way possible to ensure that it does so .
This report shows that Parliament will do the same .
I am sorry to have been a little long , but I think this is such an important matter .
Please forgive me , Mr President .
Commissioner , of course I forgive you , because I fully agree with you . It is a very important topic .

Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , former colleagues from the European Convention , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Elmar Brok , on having clearly defined the position of the European Parliament on the matters associated with the creation of a European External Action Service .
The establishment of such a service is a logical and necessary consequence of the decision to combine two foreign policy roles in one and it is crucial to the development of the European Union 's foreign policy identity .
Integrated diplomacy will mean simplification , more unified and more effective action , as well as greater visibility and recognisability .
The issue of how to install this joint service is not merely a technical one .
It will also impact on the implementation of the political intention which the European Union wishes to achieve by vesting the roles of High Representative and Vice-President of the European Commission in one person .
The development of the new service should spring from the same spirit which brought together these two foreign policy roles and which will result in the unification of the Council 's and the Commission 's foreign policy efforts .
It is important that this service is established with due regard for the roles of , and cooperation between , the Commission , the Council and Parliament , and that it is founded on mutual trust and the will to cooperate .
Although I think that , in the interests of the European Union , the single service should commence operations as soon as possible , I strongly support the recommendation that it be phased in , in order to enable it to adopt the most appropriate and most efficient form .
It seems reasonable to me that the service should form part of the Commission 's administrative structure , both in terms of organisation and budget .
To me , it is absolutely vital that the future service also include staff from national diplomatic services , which would undoubtedly result in a better and more accessible service for European Union citizens and , in particular , for those countries which have only a small number of diplomatic representations .
Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with this debate and with the report that we will approve tomorrow , this House intends to demonstrate its desire to help establish the European External Action Service , even at this preliminary stage , by conducting a constructive dialogue with the Council and with the Commission .
We believe that calling for this interinstitutional dialogue straight away is above all useful and sensible , given that the procedure laid down by the treaty provides for Parliament to give its opinion on the proposal to be presented by the High Representative , and because Parliament 's prerogatives as regards the budget make it crucial that it gives its consent and cooperates .
This is without mentioning the consent of the Commission , as discussed by Mr Brok , which provides further scope for the European Parliament .
However , we also believe that it is our duty to call for this dialogue straight away because the European External Action Service is one of the most important innovations introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Its characteristics are intended to have a considerable bearing on the way in which European governance is reorganised and thus , on the way in which the overall balance of the Union 's institutions is decided on in practice .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament agrees with the position adopted in the Brok report , which it played an active part in drafting .
It is a position that aims to develop the role that the Service can carry out as a bridge between the Community dimension of the Union 's external action and the intergovernmental dimension of the common foreign and security policy , as laid down in Title V of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Naturally , we are aware of the unique nature of the Service , which also reflects that of the role of the High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission , just as we are aware of the fact that the Service must not incorporate all of the services used by the Commission when it implements the numerous aspects of its external action - which does not just boil down to the CFSP - starting with development cooperation .
However , we think it crucial that the Service be able to make the Union 's foreign and security policy more effective and its external action as a whole more consistent .
We also think it crucial that the Service be under the democratic control of Parliament and , to this end , we believe that its inclusion in the administrative structure of the Commission is the option that is most consistent with these objectives , which we really do have at heart .
For this reason , we have voted in favour of the Brok report .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the Commission is quite correct to say that the service ought to combine all the instruments and assets that are required for the conduct of an active foreign policy across the globe .
It is crucial that all the partners in this great project begin to trust each other and the service , including the most populous and imperious states .
It is crucial for the Foreign Office in the UK to send their top people to the service rather than their discards .
I agree fully that , for the sake of parliamentary scrutiny and financial control , the service ought to be attached to the Commission , for administrative and budgetary purposes .
I have to say to the Council that it is not acceptable that the service is placed in the same class as the Economic and Social Committee or the Ombudsman as part of the Financial Regulation .
I think that this Brok report has been a practical preparatory stage of the process of setting up the External Action Service but I also believe that we should pause now before we go further and settle important questions before the High Representative Vice-President is in place .
For Parliament , it is crucial that we have a political interlocutor to negotiate the establishment and future programme of the External Action Service , so , please , states - bring us your people for all these posts .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it has been a great and a pleasant experience to work with several admirable people .
I want to congratulate Mr Brok and also many others who made their contributions .
Now , however , I would like to quote Mr Barroso , who this morning wisely stated : ' Even institutions do not last ; we need enormous political will . '
Actually , institutional creation is not possible without political will .
In order to prevent a situation where we create just one more institution , our political will must always be paramount at the creation of a new establishment .
The goal is a truly European , and in reality , a sui generis organisation which serves the common interests of all Europe 's citizens .
If we want to avoid the duplication or possible waste of resources which is so typical , we must guarantee that the allocation of budgetary resources and the use of these resources takes place under the supervision of the European Parliament .
The report broadly defines the principles reported to the European Supreme Court , which would help us to appoint the high representative and also to put a plan in place .
After this plan , we will all be in a better position , and also we will get the opportunity to put our own political will into operation .
As everyone is aware of the aspirations of the Green party - such as the concept of peace creation , the absolute application of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and , of course , the subject of gender equality - I will not start going over these today , though I promise to address these subjects again in due course .
All the same , in my opinion , the Council would be very wise to consider appointing a female High Representative , as we all know that the President of the Commission is not a woman .
In fact , a woman has never been appointed to lead Europe , and therefore if we are creating a new European institution , it would perhaps be a good idea to consider this aspect .
In dealing with the report , I have drawn attention to certain negative attitudes coming from some areas .
It was suggested that the European Parliament does not have any role to play here and that it is trying simply to give itself more importance with this report .
My response to this attitude is that Parliament is important and we must take this into account .
Our report about the European External Action Service provides a very good opportunity to bring such facts to light .
Therefore , I call on everyone to support the adoption of the report , taking into account the fact that it does not incorporate all the improvements and wishes .
The main thing is to adopt the report now .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I want to express my disappointment that yet again , this Parliament is considering a report that pre-empts the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
I wonder whether we would be having this debate today if the German Constitutional Court were still considering the Treaty .
I suspect not , and I ask why the Czech Republic is treated differently .
As the English author , George Orwell , might have observed , all Member States are equal , but some are more equal than others .
I want to speak against the setting-up of a European diplomatic college .
At a time when all Member States face huge budgetary pressures , the EU should show restraint .
We should act as guardians of the public purse .
Our aim should be to spend public money prudently and endeavour to return money to the Member States and the taxpayers we represent , when we can .
This proposal is uncosted .
It is another example of how some Members of this Chamber are all too eager to make grand gestures with other people 's money .
A European diplomatic college is a waste of money and would become another burden on the taxpayer .
I wish to remind colleagues that any common position on foreign policy would be determined by the Member States represented in the Council , not by the Commission , and certainly not by this Parliament .
Any additional staff the EEAS requires should be seconded from the Member States , and they require no separate training .
The policy that they will represent to the world will be that of the Council of Ministers , not some independent European policy .
A diplomatic college would only become necessary if the EU were to take control of foreign affairs away from the Member States .
I hope that day never comes and I will do my utmost to prevent it .
( The speaker agreed to take a question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , could I ask the speaker if , should he be disappointed and the Treaty actually finds itself in force , he would support the appointment of Mr Chris Patten as the High Representative ?
Mr President , I am very grateful to be asked my opinion , but I rather doubt that it will be my decision .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak today .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left has repeatedly made clear in plenary its fundamental criticism of the direction and nature of the foreign and security policy of the European Union and has been opposed to following this course , including in the Treaty of Lisbon .
This joint debate at the beginning of this parliamentary term covers one of the most important reports of the term .
Unfortunately , although I understand Mr Brok 's motives from the perspective of parliamentary activity , we have to get something underway within a deadline which makes it difficult to weigh up properly and responsibly the dimensions and complex issues resulting from the content of this new structure .
It has become clear during the course of the debate how much unfortunately is still up in the air and therefore within the political poker game between the interests of national power and government and the EU structures .
The GUE / NGL group is opposed to this .
Therefore , we hope that the European Parliament will have the opportunity after the negotiations to consider the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) again in accordance with the expectations expressed this morning in plenary to the Swedish Presidency concerning restraint in the formulation of the negotiating mandate .
We in Parliament should also ensure that the citizens of Europe are as well-informed as possible about the different aspects of the EEAS , particularly in the face of the doubts and criticism relating to the Treaty of Lisbon and the demand for more transparency and democratic codecision in this respect .
The discussions about the establishment of the EEAS have been taking place for months behind closed doors .
My group would like to repeat that the failure to include the European Parliament , the civil society organisations that have so far been affected , or even the national parliaments , gives rise to serious questions .
This is particularly the case because a lively debate and open and transparent discussions about the institutional structures are of great importance for their legitimacy in future and for their public accountability .
As a result , I welcome Mr Brok 's approach in which he attempts , by means of his report , to achieve parliamentary codecision for the European Parliament at the very least .
Some of our requests aim to produce the same results .
We oppose all efforts - and I say this unequivocally and categorically - to include political-military structures in the EEAS , regardless of whether this happens now or in the future , as has been recently proposed by France , among others , in the Council .
The possible combination of military planning , secret service structures and general diplomatic and political tasks is not acceptable from our point of view .
Mr President , yesterday , I was asked to give three reasons why people should vote against this report .
That is pretty easy : democracy , democracy and democracy .
First of all , it is farcical that any parliament would want to adopt a report based on a treaty , the fate of which is still completely uncertain .
No one knows what the future of the Treaty of Lisbon is , and anyone with even the smallest modicum of respect for democratic structures - the smallest modicum of respect for Member States such as the Czech Republic - would hold back on this project until there was clarity about the future of the treaty .
Secondly , this report ( and the whole foreign affairs service that is now being constructed ) represents a complete undermining and disavowal of and failure to appreciate the sovereign right of the Member States to conduct their own foreign policies .
It is also the reason why this report seeks to make the Commission responsible for everything .
The Commission , of course , particularly in its role as a ' civil servant ' , is very obviously not popularly elected .
In other words , if the people want a different foreign policy , there is no chance on earth of changing the policy conducted as it is only the Council , meaning the governments , that people have the ability to change - not the Commission .
That means , thirdly , that it is a democratic farce that this Parliament wants to hand more power , some absolutely crucial core areas within the sovereign State , to the Commission , which has no popular mandate .
This Parliament is based solely on kratos - purely on power .
It is never ever based on demos .
Our focus should instead be on demos - we should be focused on the people and not on power .
We must , therefore , have more democracy .
For that reason , this report must be rejected .
Mr President , this report tries to put our minds at rest about the service but , to my mind , it does exactly the opposite .
It claims , on the one hand , that the service complements Member State diplomacy and does not call it into question .
However , the rest of the report , in my view , flatly contradicts that assurance .
Paragraph 4 says that the service - that means its powers - cannot be circumscribed or predetermined in advance .
Paragraph 8 ( d ) suggests that delegations , which are part of the service , might take over consular services from Member States .
It is clear that this service is intended - not in the short term but in the long term - to take over and replace diplomatic representation of Member States , perhaps in the end , even the vetoes of the United Kingdom and France on the UN Security Council .
When you hear an EU body giving an assurance that they will not do such and such , you have a pretty good clue as to what they are up to .
With apologies to Mr Shakespeare , methinks the report doth protest too much .
Who or what will actually exercise any control over this body ?
Not , I think , the Council .
That has to act unanimously .
If it cannot decide , the service will simply be carrying on with its own agenda .
What about the Parliament ?
No , that is limited to consultation .
This body will conduct foreign policy over the heads of Member States with no effective control by Member States or the European Parliament .
National governments will be reduced to the status of a parish council .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I all I feel it is my duty to thank the rapporteur , who has done a marvellous job , and , as chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , I must also thank all of the members of the committee and of both committees - the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Development - who delivered the opinion , for their very swift work .
We have , in fact , tried to prepare a document - which I hope will be approved - that can be presented to the Council of 29 and 30 October .
We are well aware that this report is not a definitive report .
It is intended merely to point out a few courses of action , a path of some kind to follow , to the Council and thus to the High Representative who will be appointed .
It will be the High Representative 's job to devise his own organisational plan which , in turn , will have to be examined by us .
Therefore , it is only guidelines that are being submitted to our Parliament .
We also know that the success of this operation regarding the External Action Service is linked to the role of the High Representative , who will have to be able to organise and manage everyone .
Through him , we want a consistent and uniform foreign policy .
We are well aware that there are problems , that much has already been said , but problems are there to be solved .
The important thing is that the compass , the information , the scope is clear .
The Brok report provides some interesting proposals in this regard - I have to be brief because my speaking time is up - but , in any case , they include the integration of the Service into the administrative structure of the Commission , the decision to further develop the Community model and the proposal , which is , moreover , laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon , that the staff must be taken from the secretariats of the Commission and the Council and from the delegations of the Commission itself .
There are two innovations that I believe are worth mentioning : Union embassies , headed by officials from the European External Action Service , which would also include the Commission delegations present in third countries and the Council liaison offices , with the possible secondment of experts from the Directorates-General ; and the foundations that have been laid for the establishment of a European diplomatic college , which is an interesting idea .
My speaking time has run out .
I only hope that this report really is adopted , and adopted by a large majority .
Mr President , as we all know , the European External Action Service is one of the major innovations proposed by the Lisbon Treaty .
Therefore , we have to be very careful and responsible during its setting-up .
We all agree that it should start functioning as soon as the Lisbon Treaty is in force .
The Commission and the Council are already working on the guidelines which they are expected to present to the European Council meeting at the end of this month .
It is therefore essential that the European Parliament influences this process .
Today 's debate and the resulting resolution are of the utmost importance because we have to send a very clear message now as proof of political consensus on the setting-up of the service to the Council and to the European Commission .
I am very proud of my colleague 's work , which is the result of cross-party deliberations in this House .
We insist that the Community model in the Union 's external relations is preserved .
The Members are keen to have the service attached to the European Commission and part of the overall community budget .
The EEAS should form part of the Commission administratively and budget-wise , and should formally be a part of the Commission as a sui generis body attached to the Commission structure .
The budgetary commission is extremely important .
It is a lever with which the EP can exercise its power .
In this way , Parliament should , and will , exercise budgetary control and democratic scrutiny over it .
There are many issues to cover , for example , the clear division of tasks within the EEAS and the responsible European Commission units - taking into consideration that we do not know yet the structure of the future Commission - and the relation between the High Representatives and the different Union representatives abroad , but this resolution will be the first position of the European Parliament from which the further steps will follow .
We should not forget about the human factor either .
The High Representative should be a person of merit , expertise and excellence , supported by the Commission , Council and national diplomatic services .
I am convinced the institutional set-up of the EEAS must include gender architecture that duly reflects the commitments made by the Union with regard to gender mainstreaming .
Last but not least , as a person who has been working for women 's equal political representation over the last 15 years , I would be glad if this person were a woman .
( NL ) Mr President , some fellow Members have seen fit to use their speeches to try to give us lessons in democracy .
May I point out , therefore , that in both the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , whose opinion I drafted , we made sure that the discussion and vote on our respective texts were not held until the outcome of the Irish referendum had become known .
We did so out of respect for the verdict the Irish people were to give .
They did say ' yes ' , fortunately , but they could have said ' no ' .
We wanted to take account of this , and also of next week 's European Council meeting .
Hence , we had to accomplish our discussion and texts in an extremely short period of time .
The same fellow Members who seek to give lessons in democracy have , of course , complained about this , too .
I digress .
Today , we are experiencing a particularly important point in time .
Our texts expressing our opinion on what the future European External Action Service should look like herald a new era for the European Union .
Those of us who have been following the evolution of the Union for years and remember the first modest steps on foreign policy , let alone security and defence policy , of the Treaties - first Maastricht , then Amsterdam - may have thought , as I did at the time , that we would never see this day , that we would never manage to lay down the foundations of a common European diplomacy .
Those of us who have watched attentively as the ideas on this have evolved will also remember that , just a few months ago , some of our national diplomatic services were absolutely unwilling to accept a kind of instant ' big bang ' , with all the current delegations brought under the authority of the future High Representative from the very first day .
I am absolutely delighted about this .
My own political and governmental responsibilities in my previous political incarnations have taught me that none of this will be simple .
Yet we are experiencing an important point in time , and I hope that this report will be adopted by a very large majority .

( DE ) Mr President , our group supports the basic structure proposed by Mr Brok in his report and , in particular , the retention of the controlling rights of the European Parliament and the retention of the Community tasks as Community tasks .
However , in order to ensure that our common External Action Service is a great success and not just an appendage of the Commission or the Council , we must now discuss its content and its functions .
The EU needs a new , integrated foreign policy which will allow it to confront the world 's problems effectively .
The External Action Service must enable the EU to implement comprehensive , integrated political strategies and campaigns .
We need this service now , for example , during the discussions on climate change in Copenhagen .
We must do away with traditional diplomacy , otherwise this service will bring very little added value .
I would therefore like to promote four areas which , in our opinion , will help the service to create a new foreign policy .
Firstly , we want the new service to have a directorate for peacebuilding and crisis management .
We have the corresponding financial instruments and missions , but until now , we have only had small and fragmented organisational units .
Secondly , we want the staff to be given comprehensive education and training .
Simply having attended a diplomacy college is not enough .
In addition , we want to ensure that those members of staff who wear uniforms have not merely been educated at the defence college .
All of them must complete at least part of their education together and this is why we are calling for a European External Action Academy .
Thirdly , we do not want a dual structure for the Council President within the Council Secretariat .
Therefore , the External Action Service should also be supported by this organisation .
As far as appointments to the top jobs are concerned , my colleague , Mr Tarand , has already mentioned that we firmly believe that it is time that a woman is appointed .
Mr President , as the Union seeks a broader role in international affairs , it arguably should have the tools to project our common values throughout the world , providing , of course , there is unanimity in all 27 Member States .
But how will that role develop ?
Where will its limits be ?
We in the ECR Group believe , as an anti-federalist body , that foreign policy must ultimately remain the preserve of our individual Member States .
It is therefore of concern to us that the Lisbon Treaty , if it becomes law , appears to set in train a series of developments that could end up undermining that prerogative .
The proposed European External Action Service must complement and not compete with or undermine Member States ' bilateral diplomatic activity and must draw its authority mainly from the Council and not from the Commission .
Parliament must exercise its rights to scrutinise the EEAS and shape its budget .
Given that there is much talk about EU embassies in the Brok report , I would like the Commission once again to repeat the assurances it gave me a year ago that EEAS missions or delegations will not be called embassies .
To call these missions embassies would compound the fear that the EU is seeking all the trappings of a sovereign state .
( ES ) Mr President , my group - the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left - is going to vote against this report , primarily because we do not support the Treaty of Lisbon .
For us , the Treaty of Lisbon does not reflect the spirit of the European project envisaged by and for the citizens .
In fact , quite the opposite is the case .
It provides a model in crisis , a model which prevents public intervention in the economy .
There is a desire to move forward at two different speeds : we are hurrying to ensure that Europe has a single voice abroad , but the European Union does not have the power to call the economy back to life using its own instruments , as it has no treasury or any active industrial policies .
Neither does it have the capacity to intervene in the price of money nor control of the European Central Bank .
Therefore , we do not share this philosophy .
If the Treaty of Lisbon is adopted , with the Commission 's approval and following parliamentary consultations , five thousand officials will be employed at the European External Action Service , following a decision of the Council , based on a proposal by the future Vice-President .
We do not agree with this structure because it is also being given the powers to solve all kinds of military crises .
We believe that there is a lack of control .
In our opinion , this control should fulfil the highest democratic requirements , as is the case in each Member State .
Therefore , we think that this philosophy does not follow in the spirit of the kind of Europe that our group want to build , namely a Europe that is , in fact , capable of intervening in matters that fundamentally affect us , such as the current recession and unemployment rates that are currently the highest they have been since the 1930s .
That is why , ladies and gentlemen , we are going to vote against this report .
Mr President , this Brok report is positive proof of the emergence of a single European Union superstate .
The wicked Lisbon constitution already forces an unelected President and Foreign Minister on us all .
Now this report adds a new European diplomatic service , the so-called European External Action Service , but embassies represent national interests .
So what national interests will these new EU diplomats and embassies represent ?
They will not be those of our nation states , our trade or our companies .
They will be those of the European Commission .
All other national embassies will become redundant .
Already , British embassies around the world are selling off properties .
This master plan for an EU superstate is built on foundations of deceit , dishonesty and denial , but federalists are not creating a new United States of America .
They are creating a new Yugoslavia .
By forcing very different nations , cultures and economies together under a rigid , undemocratic Soviet-style bureaucracy , you are entering very dangerous waters indeed .
I worked for the British Government on the Northern Ireland peace process .
I saw what happened when democracy fails .
It is not pretty .
Now I see democracy failing here in Europe .
You profess to love peace but , by railroading through Lisbon and by this power grab of our embassies , you are putting Europe firmly back on the road towards war once again .
( DE ) Mr President , the Council 's actions are not transparent .
The decisions are made de facto in the numerous , largely non-transparent working groups and in COREPER .
In 2008 , only 1 % of the agenda items in the Council of Foreign Ministers were debated publicly .
Against precisely this background , the European Security and Defence Policy ( ESDP ) has been developed since the end of the 1990s without any consultation or democratic control .
Against precisely this background , the European External Action Service will also be established .
My response is a clear ' No ' .
This must not happen !
We need genuine democratic parliamentary control and we also need genuine transparency .
I am also rather surprised that you in particular , Mr Brok , are now suddenly in favour of parliamentary control .
Is it not the case that specifically in the area of the ESDP , the Treaty of Lisbon will remove this parliamentary control ?
However , you are in favour of this treaty .
On the subject of budgetary control , it is quite clear from the discharge of the Council how your group is acting .
Is it not the case that in the next few weeks , your group will vote in favour of the discharge of the Council in the Committee on Budgetary Control , although the Council has not given adequate responses ?
It is unfortunate that although your draft has very good beginnings , it is in fact hypocritical , it is not credible and it is ultimately an admission of the failings of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Thank you very much Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , I have to start with the footnotes .
As much as I really admire the rhetorical flair of our friends from UKIP , I find it quite interesting as someone coming from Central Europe that you are so ready to share your experience of living under the Titoist regime in Yugoslavia or under the Soviet regime .
Really interesting .
First of all , let me congratulate Elmar Brok for preparing a report which so magnificently represents the mainstream , and let me repeat that , the mainstream of this House .
With the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty and the new Service , we will increase our ability to speak with one voice .
We agree that the new Service should be as close to the Commission as possible , because only the Community method guarantees the coherence of our actions and , most importantly , the points of view of us all will be taken into account to the same degree .
For the new service to be credible it has to be endowed with as much democratic legitimacy as possible .
Therefore , all the efforts to take care of this House 's powers of scrutiny have to be saluted .
Most importantly we have to do everything to ensure that the new service is of the best quality and that it is trusted by everyone .
We have to do our utmost so that the Commission , the Council and 27 Member States send their best people to work in the EEAS .
That is why they have to enjoy the same status .
Work in the Service should be treated as an integral part of their career at home .
The people working for the service have to be chosen on merit , but also according to geographic balance so as to counteract the unfounded fears that the Service could be hijacked by anyone .
The Lisbon Treaty is important and different from all the other treaties because so much depends on its implementation .
I hope that the insights of this House will help the Council and the Commission to actually implement this Treaty in such a way that we will increase our ability to speak with one voice .
Mr President , I want to welcome the Brok report and urge rapid progress on establishing the EEAS as a democratically accountable service .
I have great hopes that this service can lead to greater coherence between our policy objectives and decisions , particularly as they impact globally on sustainable development , on human rights , and on the eradication of poverty .
We have failed so far to ensure that our policies are coherent .
Often our trade policies conflict directly with our development cooperation policy .
I also want to warn against any thoughts about subsuming development policy as part of our foreign policy .
We need an autonomous development service answerable to an autonomous Commissioner for Development and Humanitarian Aid .
To ensure coherence , we need benchmarking , screening and impact assessment for proposed decisions as they impact on development policy objectives .

( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate Mr Brok and thank him for the excellent report - I would even call it a remarkable report - that he has presented to us .
The creation of this new external service is an opportunity that should not be missed .
Parliament must have its say , not only on the budget , but also on the service 's overall structure .
As has been said , this service will have to have internal operating rules that are one of a kind .
We cannot do without such operating rules , which are in accordance with the spirit of the Treaty . To act otherwise would be to arouse the distrust of certain Member States .
I am thinking in particular of the smallest and newest Member States .
We must also focus on the core of the external service 's mandate , set the strategy and the political priorities , and create consistency within external action .
It is vital not to fall into the trap of duplication by the external service and the Commission delegations , but instead to develop a specific service generating added value for joint external action .
The external service must be wholly in step with the Commission .
It must not drift off course to become or inspire intergovernmental action .
I would also like to add that the profile of the High Representative / Vice-President is clearly crucial for the added value of the service .
Finally , Mr President , while we both agree that the sphere of development has its own aim , at the same time , it is an external policy instrument .
To deny that would be naive .
One solution could be to keep programming as a responsibility of the Commissioner for Development , in agreement with the High Representative .
The final point is that this debate cannot be separated from the debate on the budget for the European Development Fund .
( NL ) Mr President , now that the Irish referendum is behind us , the European Parliament is again venturing to show what it stands for , and is doing so with great drive and enthusiasm .
This report paints a Utopian panorama of an external service that is to implement the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) , which is not yet functional .
One striking feature of this report is its heroic attempt to urge the Commission to throw its full institutional weight into the balance .
What is the reason for this position ?
I think that many of my fellow Members wish to use the external service as a Trojan horse to gain control of the CFSP via the Commission .
It is a disgrace that the European Parliament and the other institutions still have no idea of exactly how this service is supposed to work .
The gradual process discussed in paragraph 4 is a risky institutional venture , pure and simple , and will surely end in institutional tears , if you will excuse the pun .
Mr President , I too would like to add my voice to those who support the Brok report and also to express my fascination for the paranoia that has come from that side of the House .
The External Action Service is , without any doubt , a potentially major element in the promotion of coherence in the EU 's relations with the rest of the world .
These relations are often wide-ranging , complex and have a significant impact on the world outside Europe .
It is vital , therefore , that these activities are thoroughly coordinated in order to ensure that EU policies have the impact that they were designed to have .
Indeed , once the External Action Service is up and running , it will affect the EU 's stance , for example , on the common foreign and security policy , as has already been noted , the promotion of the democracy agenda , human rights , channelling of aid , and dealing with the multi-faceted issues of development .
The question of coherence is central in this context .
If different parts of the European Union place different emphases on policy issues , the impact will be muted and will very likely have unintended consequences .
Consistency is pivotal in this connection .
The External Action Service will , in the light of this , have a considerable responsibility in working together with all the other institutions of the European Union that have an external dimension .
Clearly , the effectiveness of the Service will necessarily structure the work of the High Representative but , in the medium term , its work will resonate throughout all the institutions of the European Union .
It is a two-way process .
When seen from this perspective , it is essential that the Service should be accountable , obviously to the High Representative but also , more broadly , to Parliament itself .
The Service will , at the end of the day , represent the European Union in all its aspects , hence the emphasis on accountability , transparency and coherence .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one Europe , one voice !
We have taken another important step towards a common foreign policy for the Member States .
The decisive factor involves ensuring that the position of the High Representative is held by a strong , independent , competent person and that he or she has the necessary scope and freedom to develop and structure the service in accordance with the requirements and , of course , in accordance with the principles of the European Union , which include the observance of fundamental human rights .
That is sui generis .
It is essential that this is done transparently , that Parliament plays an appropriate role and that budgetary rights and budgetary control remain with the budgetary authority .
However , it is also essential that the national governments once and for all give their own interests a lower priority and offer their full support to this office and to the tasks of the service and do not constantly stick their oar in whenever they feel like it , which is what we are unfortunately used to .
It must also be made clear , and this is very important to us , that development policy should remain independent , because these things must not be combined arbitrarily .
Let us see the new office and the portfolio which we have fought for over a number of years as an opportunity for the future and let us not talk it down and pull it to pieces right from the beginning .
One Europe , one voice !
That is our task and that is what we must focus on : no more and no less .
( DE ) Mr President , what do we want to achieve with the European diplomatic service ?
We want to set the political priorities of the European Union for the 21st century .
Many countries and many people outside Europe expect Europe to play a strong role in peacekeeping and conflict prevention and , in areas where this has not worked , to restore peace and to help reconstruct the country in question .
For this reason , it makes sense to establish a peacebuilding department .
However , in the negotiations , some of the representatives of the Member States in the Council have put their foot heavily on the brakes , including the representatives of Member States which are generally regarded as pro-European .
At best they have one foot on the accelerator and one on the brakes .
This generates a lot of heat , but not much movement .
We therefore hope that the negotiations for a really strong European External Action Service ( EEAS ) controlled by the European Parliament are successful .
The citizens of Europe want Europe to speak with one voice .
People outside Europe expect this .
The EEAS will not be able to achieve this on its own . However , it represents a step in the right direction .
Let us make sure that it works .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that , given the importance of the subject under discussion , Parliament should have had more time to explain its position to the Council .
Instead , the committee process lasted only a few days and we are now holding a debate in Parliament two days after the adoption of the provision within the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
The proposal to establish the European diplomatic service is a leap forward when compared with what is strictly provided for by the treaties .
Furthermore , the European External Action Service , as it is described by the report , appears difficult to integrate with the Member States ' foreign affairs ministries .
What will happen to these ministries ?
Will they dissolve ?
That seems unlikely .
Moreover , how will the powers of these embassies , with regard to visas , for instance , fit in with the work already carried out by the national embassies ?
Who will the so-called ambassadors of the European Union be appointed by ?
By the Commission , as seems likely , or will the Member States be able to appoint their own ?
Moreover , the idea of calling the future representatives ' ambassadors ' is provocative , given that the European Constitution , which provided for a European foreign affairs minister , has not been adopted .
We cannot pretend that the European Constitution was not rejected by the French and the Dutch .
( PL ) Mr President , our European Union project is , of course , unique , and we have stressed this many times .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon which , I hope , will be accomplished effectively , will also create new institutions .
One result of these moves will be the establishment of the European External Action Service , which is primarily intended to ensure that external relations are both coherent and effective .
As Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner has said , it will be a sui generis entity but , at the same time , it is worth recalling Mr Brok 's statement that the fundamental principles which should apply in the creation of this service , alongside effectiveness , are transparency and a democratic mandate .
Effectiveness should be ensured by consensus on establishment of the European External Action Service , both among the institutions , and here I am pleased by the declarations of the Council and the Commission , but also by the inclusion of matters related to development aid , humanitarian aid , enlargement and international trade .
The EU also needs a strong voice in matters which concern energy policy and solidarity , for example .
Regarding transparency , I expect a balance to be achieved when establishing the European External Action Service .
I have in mind not only a balance between institutions , but also a geographical balance when making appointments to the European External Action Service .
This is something of vital importance that I cannot emphasise enough .
The current representation does not meet this requirement if , for example , we consider Directorate-General RELEX or the Commission Delegations outside the EU .
The service should be established pursuant to democratic standards , and I expect Parliament to play a significant role here , both in the establishment process and later in the interviewing of candidates for heads of delegations , together with the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
As concerns training personnel , it is proposed to create a European diplomatic college .
This is an important venture but , at the same time , I would like to take this opportunity of stressing that there are , in fact , national centres , and also numerous European colleges with experience in training personnel .
We ought to draw on this experience .
I have in mind Bruges , Natolin , Florence and Maastricht .
( FR ) Mr President , I would also like to welcome the establishment of the European External Action Service as a step in the right direction , representing progress in making Europe more consistent and effective on the international stage .
I also believe creating this service will add a significant political dimension to the European project and give Europe a more political profile .
I would also like to underline the need for consistency within the action taken by the service with regard to administrative and budget responsibilities and on this point , of course , relations with the Commission , on the one hand , and with Parliament , on the other , are crucial .
As far as Parliament is concerned , I also believe that this service must cooperate directly and very closely with Parliament in order to keep MEPs constantly informed of its activities , as well as appointments to the most important posts .
In addition , the High Representative will , naturally , be a well-known figure , but I believe that the other members of the service should also be people who inspire a high level of confidence .
I would also like to emphasise the issue of recruitment .
As some of my fellow Members have said , I think that geographical representativeness is important , and a balance must be found for the small countries and for the new Member States .
Finally , I would like to mention briefly the importance of this common European culture which , of course , is being created in different schools and different institutions , but I believe that a consistent initiative on the subject , creating a European-level structure , would be a good idea .
( PT ) Mr President , it is essential that the primary objective in creating the European External Action Service is to consolidate the efforts of the European Institutions , ensuring the creation of an efficient service capable of articulating , formulating and implementing a European response to the present international challenges .
It should also be more than the sum of its parts ; it should constitute added value to the existing efforts by the Member States and the European Union .
Against this backdrop , I believe it is essential that what makes the EU special - in other words , the Community method - should take centre stage in this new reality .
That is why I fully support the Brok Report , which advocates and safeguards close collaboration between the Commission and the future service .
On this note , I would like to point out two things .
Firstly , there needs to be close coordination between the President of the Commission and the High Representative , who will also be a Vice-President of the Commission , in order to ensure that it is effective and works smoothly .
Secondly , there is the need for an alliance between Parliament and the Commission in order to combat the expected intergovernmental drift , which may compromise the effective running of the service .
Parliament must therefore be vigilant and make sure that the European External Action Service will be a centre of excellence , representing the best expertise in foreign policy .
Mr Preda , in your speech , you used the phrase ' a common European culture ' .
Do you regard the admission of Turkey into the European Union as being fully compatible with the common European culture to which you alluded ?
( RO ) I talked in my speech about a common culture from a diplomatic perspective , as part of a political culture .
As far as I am concerned , I believe that , in this sense , Turkey is also part of this European political culture which includes a totally respectable tradition of diplomacy .
Thank you for your question .
This is what I should have addressed first .
( DE ) Mr President , as a member of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I am concerned about the way in which the Commission and the Council are excluding the European Parliament when it comes to the question of the External Action Service .
We have no documents and we are the only ones who have no documents , who have not been involved and who are forced to accept what has been negotiated .
This is outrageous !
What I have seen during this debate and following the statements by the two representatives is that the Community instruments are being dismantled .
We will also see an opt-out from the instruments which involve parliamentary rights , such as the Budget Regulation .
We in the European Parliament must pay attention .
The answer to the question of ' Who decides what ? ' has not become clear to me in the course of the debate .
I believe that this is an open question .
I also believe that if our budgetary and control rights and our codecision on this issue are not respected , it will be very difficult for us to work together with the Council and the Commission over the next few years .
Mr President , I want to support a strong External Action Service with geographic desks covering the whole world , responsibility for the European Security and Defence Policy , and combining Council and Commission functions on planning , conflict prevention and crisis management .
But I do want to agree with Mrs Malmström that this is not prejudiced by retaining responsibility for trade development and enlargement in the Commission , which is why I have collaborated with my colleague , Mr Gualtieri , on an amendment to paragraph 6 ( c ) supporting bringing together EU development policy programming and implementation .
The critics should understand that there are problems in the existing system .
A High Representative with no direct responsibility to us in Parliament , duplication of functions between Council and Commission , splits between EU Special Representative and Commission heads of delegation , human rights sometimes ignored for trade and geopolitical interests , etc .
This major reform of the Lisbon Treaty has to be made to work and will do so .
Finally , to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , I know she will be containing her excitement following the intervention of the UK Independence Party and she understands that British Embassies are not up for sale .
( SL ) Mr President , what we are doing today is giving the green light to the European Union to press on with a major achievement in its efforts to create a greater and more important role for itself in global foreign politics .
I should like to congratulate Mr Brok on a detailed and very substantive report .
I believe that it is vital that the new service should complement the existing services of the European Union , which will continue to be offered .
It is also important that European Union representations around the world are not duplicated or triplicated .
It seems to me that there is a real risk of that happening .
Finally , I should like to add that we should emphasise the role of the consular services of such new representations .
Small countries do not have much money and do not have representations all over Europe and all over the world , which is why they have high hopes of this service .
We , in Slovenia , have had a good experience of working in collaboration with Austrian diplomats .
Commissioner , we would like that cooperation to continue to act as a kind of template .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , I would like to bring to your attention the fact that the European Union is committed in everything it does to compliance with human rights and , obviously , these also include the rights of women , as already mentioned here .
I myself believe that the common European External Action Service will definitely improve our opportunities to take human rights into account in all our work , though this will not happen by itself .
I would like to hear you describe how you intend to ensure that human rights and aspirations for equality are mainstreamed into this forthcoming External Action Service .
I will give you an example : not all EU delegations at present comply with the seven human rights guidelines we have agreed on together .
Now we have the opportunity , through training programmes , for example , to raise the profile of these important matters .
Mr Brok 's report also mentions training .
I would therefore be interested in hearing your views on these matters .
( HU ) Mr President , the question that is being asked here at the moment , and what we are actually talking about , is whether , while progressing along the path determined by the Treaty of Lisbon , there will be a superstate initiative or 27 countries will have close institutional cooperation .
Constitutional courts are now debating this issue as well and want to make a decision .
In Strasbourg , prior to the first sitting , the EU flag was raised and the EU anthem was played , along with a military parade .
A state has an anthem and a flag , cooperation does not .
We have heard here about us sending an ambassador to represent us around the world .
We also hear about Europe speaking with one voice .
We do not agree with this .
We envisage a different path for Europe 's future .
This does not make us paranoid , as those preaching tolerance are saying .
We still want Europe , it just happens to be a different Europe to what most people want .
Mr President , because the speaker was so kind as to agree to answer a question , I am going to ask one .
Real Madrid , which is a Spanish football club , has got a flag and an anthem .
Do you believe it is a state ?
( Laughter and applause )
( HU ) A flag belonging to other states is not usually raised amidst a military parade , as in this case , while playing the anthem .
If you believe that Europe operates like a football team , this means that you have your own individual view on this .
Europe should not be a club of fanatics rallying around one flag , even though you might be an ardent fan , but it should be a team representing different perspectives instead .
Mr President , the discussion on the European External Action Service is taking place at a time when the need for a long-term EU strategy on how to work with the other parts of the globe in the dramatically changing world has become urgent .
We need bold strategies , vision and actions , as the emerging global powers are modernising more quickly than Europe ever did and are becoming more and more assertive .
Our geopolitical strategic thinking in foreign policy cannot be limited to climate change and energy security .
One of the three institutions that will , in practice , be active in foreign policy - President of the Council , President of the Commission and High Representative - must have the geopolitical strategic competences assigned to it and not only short-term fixing of emerging problems , which leads to lowest common denominator-based foreign policy .
In my view , the natural candidate for these strategic competences is the High Representative , drawing on the competences and expertise of the European External Action Service .
( BG ) The creation of the European External Action Service and a successful start to its operation will mark a major political success in the European Union on its way to achieving the goal of having a proper European common foreign and security policy .
This would allow Europe to truly speak with one voice .
It will be possible to provide an answer to the famous anecdotal question asked by Henry Kissinger : ' Who do I call if I want to call Europe ? ' because Europe 's telephone number will be the telephone number of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
At present , in order to find out what Europe 's position is , we need to know 27 telephone numbers , one for each Member State .
It goes without saying that for this service to be able to start operating , the prospective High Representative must submit here in our Parliament his or her proposal for setting up the service .
I also hope that this person will take into consideration Mr Brok 's report and will have an equal and fair representation of all Member States , in particular , new Member States .
Mr President , it is really interesting to hear how some Members are very irritated by this famous one voice being challenged and the whole status quo being challenged .
I call upon and invite the citizens of Europe who elected us to be here to listen to this conversation through the transparency of the Internet and give their opinions about all these things we are talking about .
I wanted to raise another issue , however , I recalled during the discussion when Mrs Ferrero-Waldner visited the Israeli Government during the terrible bloodshed of the Gaza war .
I will never ever forget , Commissioner , how you hugged and kissed the members of the Israeli Government during that terrible time .
How can I be sure that if this resolution is accepted nobody is going to hug and kiss war criminals on my behalf ?
( RO ) I would first of all like to congratulate Elmar Brok for drafting this report .
As the previous speaker also said , it is three decades since the US Secretary of State , Henry Kissinger , asked the question : ' Who do I call if I want to call Europe ? '
Creating the post of High Representative and an external service will allow the European Union to answer this question .
With these functions available , I believe that European diplomacy should be able to play a more active and decisive role in defending the EU 's basic interests , which also concerns energy security .
I welcome the fact that the High Representative and the heads of the diplomatic missions should engage in permanent dialogue with the European Parliament .
With regard to the deployment of staff as part of the external service , I believe that , apart from the fact that the relevant employees must have excellent knowledge and skills , consideration must also be given without fail to ensuring proper , proportional representation for Member States .
( PL ) Mr President , I , too , would like to express my sincere thanks for this splendid , factual report .
Thanks to establishment of the European External Action Service , the European Union will be able to have an active presence in the international arena as a creator of international policy .
This is extremely important .
Of course , we all agree that the question of the quality of services is principally the responsibility of the Commission and the Member States , and that in this matter , cooperation is needed between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
However , I would like to ask the Commissioner whether , on the basis of her contact with the European Parliament , she envisages a practical possibility of using our work in the form of active cooperation , for example , in interparliamentary delegations .
I think there are many forums where the High Representative and the European External Action Service could cooperate actively with Parliament , including by means of delegations .
Are appropriate preparations being made in this regard ?
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , firstly I also want to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report .
I wish to emphasise , however , that in order to make the European External Action Service work , we must also pay genuine attention to the small Member States and each country 's special characteristics in the area of foreign and security policy .
It is only by doing that and by having this debate that we will be able to make the EEAS a viable entity .
It is important that the report also mentioned the importance of transparency and democracy .
In addition , it is my view that we should stress the importance specifically of the issues of soft security in connection with the EEAS .
The European Union was created on the basis of peace and stability , and we can promote these globally , in particular , by means of humanitarian aid , development cooperation , crisis management and international trade .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I found it interesting that some of the honourable Members who speak so warmly of democracy cannot accept that the Lisbon Treaty has been democratically adopted by 26 Parliaments and one referendum .
( Applause )
There is one man 's signature remaining , I agree , but I feel very confident that the Treaty will enter into force very soon , and that we should have the External Action Service in place .
That is a good thing .
It is supported in Member States , in national parliaments and , honourable Members - if you look at Eurostat surveys for instance - also by citizens all around the European Union .
This is because they think - like we do , like I do , like most people here do - that it is important for the European Union to be able to act in a more coherent and stronger way if we want to promote our values and work towards peace and democracy all over the world .
We should , of course , avoid bureaucracy and duplication but , as Mrs Ferrero-Waldner said , we are building a new body .
It is sui generis so we have to find ways to develop it .
What the Coreper is discussing in cooperation with the Council , the Commission and with Members of the European Parliament - Mr Brok and others , and I personally have also had several discussions with Mr Buzek in order to try to keep Parliament informed - is the general framework and the tasks of the External Action Service .
That now has to be discussed politically , and it will be the task of the High Representative to then develop the details .
That will be done in close cooperation and in dialogue with the European Parliament .
I am quite convinced of that .
Of course , there are still issues to be resolved .
What is important is that the High Representative has the instruments to execute his or her tasks in the most efficient way .
That means that he or she has to be responsible for the EAS administrative budget , but also for the appointing authorities .
Obviously , any legal solution that we choose - and there are discussions still to be held here - must respect all the budgetary rules in place , thereby ensuring appropriate accountability .
The Council might not agree with all the details in the Brok report , but I think it is a very valuable contribution to this discussion .
I hope it will get broad support in this Parliament .
I would like to thank Mr Brok for the work he has done and for the debate here in the Parliament .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , again I want to say we are not deciding whether the External Action Service will be there or not : it is already there with the Lisbon Treaty .
As my colleague just said , and I too am confident , the Lisbon Treaty will be in force fairly soon .
I shall now comment on a few things that have come up in the discussion , and I think it is worthwhile taking them up .
First of all , we , as the Commission , are committed to making the EEAS a success .
It needs to be a shared enterprise with full buy-in of all the EU institutions and the Member States from the very start .
From my own experience as Commissioner for External Relations , I think a lot of things will be done in different ways in future .
I can see the need for the High Representative Vice-President to have a degree of managerial and budgetary autonomy .
At the same time , it is clear that the EEAS will need very close links with a wide range of Commission services and therefore , it is important that we work together .
I support Parliament 's objectives of ensuring transparent and accountable budgetary arrangements for the EEAS .
That is also clear so I think that we are looking forward to working towards the right formula on that .
Second , under the Treaty , the political accountability for the European Parliament is primarily through the President of the Commission and the High Representative Vice-President and other Members of the Commission .
We welcome the clear signal in Mr Brok 's report that the High Representative Vice-President should be the appointing authority for the EEAS and the senior delegation staff .
In the new system , heads of delegation and other senior EEAS staff will be EU officials under the Staff Regulations , subject to defined appointment procedures and obligations of independence .
We would have questions about the implications of singling out one group for EP hearings in this way . Even if it were a question of hearings only for a more political post , the same consideration would apply .
I think this is certainly not in line with the practice in Member States .
Again , we understand , however , that Parliament has an interest in having an in-depth exchange , be it formal or be it informal , with key senior officials in the EEAS and the delegations .
I think this could be done after somebody has been appointed ; then they should go to Parliament and discuss things with Parliament .
I have also noted with great interest and pleasure that the question of human rights and the question of women 's rights have been mentioned .
I can only tell you that all the EU institutions are committed to gender mainstreaming .
This will also apply in the EEAS , but appointments also have to be on merit , so merit and gender mainstreaming have to go together .
I wanted to quickly comment on the Israeli Government and my trip to the Middle East .
After the Gaza conflict , it was very important to obtain a ceasefire .
I tried to contribute to the first ceasefire and I think it was my intervention in particular that made it possible to open humanitarian corridors and set times to deliver humanitarian goods at that very difficult and decisive moment .
Finally , on the matter of delegations , as I said before : they are open already .
The European parliamentary delegations that you mentioned are already open for Commissioners or for Council members to go there , but it also depends on the time schedule .
The situation should be the same in the future .
Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the attacks that have been made here on a common European foreign and security policy belong in the past .
In opinion polls , 70 % of the citizens of Europe say that they want a stronger common foreign and security policy , because they know that this is the only way of keeping the peace in Europe and of looking after the interests of Europe throughout the world .
The statements that you have made belong to the past .
These are the sort of statements that have led Europe into war and we want to put an end to them .
We would also like to state that we want this foreign policy to strengthen Europe 's ability to act .
I would also like to say explicitly that foreign policy is not the job of parliaments .
Operational foreign policy must be the responsibility of the executive .
This is the case in all national states .
However , this means that parliaments - and in this case the European Parliament - must have full rights of control .
It must be made clear how this applies to the budget , in which areas there is a right to information and where there is genuine accountability .
I would like to invite the Council and the Commission to include in their documents less information about organigrams and about the members of the national delegations who will be appointed to specific posts .
Instead , they must describe the rights of the Parliament in these COREPER documents and not simply say that the rights of Parliament must be maintained full stop .
I believe that some action must be taken here .
In addition , I am of the opinion that the High Representative or Vice-President , who has yet to be appointed , must be involved in drawing up the proposals and must not be presented with a fait accompli .
This must also be taken into account .
Mrs Malmström , it would generate a lot of confidence if you would refer to the High Representative in future as the High Representative or Vice-President of the Commission .
Then we would all be talking about the same subject and this would be helpful in establishing that we really are speaking about the same thing .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 22 October 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The text on which we are preparing to vote tomorrow is an excellent foundation for the negotiations ahead of us .
I am grateful to Mr Brok and to Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck for the excellent work they have done in spite of the little time available .
On the basis of this work , the committee that I have the honour of chairing will be able to conduct a constructive but firm dialogue with the future High Representative and to defend the Community character of the new External Action Service .
The message that we want to send out to the Commission and the Council is basically this : we want a service that has extensive powers and which fulfils our ambitions of making the European Union a global political player , and we want this to happen on a consensual basis , that is to say , with the involvement and the support of all three institutions - Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
I therefore urge the Commission to be courageous in the negotiations and to defend the Community model , and I invite the Council once again to involve this Parliament and , in particular , the committee that I chair , in the negotiations from the outset , in order to complete this crucial stage in the creation of a true European foreign policy .
The creation of the European External Action Service is an absolute must in order to improve the effectiveness of the EU 's external action .
The purpose of this is to promote a much more consistent foreign policy and raise the EU 's profile at an international level .
However , achieving these objectives depends on how we organise this service .
The report contains a number of particularly important proposals .
We need an organisation which is as streamlined as possible and avoids any duplication .
This is why I support the merger of Commission delegations in third countries , of the Council 's liaison offices and the offices of the EU Special Representatives , as well as the creation of ' EU embassies ' .
From an efficiency perspective , I also find it an interesting proposal that these delegations will adopt certain consular functions , such as dealing with Schengen visas .
I wish to stress the need for standard training for staff so that we can really have a professional service which meets the EU 's needs .
Setting up a European diplomatic college seems an ideal solution to me for providing diplomatic staff with training based on common standards in order to guarantee consistency for the EEAS .
Indeed , in the future , a European diplomatic career could become just as attractive as a diplomatic career for a Member State .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , last spring , the European Parliament adopted the report by Mr Dehaene on the effects of the Treaty of Lisbon on the EU 's institutional balance .
In it , Parliament requested that future nominations for top posts in the EU should also take account of the gender equality angle .
Now , just a few months later , the European Parliament is adopting an even more stringent position in favour of the implementation of equality .
Parliament 's position on equality is therefore clear .
Vice-President of the European Commission , Margot Wallström , has been proactive in matters to do with equality .
José Manuel Barroso , the Commission 's re-elected President , has also promised to be sympathetic to the notion of equality when he forms the new Commission .
The Member States , however , are in a crucial position here .
I am convinced that we will find suitable Commission candidates in the Member States of the European Union , both men and women . Thank you .
The Treaty of Lisbon promised to bring about all sorts of changes .
The EU was to become more responsive and more democratic , the European Parliament would have more powers of codecision and the citizens would have their EU referendum .
However , Member States are , in fact , being put under pressure by the threat of commissioners being removed .
Now is the time for the EU to show its goodwill and finally to ask the people about the accession of Turkey .
However , referendums seem only to be held in order to be ignored .
It is also difficult to work out how the EU is to become more responsive if the responsibilities of the newly created posts are only outlined in the treaty .
Conflicts are as inevitable in this area as they are in the new External Action Service whose rights of access have not yet been clarified .
Our extraordinary budget is already becoming increasingly costly and covers an increasingly dense network of EU agencies which inevitably involve duplication of effort and overlapping authority .
Therefore , it is important to maintain the balance so that the new system , on the one hand , does not result in any duplication , but allows synergies to be exploited , and so that , on the other hand , parliamentary control cannot be circumvented , the Member States cannot be blocked and national authority remains unchanged .
Along with all of this , the new body must have the necessary authority to complete its tasks and to work efficiently with Europe 's strategic partners .
Ladies and gentlemen , the establishment of the European External Action Service is an exceptional project and particularly worthy of support .
It is intended to assist the EU High Representative but , at the same time , we must remember to ensure a proper level of qualification , as well as its institutional and national representative character .
Recruitment of people to the service should be done taking special care to maintain principles of transparency and equality .
It is also worth noting the fact that the European External Action Service will extend the possibility of receiving diplomatic assistance , because every EU citizen will be able to apply for this .
This is a de facto extension of the present possibility of applying for assistance to the foreign service of another Member State , if the Member State of origin does not have a diplomatic or consular office in a particular country .
The European External Action Service should also represent added value because of the synergy of its three basic components - services which have their origins in the present European Commission , the Council and the Member States .
In my opinion , the EEAS should recruit candidates from all three sources .
This will ensure its professionalism , effectiveness and unique character .
Effectiveness will also be achieved through the large number of European Union representations which will arise from the transformation of today 's Commission representations .
With reference to Mr Grzyb 's speech , I agree with him that the creation of a European diplomatic college could be obviated by making use of national and regional centres which are already renowned across Europe for the professional training they provide for future diplomats .
Preparation of the TEC meeting and the EU / USA Summit ( 2 and 3 November 2009 ) - Transatlantic judicial and police cooperation ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the Council and Commission statements on :
1 .
Preparation of the TEC meeting and the ΕU / USA Summit ( 2 and 3 November 2009 ) and
2 .
Transatlantic judicial and police cooperation .
Mr President , honourable Members , as you know , our relations with the US and the transatlantic cooperation between the US and the EU are extremely important .
It is a cornerstone of EU foreign policy , founded on the values of freedom , democracy and respect for human rights and international law , which is something that unites us .
The new administration in the United States has shown great interest in deepening and extending links with us in Europe .
We will have the first Transatlantic Economic Council with President Obama 's administration on 26-27 October .
Shortly after that , on 3 November , there will be a summit between the EU and the US .
These are two important opportunities to strengthen our relations .
Today 's debate is therefore very important .
I would like to highlight a number of areas on which we are cooperating and in connection with which we hope to be able to achieve results and closer relations during the summit .
On the issue of the climate , we welcome the higher ambitions on the US 's part .
We must work together with the American administration to achieve a comprehensive , globally binding agreement in Copenhagen .
We call on the US to set targets that are comparable to those set by the EU .
The United States and the EU must be prepared , together , to support climate measures such as emissions reduction , adaptation , financing and other support for developing countries .
Another important issue is , of course , the financial and economic crisis .
Very close cooperation will be needed in order to follow up the agreements that we reached at the G20 summit and to restore confidence in the financial markets .
Together , we will work to conclude the Doha round with a positive result in 2010 , because this is extremely important in the efforts to promote recovery and combat protectionism .
We will , of course , also discuss a number of regional issues , for example , Afghanistan , Pakistan , Iran , the Middle East , Russia and the Western Balkans .
We have regular and ever closer cooperation in connection with crisis management , which found expression , for example , in the US 's participation in a civil CSDP task , the Eulex mission in Kosovo .
We are also cooperating on energy issues , which is something that needs to be strengthened now , and we hope to be able to establish a special energy council between the EU and the US at ministerial level .
There is interest on both sides in deepening cooperation on domestic and legal matters .
I will come back to this in a moment , as I understand that the debates have been combined .
With regard to non-proliferation and disarmament , cooperation between the EU and the American administration has gained new momentum , and Barack Obama is giving priority to this issue .
We hope that this can be reflected in a new joint declaration on non-proliferation and disarmament in connection with the summit in November .
Both sides of the Atlantic are interested in strengthening our cooperation with regard to development .
The EU and the US are , of course , responsible for the vast majority of all the world 's development aid .
The forthcoming summit is therefore an excellent opportunity to discuss this and any other relevant issues at the highest level .
The Swedish Presidency is very pleased to have the opportunity to represent the EU .
I would like to say a few words about the economic partnership and the Transatlantic Economic Council , the TEC .
This will provide us with a mechanism at the highest possible level to speed up current negotiations and establish new areas for regulatory cooperation .
We need to draw up a work programme for the TEC that can be established next year .
That will give us a forum for cooperation , where we can deal with issues relating to globalisation and rapid technical changes .
Up to now , it has been an important forum but it could , of course , be better , not least when it comes to the broader strategic issues relating to the transatlantic economy and common economic challenges .
The Transatlantic Economic Council is even more important today in light of the financial crisis .
Allow me now to say a few words about legal and police cooperation .
For a while now , we have had cooperation with the United States in this area , which is reflected in a number of agreements on extradition and mutual legal assistance which will enter into force in a few months .
We often discuss this with the European Parliament , which I know is an active and committed partner on these matters - often a critical partner , too , which is a good thing .
In this regard , I only need remind you of the debate on passenger name records , for example .
Once the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , the European Parliament 's influence on , and involvement in , these matters will increase .
We are currently working on what is referred to as the Washington Statement , which will describe the situation with regard to legal and domestic policy issues and the cooperation in this area between the EU and the US .
This statement must be meaningful and it must be followed by concrete measures .
What we need is not more elegant words , but rather cooperation that is tangible and active .
Naturally , we need to establish our common values , namely democracy and the rule of law , along with respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
We are , of course , interested in cooperating in all areas that constitute a threat to these common values .
We are seeking early consultation between the two parties when political incidents occur that may affect the other party .
We are emphasising our common ambitions to be active in international forums to achieve full implementation of multilateral obligations .
We are cooperating with regard to increasing the security of travel documents and the introduction of biometric passports as an international standard .
An important example is the agreement on airline passenger data .
Together , we will ensure that the agreement works , but at the same time , the privacy of individuals must be protected and the systems of the different countries must be respected .
The list of areas of cooperation is a long one .
Let me name just a few : people trafficking , the sexual exploitation of children , the drugs trade , economic crime , IT crime , corruption , the confiscation of aids to , and the profits from , crime and the fight against terrorism .
This all requires joint and , to a certain degree , coordinated efforts .
We have been working to improve legal cooperation with regard to detecting , investigating and prosecuting cross-border criminals and terrorists .
We look forward to the agreement between the EU and the US on extradition and mutual legal assistance entering into force at the beginning of next year .
The agreement has now been transposed in all 27 EU Member States and a joint working group has been set up between the EU and the US to ensure that the agreement is implemented .
Seminars are being planned to bring the players involved closer together and to help them monitor the implementation .
Finally , I would like to mention three more points .
The first concerns the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
This is extremely important .
The fight against cross-border crime and terrorism often requires the exchange of personal data which , to some degree , forces us to make certain concessions with regard to fundamental freedoms and rights .
This must be counterbalanced by the fundamental and rigorous protection of personal data .
The cooperation and dialogue in this area is continuing and should be stepped up .
My second point relates to critical infrastructure .
We need to cooperate with one another in connection with the damage that could be done to critical infrastructure in the event of a natural disaster or a terrorist attack or attacks on our information systems .
That could have devastating consequences .
There is huge scope for cooperation in this area .
Thirdly , the EU and the US have undertaken to work on the basis of the principles of freedom , democracy and justice .
We are determined to promote these principles throughout the world .
We do this whenever we work together and when we work in international forums such as the United Nations .
The cooperation between liaison officers and delegations has proved fruitful , for example , in the Western Balkans and in Afghanistan and Pakistan .
This cooperation must be improved .
The various measures within this cooperation can complement each other .
We also need to coordinate our technical assistance better .
We will continue our donor cooperation , the cooperation on aid and the operational cooperation in respect of Latin America and West Africa to help in the fight against the drugs trade and to be able to meet other challenges .
I am very pleased that the American administration is showing such a strong interest in cooperating with us .
It is in our interests to take up this offer of working to safeguard our values and our interests in a constructive dialogue , a cooperation which will hopefully lead to some tangible results in the future .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , in my remarks , I shall touch upon the forthcoming EU-US Summit that will be an important milestone in our transatlantic partnership , as well as addressing certain EU-US aspects , particularly on climate change negotiations under way and also some critical GLS issues .
The change in the US Administration in January has had a very significant impact on EU-US relations , and our partnership has got off to a good start .
I would say we have re-energised our relations and I am convinced that the Lisbon Treaty , once in force , will also contribute towards the further strengthening of this vital relationship by providing the European Union with an even stronger foreign policy identity .
That is also what our friends in Washington expect .
But let us be also clear . Our aspiration for a true partnership of equals with the United States also means that Europeans must be willing and able to deliver .
I would say that it is a dual momentum , internal and external , that makes the summit in Washington so important .
The first formal summit with President Obama took place after our informal meeting in Prague this spring .
Now the preparations for the Washington Summit are in full swing .
We are working with the US side on delivering tangible results in priority areas .
The global economy and climate change are likely to be the two major areas of focus of the summit discussion , in addition to a number of key foreign policy challenges .
On the economy , the focus in Washington will be on joint efforts to combat the economic and financial crisis and securing a sustainable global economic recovery to secure jobs and create growth .
We will move further on governance issues for the global economy , notably on financial regulation and a timely follow-up to the G20 Pittsburgh Summit .
The Commission will also emphasise our joint interest in countering protectionist tendencies and we will call on the US to renew efforts to bring the Doha Round to a successful end .
Secondly , on climate change , we as the European Union will encourage the US to go to the Copenhagen conference with ambitious objectives to reach a sound global agreement , and we will also engage with the US to make progress on establishing a cap-and-trade system across the Atlantic .
Thirdly , on foreign policy , we will , of course , also discuss with the US how to meet urgent foreign policy challenges .
Here we will focus on how to cooperate further and more closely on the Middle East peace process , on the challenges posed by the nuclear ambitions of Iran , and on ways in which we can assure the renewal of the compact in Afghanistan , which is at the basis of our concerted efforts there .
I will have a separate foreign policy meeting with Secretary Clinton and Foreign Minister Bildt to discuss these matters in greater detail .
Furthermore , I expect the summit also to adopt a declaration on non-proliferation and disarmament , taking forward EU-US cooperation in many of the areas identified by President Obama in his speeches in Prague and New York . This initiative , which carries strategic importance in itself , is indicative of the renewed US commitment towards effective multilateralism , which the European Union has every intention of supporting and consolidating .
Last but not least , a further major summit outcome will be the creation of a new EU-US Energy Council which will have its first meeting on 4 November .
On the EU side , the Council will be chaired by myself , my colleagues , Commissioners Piebalgs and Potočnik , and the Presidency , and on the US side by Secretary Clinton and Secretary Chu .
The Council will look at global energy security , energy markets and product regulation , at new technologies and research .
In short , it will provide added value in a policy field , the importance of which is obvious .
Now there is also a new Transatlantic Economic Council ( TEC ) .
That will be complementary to the Energy Council , which we will re-energise as well .
The TEC meets in Washington next Tuesday - so before the Energy Council - and its outcome will obviously feed into the summit talks as well .
A promising area in our transatlantic cooperation is what we call upstream cooperation .
We will discuss policy approaches early on , so that we will avoid divergent regulation down the road .
It goes without saying that we need such cooperation more than ever .
The needed coherent response to the financial crisis is the best example for it .
We will also explore whether we can intensify this forum of cooperation for nanomaterial health care-related information .
Upon a US initiative , we also intend to launch closer cooperation in the area of innovation .
Both sides recognise that enhancing the innovative potential of our industries and our workforces is essential for the creation of jobs and growth and therefore for a successful emergence of the coming crisis .
And the Commission , of course , will also repeat our European concerns on some critical issues such as securing trade , potential distortions of competition from State aid and procurement policy in the US .
Finally , we as the Commission have also , from the very beginning , strongly relied on the European Parliament 's support for the TEC process , and we are grateful for this .
So rest assured that we will very much support the initiatives by the European Parliament 's delegations for relations with the USA to strengthen parliamentary involvement in TEC matters on both sides of the Atlantic .
We would like to consolidate the TEC 's role as a bilateral forum to address both day-to-day and strategic issues regarding transatlantic trade and investment .
And importantly , the TEC will have reached out to the transatlantic legislators ' dialogue and civil society stakeholders , too , so clearly we need the expertise and political thrust of legislators to tap the full potential of the transatlantic market place .
My colleague has already mentioned that GLS will also be very important .
There will be a Troika meeting on GLS affairs on 27 and 28 October in Washington , in the framework of our cooperation on justice , freedom and security .
Vice-President Barrot will represent the Commission .
We are in the final stages of preparing a statement that will aim to renew our transatlantic partnership in these areas .
In the Washington meeting , there will be the opportunity formally to exchange the instruments of ratification of the extradition and mutual legal assistance agreements so that they can enter into force in early 2010 .
These agreements will strengthen our efforts in fighting crime in today 's globalised world .
On another critical matter close to the hearts of the citizens , we certainly need to make further progress , as was mentioned .
We will reiterate the call for visa-free travel to the US for all EU citizens ; we will express our concern over the prospect of a fee for the electronic system for travel authorisation as the de facto new tourist tax ; and we will once again remind the US of the need to lift the restrictions on travellers with HIV / AIDS under the US visa waiver programme , as you have mentioned .
Finally , a delegation from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs will be travelling to Washington around the time of the ministerial meeting , so we trust they will also be able to convey the same messages .
Vice-President Barrot is also ready to meet the Committee on Civil Liberties delegation while in Washington .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Malmström , I have just noticed that gender mainstreaming has become a feature of this House .
We must be aware that the issue of the Transatlantic Economic Council ( TEC ) is a very important one and that the body which was established a few years ago needs a new driving force , because we are in a transition period with a new administration in the US and soon a new Commission .
I hope that the meeting next Tuesday will ensure that the TEC continues and that it has the appropriate spirit .
A transatlantic market with no trade barriers would result in economic growth of 3.5 % in the US and Europe and 1.5 % worldwide .
In the context of this economic crisis , this issue is very closely linked with jobs .
For this reason , we should make the most of this opportunity and explain in public statements that we are taking this initiative seriously .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , we should also make sure that security policy in the field of energy is handled by the new energy security council and that the regulatory issues are dealt with in the TEC .
It is important that these two areas are not mixed together in order to prevent duplication and to ensure that we have a solution at the end of the day .
This involves , in particular , the question of the legislators .
It will not be possible to remove barriers without the participation of the European Parliament and the US Congress , because 80 % of the regulations are enshrined in law .
For this reason , the administration cannot achieve this on its own .
There is one final comment I would like to make about the summit .
Climate change , Afghanistan , the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons , weapons of mass destruction and disarmament are all important issues which offer new opportunities as a result of the new administration .
I would like to wish you success in ensuring that all of this is included and I hope that the new Nobel prize winner , in cooperation with the European Union , will achieve major success for all of us in these areas .
Madam President , Mrs Malmström , Commissioner , the fact that Mr Obama and the new majority in Congress are presenting us with a significant opportunity to intensify our cooperation , in particular , with regard to the common transatlantic market , has already been mentioned .
However , this should not be a common market for deregulation , but a common market based on the foundations or on the principles of a social market economy , with sensible and appropriate regulations where these are required .
Mr Brok is absolutely right that this must , of course , have a legislative basis , regardless of whether we are discussing the regulation of the financial markets or environmental and energy policy regulations .
Taking a joint approach in this area would make a major contribution towards shaping global relationships .
One area which has already been touched on and which we could discuss this morning is the central issue of climate policy .
Many of us will be in Washington in the next few days , where we will have the opportunity to hold discussions with our colleagues from Congress .
Although the legislation concerning climate policy has not yet been passed , the representatives of the US Government are at least partly authorised to make binding undertakings , even if the details cannot be finalised until after the US legislative process has been completed .
It is essential that Copenhagen is a success .
It is not the end of a process , but it is an important step in the process of achieving a common climate policy .
We must all ensure that Copenhagen is a success .
It can only be successful if we have binding climate policy objectives .
Finally - and this has also already been mentioned - regardless of our friendship and mutual affection and regardless of our good relationship , there are certain things that we cannot accept . These include the repeated protectionist measures , for example , in the market for defence equipment , the discriminatory visa policy aimed at some Member States and the visa charges demanded by the US which have already been referred to .
It is important that we talk to the US from a position of equality .
It is important to establish a partnership , but also to explain what we cannot accept , which in this case , is a policy that discriminates against Europeans .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , on behalf of the ALDE Group , I strongly welcome the fact that this resolution calls for a strengthened strategic partnership between the EU and the US as a cornerstone of EU external policy .
It also rightly reiterates the role of an integrated transatlantic market by 2015 .
We must not let the trees of myriad disagreements on specific issues obscure the wood of an overwhelming interest in common values and objectives , and action on promotion of democracy and human rights , resolution of conflicts and protection against security threats among others .
On the economic side , the ALDE Group has emphasised the need to avoid regulatory arbitrage in the financial sector and to address issues such as ' too big to fail ' institutions .
We have put in an amendment to paragraph 39 since , as far as I can see , there simply was no G2 leaders ' agreement to work on a financial transaction or Tobin tax , so it is absurd to welcome such an agreement , even if we have already done so , erroneously , in the G20 resolution .
The ALDE Group also calls for deletion of paragraph 38 , which appears to seek the abolition of intellectual property rights .
But , as Mrs Malmström has explained , a large part of the transatlantic relationship relates to justice and security matters .
The ALDE Group fully supports close cooperation in this area but it must respect fundamental rights , including privacy , and be progressed within a democratic and transparent framework .
In that respect , it is a pity that MEPs have not been consulted on the joint statement to be agreed next week - especially as , with the Lisbon Treaty , almost all of these matters come within codecision .
It is puzzling why the Commission and Council are promoting a new agreement on access to SWIFT financial data on EU citizens when the Mutual Legal Assistance Agreement allows for specific requests .
I would like an answer on that .
Finally , it is a pity that the new context of justice and extradition cooperation nonetheless permits the completely unjustified extradition from the UK of Gary McKinnon , a computer hacker who has Asperger 's syndrome , rather than his being prosecuted in the UK .
Very finally , I fully support what Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner said about visa-free travel for all EU citizens and we are very critical of a ' visa lite ' fee for the ESTA .
Madam President , in her speech , Mrs Malmström said that action was needed , not just fine words .
I can tell you that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance will follow the results of this summit between the United States and the European Union very closely , since it comes at a key moment in the path leading us , on the one hand , to Copenhagen and , on the other , to the reform of the international financial system .
On this last point , the casino has now reopened , banks ' profits are once again reaching historic levels - USD 437 billion in profits for the US banks - and our view is that there is less political will than there was six months ago .
We therefore have enormous expectations of this summit , which is intended to show that , in both the US and Europe , the political will to regulate capitalism and to regulate the financial institutions is still present .
In order to achieve this , we would like to suggest that progress be made on two very important points .
The first is combating tax havens , and this is something that was not mentioned in your speeches .
The US Treasury admits that tax havens result in a yearly tax revenue loss of USD 100 billion .
We therefore wanted to emphasise this point and to tell you that it is important for the United States and Europe to work jointly on this issue at the summit .
The second point , which has just been mentioned , is the tax on financial transactions .
When Mr Barroso was a candidate for re-election to the presidency , he expressly said that he was in favour of such a tax .
A fortnight ago , the European Parliament for the first time voted , by a majority , for a tax on financial transactions , provided that they formed part of an international framework .
The Group of the Greens therefore calls upon you to put this subject on the agenda for the United States / European Union Summit in early November .
My last point is that on climate , we have a responsibility to remove a thorn from Mr Obama 's foot .
President Obama wants to act , but he is blocked by his majority .
The best thing that the European Union could do for him is to make an undertaking , at the end of October , to provide EUR 30 billion of funding for climate adaptation expenditure in the global South and to commit to a 30 % reduction in its own emissions .
Once this is done , we will be able to make progress in negotiations .
This is our responsibility .
We must do it before the summit .
Madam President , deepening relations between the United States and the European Union should be the foundation of EU external policy .
After all , the United States has been our closest ally for years .
Currently , many challenges are before us , which we must face up to together , shoulder to shoulder with Washington .
In the area of security , we are troubled by the attitude of Iran and the worsening situation in Afghanistan .
A little closer to our borders , Russia is becoming an increasingly unpredictable and authoritarian neighbour , and the Kremlin is exerting neoimperialistic pressure on the countries which lie just across its borders .
In order to defend and remain faithful to the values which are common to America and Europe , we must always speak with one voice when we have to deal with cases of violations of human rights and threats to citizens ' fundamental freedoms .
We must be united in defence of our security .
We must not forget that the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation is the foundation of our transatlantic relations .
This is why the area of security , freedom and democracy should be extended to include those European countries which increase Euroatlantic security .
It is essential for active strengthening of ties with the United States to be a priority for the European Union .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Malmström , in the current economic crisis the newly-elected Parliament is entitled to up-to-date information which is as precise as possible regarding the structure of the plan for a large transatlantic market and regarding the deregulation objectives that this involves in the economic and financial spheres , in contrast to the dream set out by some of our fellow Members .
Is this large deregulated market to be implemented by 2010 or 2015 ?
Has it been confirmed ?
Personally , I think it would be very detrimental for Europe , given the miserable state of the fundamental elements of the US economy and the refusal by the US to set its financial house in order , in addition to reasons of principle that lead me to oppose the idea that this partnership should be , as many of you have said , the cornerstone of the European Union 's policy .
This consideration also leads me to ask what measures will be taken to combat the collapse of the dollar and the risk that it poses to Europe and the rest of the world .
Why has the proposal for a common world currency , put forward by China for the benefit of the stability of the world economy , been rejected without serious examination ?
I want to warn against an outmoded enthusiasm for Atlantic cooperation , which ends up being a very archaic conformism , at this point in the world 's history where we need , more than ever , to affirm an existence that is independent of the wishes of the United States of America .
Madam President , regarding the joint fight against terrorism , as a criminal and human rights lawyer , let me make a suggestion .
I think it would be very important and useful to put together a joint working group of experts , academics , practising lawyers and so on , drawing conclusions from the often very painful experiences of the post 9 / 11 era , where human rights have been suspended in the name of the fight against terrorism .
I come from a country where , in the last three years , the government has been suspending human rights and sending people to prison completely without any foundation .
In this day and age , they do it in the name of the fight against terrorism .
We have 16 very probably political prisoners in prison , charged with terrorism , without any evidence whatsoever .
Suspended human rights , habeas corpus , right of defence , prisoners ' rights : I know what I am talking about .
We have to be very careful when we talk about the fight against terrorism and we have to do it in a very professional and very careful way .
( ES ) Madam President , the relationship with the United States is , strategically speaking , the European Union 's most important relationship .
The United States holds a key position in the world and the European Union is increasingly becoming a global actor .
We can , and should , undertake many things together .
First of all , we should take a leading role in creating a new , global world , featuring new challenges and the emergence of new actors .
We need to further strengthen our relationship and create new institutional mechanisms .
This is the right time to undertake such action .
We have a government in Washington which favours multilateralism , a European Union strengthened by the Treaty of Lisbon and we are witnessing the emergence of a new world which we want to shape together .
The resolution we will adopt tomorrow specifically supports the strengthening of the institutional mechanisms , something which Parliament called for in its resolution of 26 March .
The decision to create the Transatlantic Economic Council two years ago was the right one .
However , in today 's world , we also need to develop excellent coordination in terms of policies and security .
We need regular meetings between officials responsible for external affairs and security .
That is why this House , this Parliament , supported the creation of a Transatlantic Political Council which , in the future , must include the energy council that you wish to establish at the next summit .
The Parliament also wants two summits to take place every year .
If we have two summits with Russia , why not with the United States ?
Ladies and gentlemen , there is increasing talk of a G2 being set up by the United States and China , that is to say , a privileged relationship between the top global players .
It worries me that we Europeans may weaken our role as partners and undermine our privileged relationship with the United States .
We must explain to the United States that , in the field of foreign policy , the Union will be strengthened by the Treaty .
The European Union , or the Europe of today , is no longer the problem it had been for decades .
Today , in this complex world , Europe should be part of the solution , and I hope that is the way the United States sees the situation .
In order for this to occur , as the Commissioner pointed out , Europeans also need to act in line with the global role we want to have , and to be up to the mark , with respect to the privileged relationship to which we aspire with the United States .
To summarise , a key issue for the upcoming summit , in my opinion , should be the strengthening of transatlantic relations , including at institutional level .
Madam President , the transatlantic relations that are crucial for both the EU and the US have been seriously tested in recent years .
Now , with a new Administration in the White House which is redefining US priorities , and France back into the NATO military structure , the perspective is better .
Personally , I consider that the time is now ripe for a substantive evaluation of transatlantic relations to give them the solid basis they deserve to withstand the current common challenges posed by the international environment - energy , climate change , emerging new powers , the financial and economic crisis , and terrorism .
This time we should go beyond superficial policy differences and evaluate our deeper common interests which , until now , have simply been taken for granted .
The truth is that , without such a profound joint evaluation , we in the West could lose the initiative to other centres of power , who will not hesitate to shape the world according to their interests - not ours .
Security in Europe , for instance , is one such common interest and therefore stands at the heart of transatlantic relations .
Even if , for now , war on the continent is not a serious proposition , the culmination of some current negative trends could bring back that possibility if we fail to respond properly .
Progress is not irreversible , as we all know so well in central Europe .
That is why , before considering a proposal to re-evaluate the current security architecture of the continent , we should try to have definite answers as to the continuation of US involvement , the future of NATO and the role expected of the EU after the Lisbon Treaty comes into force .
If Europe wants to realise its ambition to be a true player in world politics , it should eliminate such differences between its members , thus trying to motivate them equally around true common economic interests .
( DE ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , the fourth meeting of the Transatlantic Economic Council represents the ideal opportunity for this forum to turn over a new page .
The TEC must be more ambitious .
Both parties to the transatlantic dialogue agree that overcoming the economic crisis and combating climate change are our overriding priorities .
Now it is a question of agreeing on a specific agenda for the TEC which reflects these priorities .
Collaborating on innovations for the development of low-carbon economies and energy efficient societies is particularly important .
In addition , it is also important to involve various stakeholders more closely , such as the Transatlantic Consumer Dialogue , a forum consisting of 80 consumer organisations .
These organisations could help to make consumer protection a central theme in the dialogue about regulation of the financial markets .
The objective of establishing a common transatlantic market by 2015 may be too ambitious , but it must be judged on the basis of the fact that it will improve the lives of people on both sides of the Atlantic .
This is why the Greens are in favour of a transatlantic new deal .
Madam President , I agree with those speakers who said we have a real opportunity in front of us with a new US Administration in place .
Three quick points .
Firstly , we seem to have evolved into a situation where we have a huge number of subjects which are discussed between the EU and the US , but no strategic dialogue , and yet they tell me in Washington that the US and China have a much greater strategic dialogue than between us across the Atlantic .
Is it not time at this summit to say that we want a strategic dialogue for a strategic partnership ?
Secondly , regarding the point on protectionism on the TEC , it is quite clear that the biggest danger in the next 12 months is closing markets rather than opening ones , and yet we have the transatlantic market which is , as Mr Brok said , the biggest opportunity we have for generating growth on both sides of the Atlantic .
Is it not time to make the transatlantic market a major part of trade development , rather than putting it to one side as a regulatory issue ?
It is actually a major opener .
Lastly , it is disappointing that we have no study and no road map as promised by Mr Verheugen .
The study was paid for by Parliament .
If you want Parliament to cooperate on saying how we now need to see how to open markets , please release this report , as the resolution says , by 15 November .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if you believe that the European Union needs partners , as all the previous speakers have said , then this becomes particularly clear in the area of the economy .
The transatlantic market has a trade volume of around EUR 2 billion per day .
This makes it obvious how important the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) is .
It also becomes clear that free trade agreements are important and , above all , that we must focus more closely on the transatlantic partnership .
I am sometimes concerned about what is happening on the other side of the Atlantic when I look at the new President .
He will find the time to accept the Nobel prize in Oslo , but it was difficult for many European Heads of State or Government to get appointments to meet with him on the fringes of the G20 Summit .
He had time in Copenhagen to support his home city 's Olympic bid , but unfortunately he did not have time to join us in an important European celebration , in other words , the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall and the iron curtain .
I would be pleased if we succeeded in convincing him that he should not wait until a few days beforehand to decide whether the TEC meeting should take place , but instead that he should support the TEC with complete conviction over the next few years .
We need trade between Europe and the US to be made easier .
We need improvements in the area of joint standardisation .
We need the removal of duties and non-tariff trade barriers .
We must prevent more protectionist measures from being taken by both sides .
We must guarantee that products are safe for our consumers .
We must prevent anti-terrorism measures from obstructing all these activities as is currently under discussion .
For these reasons , I would be happy if we could make real progress in our cooperation .
Many of the issues which concern us in other areas of the world , such as wage , social and environmental dumping , are not problems in the transatlantic relationship .
I believe that we should take the opportunity , on the one hand , to work together with the Americans to solve our common problems and , on the other , to attempt to play a joint role throughout the world in making progress within the WTO or other international organisations , such as the International Labour Organisation .
I am hoping for good results in this respect next week .
( FR ) Madam President , the election of President Obama has rightly been welcomed as a victory for US democracy .
However , the recent Nobel Peace Prize that has just been awarded to him places him under pressure .
Peace in the Middle East ?
It is something we hope for , but he is certainly not the master card .
Peace in Afghanistan ?
There , US strategy has freedom of manoeuvre , but if President Obama listens to his hawks , he risks another Vietnam .
It is a telling sign that the book by Gordon Goldstein describing the dramatic spiral towards failure in the war in Vietnam has been flying off the shelves in Washington , and there are no copies left in the shops .
The President must now choose between two strategies : one focuses on stabilisation , the eradication of poverty and the economic development of Afghanistan , by providing a military as well as a civilian presence throughout the country .
The second aims to concentrate on a few urban areas and from there to launch large-scale operations against Al-Qaida .
Both options require the despatch of troops , but the first is oriented towards the people , and the second towards the war with , in the background , the risk of a catastrophe .
Should Europe not save Barack Obama from the old demons haunting the United States , and help him to choose the first of these strategies , focused on the people ?
That , at least , is the view of my group .
Madam President , the ECR Group is strongly Atlanticist and seeks ever closer economic , trade and political ties with America , which we consider to be the EU 's foremost ally and not competitor .
We also remain in debt to the USA for its contribution to NATO , which is based on our shared democratic values , and we welcome America 's belated commitment to fighting climate change .
However , we should not pretend to agree on everything .
I am concerned for instance about the conflicting messages coming out of the US Administration regarding Russia .
Washington 's emphasis on resetting US-Russia relations appears to excuse the Kremlin 's blatant interference in its neighbours ' affairs , notably in Georgia and in Ukraine .
The scrapping of the US missile defence shield , due to be deployed in Poland and the Czech Republic , was also questionable .
The recent discovery of a secret nuclear facility in Iran could well confirm this judgment , but we must now all redouble our efforts to curb Iran 's nuclear ambitions and , as allies of the US , we strongly support their military struggle against Jihadi terrorism in Iraq and Afghanistan and their strong efforts to bring lasting peace to the Middle East .
( PT ) Madam President , I would like to begin by pointing out the importance of relations between the United States and the European Union , particularly during a time of global economic crisis .
There is an increasing need for us to take joint action in tackling the crisis , in the energy market and in the fight against terrorism , but we also need action that is more focused and does not degenerate into more taxation or the kind of absurd attacks currently targeted at a financial system that is necessary for the market .
Focusing on the financial issue , I would like to highlight the efforts that are being made by both the United States and the European Union towards a policy of better lawmaking , with emphasis on the involvement of stakeholders in the debate on the report .
Coordinated action between the United States and the European Union is essential if we are to achieve a more mature state of economic relations , and , indeed , one that will lead to a transatlantic market , perhaps by 2015 .
We need to defend Atlanticism here , too .
It is just as vital to reduce the administrative barriers between the United States and the European Union , so as to create a competitive environment and a market that is more appealing to individual citizens and businesses alike .
I believe that the transatlantic market can be built on a stable negotiating basis , which will stimulate economies and stop the threat of new economic and social crises like the one we are experiencing at present .
To conclude , Madam President , I wish it to be quite clear that these are unique conditions , and that a more Atlanticist approach can bring about a better situation .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner referred to the importance of ensuring that the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs attends the transatlantic EU-US Summit , and I welcome the emphasis she has placed on the matter .
Furthermore , as Chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , I would like to draw your attention , first of all , to the importance of signing the treaties on extradition and mutual judicial assistance .
Significant efforts have been made to strengthen not only political , but also judicial , cooperation , thereby strengthening the ties between Eurojust and analogous institutions in the United States .
Secondly , I would like to highlight the contribution made to strengthening and initiating , over the next five years , the transatlantic dialogue and , thirdly , I would like to highlight the work performed by this Parliament .
That is why I would like to ask that information be provided at the next part session of the European Parliament in November concerning the outcome of this summit and , in particular , the chapter on judicial cooperation and cooperation on criminal matters .
Fourthly , it is clear that the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon will result in the formidable launch of the Area of Freedom , Security and Justice , as a new aspect of the European Union 's remit , and a new field of European policy on which this Parliament will also decide .
That is also why , in sensitive matters such as the protection of data and fundamental rights of persons , agreements on Passenger Name Record and SWIFT data should always be consistent with the resolutions adopted by this Parliament in order to guarantee the protection of personal data and , in particular , the resolution adopted on 17 September .
Finally , with respect to visas , we must remember the importance of reciprocity , as there is currently much room for improvement in that area .
It is good to cooperate with the United States on visas , but this is an excellent opportunity for us to reinforce the importance of reciprocity in order to ensure that we remain on an equal footing with the United States when signing agreements .
( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Malmström , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , cooperation between Europe and the United States is crucial in resolving most of the major crises in the world , and the new US administration certainly provides an opportunity .
It has already taken some initiatives that have marked a break with the past : in Iraq , on Guantánamo , on the anti-missile shield .
It would be naïve , however , to think that that will be enough to make US and European points of view identical in all situations , and that transatlantic relations will now be very simple .
Whether on preparations for Copenhagen or aid to developing countries , on Doha and protectionism , on financial regulation and combating tax havens , on the relaunch of the peace process in the Middle East or a firm policy on the nuclear issue in Iran , the US is extremely unwilling to take action .
This goes beyond the issue of whether or not the administration has good intentions , and often relates to the influence of lobby groups on Congress , or simply the defence of its interests by a great power which is being shaken by the new world order .
All these spheres will only make progress if Europe plays its proper political role as a separate global player , in a partnership of equals - to use the Commissioner 's expression - and fully assumes its responsibilities .
From this viewpoint , I must say that there is a certain confusion in the European attitude and sometimes even a certain naivety , and that this also extends to Parliament .
The approach being taken to the idea of a large transatlantic market , which was Sir Leon Brittan 's hare-brained scheme back when he was Commissioner , poses certain risks .
This affair of barriers to trade is being tackled as if the problems were only of a technical nature .
Naturally , economic and commercial trade between the United States and Europe is important for jobs and for businesses . It ought to be developed .
First of all , however , trade is not really in danger .
Secondly , when there is a conflict , either it relates to defending our economic interests - for example , as in Airbus - or it poses a risk to our health or environmental rules - in the case of beef containing hormones , for instance , or chlorinated chicken - and we should therefore not prioritise the improvement of economic relations over our own internal model , our social model , our environmental model , or development model , as if economic relations were an end in themselves .
We must be able to combine the two , and we should not surrender our political autonomy in search of a partnership that is , in itself , a commendable objective .
Madam President , I have a couple of points .
It is difficult to see how we can fit all of the resolution that we have set out on the TEC into the TEC .
It is a very small operation , as we know .
I will be there next Tuesday , Commissioner .
I look forward to seeing you , along with Mr Brok and other parliamentarians , an issue I will come back to at the end .
We do , however , have key issues which can be raised in the TEC and can be dealt with as they are sufficiently upstream , to borrow your words , Commissioner . Financial services , for example , which are appropriate to deal with because the outcomes are very closely discussed and are near agreement - not just in G20 but ongoing discussions that we have in Parliament and with the Commission and the Americans .
In particular , accounting remains one of these aspects within the reach of policymakers and legislators .
Adoption of high-quality global standards for accounting by 2011 is something which needs to be concluded quickly on the US side .
On insurance , too , Solvency II has helped to set global regulation - one which needs an answer , frankly , from the US side - and I thank Chairman Kanjorski in the US Congress for the work he has done on the Federal Office of Information .
Finally , let me just say , on the transatlantic legislators ' dialogue , that Congress and Parliament need to step up their game in this area .
We do not want to follow the Administration and the Commission , as most people in this House would agree .
We want to be amongst the leaders for change .
We need to be the impetus for this change .
TEC needs our support , but the TLD needs to be at the heart of the discussion - not just on the side and not just as advisers , but very much part of the central aspect of this whole transatlantic relationship .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to thank you for giving me the floor .
I think it is very important that we are discussing transatlantic relations , because we find ourselves , in part , in a paradoxical situation .
The changes which have taken place in the United States have largely been very well received in Europe .
On the other hand , however , the United States is showing greater interest in other important countries and continents than it did in the past .
In particular , a revival of contacts between the United States and China has been observed , as have efforts to improve relations with Russia .
Our problem is that , in my opinion , we want to bring too many matters into the discussion .
I think we should concentrate on two areas .
The first area concerns financial and economic matters .
The second area is security .
The United States and Europe could do a lot more together in both these areas .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have drawn up a major resolution which covers a number of themes .
However , one important point - trade - is only touched on briefly .
I believe that international trade is a decisive factor .
The fall in world trade is one of the causes of the economic and financial crisis and I would like to see a greater focus on world trade , even now in the Transatlantic Economic Council ( TEC ) .
It is not the case that the US and the European Union agree on every area .
On the contrary , we have only a few trade agreements , there is a risk of bilateralism and there is the possibility that the Doha Development Round will not be continued by the US .
Therefore , we should address the critical points and I hope that the TEC will introduce some new stimuli to revive international trade .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to look again at one aspect of transatlantic cooperation in the field of policing and justice relating to Swift , which has already been mentioned , that is , the transfer of Swift bank details to the US .
I believe that we should remember when discussing this point that the Council has given itself a mandate for negotiations with the US on the transfer of data .
We should remind the Council to keep to this mandate in its negotiations with the US .
I am very concerned that the European Council will be pressurised to accept the demands of the US and to circumvent European data protection standards .
I believe that this would send out the wrong signal , particularly because there will be many areas where the level of data protection will be brought into line as a result of the Treaty of Lisbon over the next year in agencies such as Europol and Eurojust , etc .
I believe that we would be sending out the right signal if the Council and the Commission were to adhere to the data protection standards and uphold them in the face of the US or to insist on a postponement .
( HU ) I read the following in a European Union White Paper in 1996 : a fierce global battle is expected in the coming decades between Europe , the United States , Japan and the emerging Asian countries .
Fortunately , this battle is taking place not with weapons , but mainly in the economic sector .
Europe must hold its own in this .
President Giscard d 'Estaing , who was Chairman of the Convent , the leader of a government drafting a failed constitution , said that Europe must not be the United States ' rival , but a reliable partner .
This is a key issue in the EU-US Summit 's success .
We must strive for partnership , but if our only consideration is for the United States to regard us as a partner , and we do not get involved in conflicts on behalf of Europe 's population , we cannot achieve success in important matters .
Madam President , I would like to thank all of the honourable Members for their contributions to this debate .
There is a high level of consensus on the importance of deepening our cooperation with the American administration and the summit that we are about to hold .
I am very pleased that the American administration is showing such a desire to deepen and develop our relations .
I think that we have done our homework and we are very well prepared to take some important steps .
We have a number of problems in common with our partner , the US , and it is therefore appropriate to find common solutions .
I think that we will be able to make progress with regard to the climate , the economic crisis and the Doha round - and once again confirm how important it is to conclude this - and that we will be able to get extremely important processes off the ground in the legal sphere .
The economic partnership is a particularly important forum for us .
We also understand the importance of discussing important regional issues - Afghanistan , Pakistan and the Middle East , for example .
There were a few specific questions for me .
As regards the question of visas raised by Mrs Ludford , both the Council and the Commission are doing everything they can to ensure that visa-free travel will apply to all EU Member States .
It is regrettable that we do not have this in place yet , but we are continuing to work very hard to make it happen .
With regard to the so-called Tobin tax , I know that there are Members of this House who strongly support this .
I will say this : a Tobin tax can only work if it is global and if it has global control instruments - otherwise , it will simply be another protectionist measure .
There is currently no basis whatsoever for an international , global agreement on a Tobin tax and therefore the Presidency will not push this issue .
I want to be clear on that .
With regard to SWIFT , we are in agreement with the US on the importance of being able to exchange information on financial transfers .
This is valuable in the fight against cross-border crime and terrorism .
We now need a new agreement , as the Belgian company SWIFT is moving to Europe , but we are both keen to retain the programme in order to prevent the financing of terrorism .
As a transitional phase , we need to find an agreement that can apply for a short period until we have the new Treaty of Lisbon in place .
Experts have looked into this , including the French judge , Jean-Louis Bruguyère , who was asked by the EU to inspect the TFTP .
Bruguyère found that the legal certainty requirements and the protection of personal data in the current agreement are adequate .
In the more permanent agreement and once the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force , there will eventually be opportunities for the European Parliament to take an active part in shaping this .
The meeting that we are to have next week is a very important one , but it is nevertheless just a meeting .
I believe that we can make progress , resolve some issues and get some important processes off the ground relating to those matters that we have in common and need to resolve in a close and strategic partnership with the American administration .
I am very pleased about the strong support in the European Parliament for the efforts of the Council and the Commission .
I will , of course , report to you the results next time we meet in the plenary sitting in Brussels .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would first of all agree with James Elles about a greater strategic dialogue with a great strategic partner .
This is the objective that we have .
As I said before , it is about cooperating for global recovery , so financial and economic questions will be very high on our agenda .
We have been one of the driving forces behind the activation of the G20 Summit process which was raised , as you know , to leaders ' level last November on the initiative of President Barroso and President Sarkozy , but we are not the only ones that are needed .
The Pittsburgh G20 Summit has also been a success in providing a platform for flexible macroeconomic coordination as we also seek exit strategies to gradually pare back our respective policies of immediate crisis response .
The IMF and the World Bank agree that this will require different approaches from each party depending on the respective economic situation .
Given the current global economic situation , the leaders will naturally also discuss possible ways out of the crisis , of boosting growth and creating jobs , and the question of the regulation of financial markets will be particularly important .
We think it is necessary to ensure the rapid establishment of a globally coordinated system of ' macro-prudential ' supervision based upon close cooperation with the International Monetary Fund and the Financial Stability Board .
On banking , we need to deploy the London and Pittsburgh commitments for better and more capital and stricter prudential rules consistently among financial centres .
We need to intensify our work towards effective global convergence policies on crisis management and systemically important financial institutions .
We should also achieve a single set of high-quality global accounting standards on financial instruments by the end of 2010 and , hopefully , complete convergence by June 2011 .
On climate change , we had a very first exchange on climate change with President Obama in Prague .
I was personally present and we pressured the United States to do more on climate change , but we also know that President Obama has a very important health care issue in Congress and the Senate .
I therefore think that we will have to put even more pressure on him to redouble the efforts to find committed , binding regulations for Copenhagen , in the light of his preoccupation with the domestic agenda .
With regard to the TEC , this is a very important new mechanism , or re-energised mechanism , to work on all matters regarding the free market and market barriers .
We want to eliminate these , which is the ultimate objective of the TEC .
This was clearly stated in the TEC framework agreement of 30 April 2007 .
Of course , I am aware of the different ideas that have been raised recently - such as reaching a unified transatlantic market by 2015 through the elimination of existing obstacles to economic integration : the so-called Millán Mon report .
We no doubt need to work on the right balance between ambition and realism , which is why we are working on medium-term priority tasks for the TEC .
On the question of barriers , we already know that you , Parliament , want to have a study , and we welcome your support for this study .
It would be important in guiding future work for the TEC .
The study has not yet been finalised , but is under way , and there are still a number of technical issues to be cleared up before it is totally ready for publication .
Commissioner Ashton here will deal with this , and I will certainly convey Parliament 's interest .
Let me also say , because this was mentioned , that the Energy Council will not overlap with the TEC .
The agendas will complement each other .
It is clear that security issues will go to the Energy Council , whereas regulatory issues go to the TECH .
The focus of the Energy Council is on new technologies and energy security .
A very brief word on SWIFT and some GLS questions that have been mentioned .
The SWIFT agreement is needed as it sets out specific safeguards on data .
That is clear and the mutual legal assistance agreement would also really like to go there .
It should also be known that this mutual legal assistance agreement is at the heart of the SWIFT agreement , and any US request is subject to the authorisation of an EU judicial authority within that framework , so we have to keep working on it .
On the ESTA , we issued a preliminary assessment which concluded that , based on the interim final rule , ESTA is not tantamount to the Schengen visa application process as defined in the European Commission 's common consular instructions .
We will , however , prepare a final assessment once the final rule on ESTA has been published , and this evaluation will also address the question of the ESTA fee if the fee is really put into place .
You can imagine that we do not want it .
A last answer on terrorism .
In our work on the summit , we are discussing with the US how to move towards closer cooperation in the fight against terrorism , especially in the light of the plans to close Guantánamo .
The need to ensure respect for fundamental rights is essential .
The conclusion of the mutual legal assistance treaties will also help us in this respect .
We will therefore also cooperate on how to prevent radicalism , including misuse of the Internet .
You can see that there is an enormous range of issues .
We have spoken about all the political issues before , but I agree with the Council President that although this will be an important summit , it will only be one meeting of a few hours .
Not everything will be solved in one meeting , but it will be a very good restart or re-beginning .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 22 October 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The EU-US Summit in November will strengthen the transatlantic partnership and promote dialogue between the two great powers .
Relations between them must be based on the values and objectives that we share , and ever closer cooperation is in our common interest and benefit .
The European Union and United States must adopt a vital role in combating climate change .
On this point , a number of joint commitments have been made in the fight against the adverse effects of global warming .
As far as Europe is concerned , one viable , practical solution for protecting the environment is to put the Rhine-Main-Danube navigation canal , which provides a direct link between the ports of Rotterdam and Constanţa , into operation .
Using inland water navigation as an option will attract numerous economic benefits and also help reduce sound pollution and cut greenhouse gas emissions .
Using this canal and raising its profile will make the transportation of goods cheaper , safer and more efficient in terms of the use of energy resources .
Environmental protection policies can be supplemented by measures supporting transcontinental mobility and international connections , while also providing safety and security for European goods and citizens .
in writing . - As the Lisbon Treaty is about to enter into force , the rapid progress in the transatlantic relationship between the two biggest democratic and economic entities will have an increased importance .
Both the EU and the US continue to be key actors in international trade and providers of stability .
The European Parliament has been a leading force in advancing transatlantic cooperation , having proposed in its resolutions the creation of a transatlantic free market , as well as establishing new structures for closer political and interparliamentary relations .
The Transatlantic Economic Council has done good work so far .
I hope that in the near future , we shall be able to work out solutions to overcome the regulatory barriers between the EU and the US .
The role of legislators in this relationship will be important .
Members of the European Parliament are willing and ready to fully contribute to TEC processes .
We should encourage the US Congress to fully commit itself to a routine Transatlantic Legislators ' Dialogue and thus also to an active participation in the TEC .
I would like to ask the Commission and the Council how the European Parliament 's resolutions have been followed up and , at the same time , to encourage both institutions to vigorously work towards achieving a transatlantic free market area .
in writing . - Relations between the US and the European Union have always been strong .
It was with American aid that a shattered Europe was able to reconstruct and develop in the post war years .
Now the world again faces a crisis and it is more vital than ever that we retain this link and work together to resolve the problems which have beset the world economy .
The European Union and the United States have a strategic role to play in the recovery process .
Combined , our gross domestic product represents more than half the world 's GDP , and we have the worlds strongest bilateral trade partnership , making up almost 40 % of world trade .
However , further developments must be implemented if we are to combat the economic crisis effectively .
The Transatlantic Economic Council has created for itself the goal of an integrated Trans-Atlantic market by 2015 . This will be done by reducing barriers to trade .
If this goal is accomplished , economic growth can re-commence and the recovery process can begin .
The risk of a further ' Credit Crunch ' is not over .
To avoid further economic collapse and unemployment , the EC must ensure coordinated economic policies are put in place in both areas .
It goes without saying that the economic relationship between the US and the EU must be maintained .
However , we must not , under any circumstances , allow the US to monopolise Europe in economic terms .
On the contrary , we must learn from the economic crisis , which had its origins in the unsupervised financial markets in the US .
Europe must maintain its economic independence and find its own way out of the crisis , particularly as bonuses amounting to billions of dollars are being paid out on the New York stock exchange as we speak .
Therefore , I am calling for the European position on the Transatlantic Economic Council to be strengthened .
At the EU-US Summit in Prague in April 2009 , President Obama pressed the European Union to offer Turkey full membership in the near future , claiming that the EU would be contributing to better understanding with the Islamic world .
The fact that the US is supporting its strategic NATO ally ( so that Turkey would clear the way for Rasmussen to become Secretary General of NATO ) should not result in the negotiations on full membership being accelerated .
Despite American support , Turkey will not become a suitable candidate for accession , because there is no sign of huge cultural , geographical , economic and political differences being reduced .
The EU should take a clear position with regard to the US on this issue .
In the light of the economic crisis and the preparations for the climate conference in Copenhagen , it is important for us to take the opportunity of the Transatlantic Economic Council meeting to strengthen further the relationship between the EU and the US .
In the area of the environment , we must discuss new types of foods in particular .
The opportunities and perspectives of nanotechnologies are also a relevant subject .
We should definitely hold open discussions on the topics of genetic engineering and animal cloning .
Europe should not be afraid to explain clearly to its trading partner the concerns of some Member States .
In the area of chemicals and toxic substances , we must work towards high standards of protection and better coordination .
This will not only make trade and economic relationships easier , but will also guarantee in particular that consumers in Europe are protected against toxic substances in the environment and in the products they use .
Constructive discussions will help to ensure that the special relationship between the EU and the US is maintained .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is good that the resolution on preparation of the Transatlantic Economic Council meeting and the EU / USA Summit ( 2 and 3 November 2009 ) calls , on page 17 , for the United States to treat citizens of the European Union equally and to include all EU Member States in the Visa Waiver Program .
It is high time that the appeals by Parliament , the efforts of the Commission and the endeavours of the visa-discriminated Member States produced results .
Otherwise , it will be necessary to take radical action and introduce a visa requirement for American citizens .
It is time , at last , to bring an end to this one-sided privilege enjoyed by the United States .
The European Parliament must not tolerate American discrimination of European citizens on the grounds of their nationality .
The position of Parliament in this matter is all the more significant because not all the governments of the Member States understand the necessity of applying the principle of visa reciprocity .
One of these is the government of the Republic of Poland .
The position of the citizens is completely different .
Over 61 % of Poles are in favour of the introduction of entry visas for citizens of the United States .
In an Internet poll , the number of respondents declaring themselves in favour of such a measure was as high as 96 % .
I trust that the forthcoming EU / USA Summit will be a turning point , at least in terms of visa policy , and that in the new year , in 2010 , the citizens of all EU Member States will be able to travel normally .
In other words , I hope they will enjoy the same freedom as all American citizens who can travel to the EU country of their choice .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0212 / 2009 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Human rights in Cuba
How does the Council assess the current human rights situation in Cuba , in particular with regard to political detainees ?
Does it have information about the conditions under which the Cuban doctor , Darsi Ferrer , and fellow-prisoner , Alfredo Dominguez , are being held , which are clearly inhumane in the extreme ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - I am , of course , ready to move from the US to Cuba and Mr Posselt on a very serious matter , so thank you for your question , Mr Posselt .
The Council remains seriously concerned about the human rights situation in Cuba , in particular , the lack of progress for civil and political rights .
The people of Cuba do not enjoy freedom of speech and assembly .
There is no free press .
Access to information , including the Internet , remains limited .
Restrictions on citizens ' freedom of movement into and within Cuba have not changed .
There are currently 208 political prisoners in Cuba .
This figure has decreased from 2 034 in 2007 , but most of the releases were due to completion of sentence .
Member States ' missions in Havana are closely monitoring the list of political prisoners and have a special human rights working group where important cases are discussed .
Prison conditions , according to human rights defenders and testimonies of political prisoners and their families , are far below the United Nations ' standard minimum rules for treatment of prisoners .
Some prisoners are in very bad health , according to their families , and do not have access to adequate medical care .
There have been a number of reports of cruel and degrading retreatment , including beatings of prisoners , denial of appropriate health care and psychological pressure .
Still , however , there are no reports of prison guards or police being prosecuted for abuse .
The Cuban Government denies the existence of political prisoners and regrettably continues to reject international scrutiny of human rights from independent human rights organisations .
The Council approach towards Cuba was set out in the common position of 1996 , which has since been evaluated by the Council on an annual basis .
In October 2008 , the EU and Cuba agreed on the resumption of a comprehensive political dialogue .
This dialogue , in accordance with EU policies , not only includes the Cuban authorities but also civil society and the democratic opposition .
The Council pays special attention to the principles of democracy , human rights and fundamental freedoms in the 2009 annual evaluation of the common position .
In the conclusions from June this year , we made clear that these issues will remain one of the EU 's key priorities in the relationship with Cuba .
The Council particularly urged the Cuban Government to release unconditionally all political prisoners , including those who were detained in 2003 , and we expressed our concerns for the prisoners and their health condition .
Furthermore , the Council called upon the Cuban authorities to facilitate immediate access of international humanitarian organisations to Cuban prisons .
Since the initiation of the political dialogue with Cuba last year , the EU side has brought up the issue of political prisoners at each and every meeting .
As stated in the last Council conclusions , human rights should always be addressed on these high-level visits and , when appropriate , meetings with the peaceful pro-democracy opposition will be part of these visits .
The Council decided to pursue the dialogue with Cuba because it provides an opportunity to discuss open issues of mutual interest and concern , including the human rights situation , but we remain seriously concerned about the situation in Cuba and we will continue to follow individual cases , particularly prisoners with serious health conditions .
Regarding the particular situation of one of the prisoners mentioned by the honourable Member , the European Union has made a manifestation of solidarity initiated by the Swedish Presidency in Havana in August .
The manifestation was held to show the family of the arrested Dr Darsi Ferrer that the Union is concerned that national criminal procedural law is not being observed by the Cuban authorities .
Equally the case of the other prisoner , Mr Alfredo Domínguez , is also being watched by the Presidency and raised in the dialogues with Cuba , and we do have contact with his family .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mrs Malmström for her excellent , detailed answer .
Mr Brechtmann from the International Commission for Human Rights has given me comprehensive information about the conditions in prisons .
I would just like to ask whether the Council can attempt to investigate the conditions in which individual prisoners are held and how does it evaluate the developments in Cuba as far as relationships with the European Union are concerned ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - We do not have access to this information formally but , via international organisations , NGOs , contacts , political parties and so on , we do get information - which is a bit fragmented - about the situation of the political prisoners .
We know that in some cases , their state of health is very serious .
We try to liaise with families and those NGOs to facilitate the situation but of course , one of the problems is that we have little concrete and confirmed information .
Another problem is that very many of these prisoners are held in prison without proceedings and without being charged with anything .
This is contrary to Cuban laws .
They have the right to know why they are in prison and what they are accused of - a basic human right in all societies , but one that does not exist in Cuba , as we know .
The Cuban dialogue is , of course , fraught with difficulties , but we think for the moment that it is important to have the dialogue in place in accordance with our decision , because it gives us a chance to try and liaise with the authorities , to be very strict and firm in our criticism , but also to liaise with civil society and the peaceful dissidents .
We are trying to do this and , for the moment , this is an approach we think could work .
I do not see any dramatic change to this in the foreseeable future .
( EL ) Madam President , Minister , because I believe that , in the field of human rights , as these are the issues being raised by Mr Posselt in his question , we can cooperate better with countries with which we have political and diplomatic relations as well as financial transactions , it is surprising that the European Union and its Member States are maintaining a passive to negative stance towards the logical and permanent request by the Republic of Cuba for the US embargo on them to be lifted .
My question , therefore , is how does the Presidency view this matter and how do you think the matter should be addressed by the Member States , in light of the fact that , as we all know , Cuba tabled a motion before the UN General Assembly on 28 October for the US embargo to be lifted ?
Here I am , a peaceful dissident from one of the Member States of the European Union , Hungary .
I would like to ask for your advice .
How can we achieve the same level of interest in the human rights situation in Hungary as you have in the human rights situation in Cuba ?
In Hungary , ever since the autumn of 2006 , there has been mass police brutality against peaceful demonstrators , and many political prisoners have been tortured in prison .
I would like to ask Cuban politicians to please negotiate on our behalf on the basis of all the ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
I am sorry but your speaking time is 30 seconds , and the question is about human rights in Cuba .
President-in-Office of the Council . - The whole European Union has , on several occasions , said that we are against the American embargo and that we think it does not facilitate a future solution on Cuba .
The European Union has also said that we are willing to enter into a closer cooperation with Cuba , including trade , depending on their progress on human rights .
For the moment , however , in view of the lack of progress on human rights and respect for democracy and of the number of political prisoners , it is not possible for us to make any progress on this situation .
It is up to the Cuban authorities to show whether they want this relation with us to show concrete progress .
Unfortunately , there has been very little progress so far .
I would be grateful if Members would abide by the rules of Question Time , which involve giving a supplementary question of 30 seconds and keeping to the subject of the stated question .
Subject : Elder abuse
Given that it has already been estimated that more than 10 % of older people experience some form of physical , psychological , financial or mental abuse , both in domestic settings and care institutions and that , as a result of our ageing society , this figure is set to rise , what steps will the Swedish Presidency take in order to fulfil its commitment to improve cooperation and efforts at European level in order to increase the quality of care services for the elderly and prevent elder abuse ?
Mrs Harkin raises an issue that is very relevant today with an increasing proportion of our population getting progressively older .
Measures in this area fall primarily within national competence and the Community can only support and complement the work done by the Member States .
However , the Swedish Presidency would like to give this matter some attention and we will do everything we can to increase the quality of care for the elderly and combat the problems relating to the abuse of elderly people .
In this regard , I would like to remind you of a conference that was held in Stockholm a month ago on the subject of Healthy and Dignified Ageing .
The conference brought together 160 people from 27 countries .
There was a high level of participation . The Commission was there , as were the Member States , officials from ministries of health and social affairs and many voluntary organisations .
The aim was to highlight precisely the problems brought up by the honourable Member : how can we deal with the need for increased cooperation between the health and care sectors to meet the needs of our elderly citizens ?
It is the intention of the Presidency that the Council should adopt conclusions on this matter on 30 November at the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council .
In the draft conclusions , we are seeking deeper and closer cooperation within the area of healthy and dignified ageing , including through the exchange of information between the Member States .
The Commission is also urged to draw up an action plan for the dignity , health and quality of life of elderly people .
I would also like to point out that the Council adopted conclusions in June of this year entitled ' Equal opportunities for women and men : active and dignified ageing ' precisely to facilitate the provision of quality care services in connection with home care for elderly people , taking into account the particular needs of older men and women .
With regard to the issue of the abuse of elderly people in particular , Council Directive 2000 / 78 / EC already prohibits discrimination in the workplace on account of age .
The Commission proposed that the protection provided by this directive should be extended to a number of other areas such as social security , health care , social benefits , education , access to goods and services , housing and so on .
This proposal contains many elements that are relevant to the abuse of elderly people .
It includes care in the home , institutional care and health care services .
It prohibits harassment , which is a form of discrimination , defined as unwanted conduct with the effect of ' violating the dignity of a person and of creating an intimidating , hostile , degrading , humiliating or offensive environment ' .
This proposal is currently being debated in the Council , and the European Parliament has already issued an opinion .
Unanimity in the Council is required for the proposal to be approved .
Of course , we cannot pre-empt the result of the debate in the Council , but I would nevertheless like to say that we are doing all we can to introduce legislation that will help to eliminate all forms of abuse and maltreatment of elderly people , which is fully in line with the opinion issued by the European Parliament .
It is , of course , our firm view that no one should have to suffer harassment or abuse , least of all elderly people , who are so dependent on care .
Thank you , President-in-Office Malmström , for your considered reply .
According to the communication from the Commission in 2008 , the right conditions have to be put in place in terms of resources , training and support for carers .
I absolutely agree that this is so , and I also understand that this is a national competence .
There are , however , some areas where the EU can help . One of them is in the whole area of the cross-border dimension .
I just wanted to know your opinion on the setting up of a formal structure for exchange of information with regard to health professionals , in this case , care-givers , who cross borders .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I thank the Member for that proposal .
It is the first time I have heard about this .
It sounds like a good initiative , but I will have to refer it back to the ministers concerned and feed it into the discussion process .
Perhaps we could come back to this at a later stage .
( RO ) The European Union has an ageing population .
Elderly people need special conditions in terms of both medical services and arranging suitable facilities for them in buildings and on public transport .
Sweden has a long tradition in social policy .
What proposals are you discussing with other Member States so that living conditions for the elderly can be improved throughout the whole of the European Union ?
President-in-Office , Ms Harkin has asked a very important question and you have answered it very well but , broadening out the scope of the question , ageism is generally regarded nowadays as 65-plus .
Would you consider recommending , on a Union-wide basis , increasing , or being more flexible with , the retirement age and having gradual retirement rather than permanent retirement , which seems to happen for most people now ?
That would help enormously in improving the quality of life and ensuring more respect for the elderly .
I would say that seems to go a little beyond the title of the question , but I leave it to the Minister whether she wishes to deal with it or not .
President-in-Office of the Council . - The answer to the first question by the honourable Member is ' yes ' , particularly because we need to discuss these issues .
The Trio - the French , Czech and Swedish Presidencies - agreed to reinforce dialogue on issues relating to health and elderly people .
For instance , there was a conference on Alzheimer 's , and the conference I referred to , held a month ago , referred to dignified treatment of elderly people .
So it was an opportunity to discuss this issue , and the conclusions will be discussed in EPSCO at the end of November , where we will also , of course , consider the report by the European Parliament .
Concerning the retirement age , this is something that every Member State decides itself , but in the discussions we have on the Lisbon strategy - not the Treaty , for once - on how to increase growth , development and employability and the demographic challenge that we will face , this is , of course , an issue to take into consideration - how to use the competence and experience of elderly people also and to find ways of letting them stay in the workforce .
It is not up to the Council to decide exactly the age this should happen , but rather to encourage all Member States to make full use of their labour force .
Subject : Swedish journalist Dawit Isaak imprisoned in Eritrea
According to reports in the Swedish media , Swedish citizen Dawit Isaak , imprisoned in Eritrea since 2001 , has been transferred to a new prison in Eritrea .
No one , apparently , has left this prison alive .
Dawit Isaak has been held in prison under appalling conditions by a rogue regime for almost eight years without being informed why he was so brutally thrown into prison , and separated from his family , friends and work .
So far , all attempts to have Dawit Isaak freed have been unsuccessful .
The EU should do more . Isaak is also an EU citizen .
If nothing is done , there is a risk that Isaak will die without either Sweden or the EU managing to persuade the Eritrean President even to discuss his case seriously .
What does the Swedish Presidency intend to do to raise the case of Dawit Isaak at the highest EU level ?
Is it reasonable for Eritrea to receive aid from the EU when that country is so flagrantly violating fundamental human rights ?
It was eight years ago that the Swedish-Eritrean journalist , Dawit Isaak , was captured and imprisoned in Eritrea .
He is being held in prison without trial and without charges .
Neither his family nor the Swedish authorities or international human rights organisations are permitted to visit him .
Unfortunately , there have been no signs whatsoever of any improvement in the human rights situation in Eritrea over the last few years .
Responsibility for this situation rests entirely with the Eritrean Government .
Eritrea 's continued breach of its obligations with regard to human rights under national and international law is causing considerable concern in the EU .
We are particularly concerned about the issue of political prisoners and the lack of freedom of expression .
The EU has several times demanded the unconditional release of all political prisoners in Eritrea , including , of course , Dawit Isaak .
On 18 September 2009 , the Presidency , acting on behalf of the European Union , issued a very clear statement in which we reiterated our demand for the unconditional release of all political prisoners and stated that Eritrea 's actions are in clear breach of the obligations laid down in the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , which Eritrea has ratified .
Regrettably , Dawit Isaak 's case has not been resolved , but it continues to be a top priority for the EU , the Swedish Presidency and the Swedish Government .
We will not cease in our efforts until he has been released on humanitarian grounds and can be reunited with his family .
I can assure you that we will continue to take his case and the situation of his fellow prisoners to the highest level in Asmara .
Human rights are a key element in relations between the EU and Eritrea .
We are prepared to help the Eritrean Government to improve the human rights situation .
In terms of aid , this is governed by and dependent on the provisions of the Cotonou Agreement .
This agreement deals both with human rights and with the political dialogue to exert pressure to bring about changes .
It is an ongoing process that is progressing desperately slowly , but we hope that this can be a tool we can use to make progress .
( SV ) I do not need to give you any further details of the terrible case of Dawit Isaak .
I also know that Mrs Malmström is extremely committed to this matter .
As far as I know , Dawit Isaak is the only EU citizen imprisoned for exercising his right to free expression .
Should the EU , then , not get together to issue a special joint statement on Dawit Isaak ?
Should the question of a special statement not be taken up in the Council ?
Perhaps Mrs Malmström or someone else should also go to Eritrea and try to meet with Dawit Isaak and also with President Isaias Afewerki .
I hope this will happen , because I think that it is totally unreasonable for an EU citizen to remain imprisoned without trial year after year , apparently seriously ill and possibly at risk of dying in prison .
To Mr Schmidt , I would like to say that I really do share your enormous concern and frustration that this situation is continuing year after year and that there is no possibility of getting through to the Eritrean authorities .
I am certain that both Mr Schmidt and other Members have seen the reports from Eritrea and listened to interviews with its president .
He is not an easy person to deal with and abuse in Eritrea is widespread .
We are continuing to work with all the channels we know of , but we do not have access to the prison .
We have not been able to visit him and we do not know how he is .
Of course , we will not rule out going there if we believe that it could result in progress on this matter , but for the time being , there is no possibility of obtaining any kind of promise that we would be able to visit him or hold talks about him or to meet his family , who are there in Eritrea .
It is extremely frustrating .
We have made a very clear statement .
As Mr Schmidt said , Dawit Isaak is , as far as I am aware , the only political prisoner of EU origin currently in prison and we are working in various ways to increase the pressure on the Eritrean authorities and to make them understand that Dawit Isaak and his fellow prisoners must be released , if nothing else then in accordance with the conventions that the country itself has ratified , but it is very difficult to have any normal dialogue with this country .
There are no other supplementaries on that question , so we will move on to the next question .
Subject : The EU 's alcohol strategy
It is nearly three years since we adopted the EU 's alcohol strategy .
The intention was that it should be assessed by the summer of 2009 .
Unfortunately , the assessment seems to have been postponed .
For Sweden , alcohol policy has always been an important issue and one to which it assigns priority in EU cooperation .
Will the Swedish Presidency therefore seek to ensure that the strategy is assessed without delay ? If so , when exactly ?
Thank you , Mrs Hedh .
I would like to begin by reminding Mrs Hedh that the Swedish Presidency has put alcohol and health high on the agenda as an important aspect in implementing the EU strategy to support Member States in reducing alcohol-related harm .
Against this background , we have already held three major events .
The first was the informal meeting of health ministers in Jönköping in July , where the sale and marketing of alcoholic drinks and how they influence the alcohol consumption of young people were given particular attention .
The second event was an Expert Conference on Alcohol and Health in Stockholm on 21-22 September aimed at supporting a sustainable , long-term and comprehensive strategy within the EU with regard to alcohol .
More than 450 people participated from , in principle , all of the EU Member States and the participants lent very strong support to the Swedish priorities in the area of alcohol and health .
The third event was the Global Expert Meeting on Alcohol , Health and Social Development held on 23 September .
This event was organised by the Swedish Presidency in cooperation with Sida ( the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency ) and the Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services and was sponsored by the World Health Organisation .
The aim was to contribute to a global strategy when the World Health Assembly meets in May next year .
At this meeting , new findings were presented concerning the link between the harmful use of alcohol , social development and the spread of infectious diseases such as HIV / AIDS and tuberculosis , an important link that is worth taking note of .
Thus , with regard to the question ' will the Swedish Presidency seek to ensure that the strategy is assessed without delay ? ' the answer is yes ; adoption of a strategy within the EU in 2006 was an important step .
Through its adoption , the Commission recognised alcohol as one of the key factors for determining health within the EU and also the fact that the EU is responsible for tackling risky and harmful alcohol consumption .
This was reinforced further by support from all of the EU 's health ministers in conclusions reached in November 2006 .
Since 1 January 2007 , the Commission has been following the trends in alcohol consumption and alcohol-related harm as well as the changes in policy within the EU .
Even though we have seen progress in many areas , there has been far too little time to assess the full scale of the impact on health of alcohol policy and drinking habits .
The first report from the Commission , which was tabled at the expert conference a few weeks ago , was a status report in respect of the EU 's alcohol strategy .
It is an interim report ahead of the final report that is to be tabled in 2012 .
The Presidency will , of course , go through this status report and consider the results of the Expert Conference on Alcohol and Health .
We will monitor progress .
We have also funded a number of new studies with a view to ensuring that alcohol remains high on the EU 's agenda .
One of the studies we are funding will examine the effect that the marketing of alcohol has on young people , another will look at the impact of alcohol on elderly people in 10 different EU Member States and yet another will investigate the effect that cross-border trade has on national alcohol policy .
In our draft conclusions on alcohol and health , which are currently under discussion in the Council 's working group , we propose that the Commission should be urged to start to analyse and seek out priorities for the next phase of the work on alcohol and health , to emphasise the fact that we need to look at the period beyond 2012 when the assessment and the current alcohol strategy will be concluded .
Based on this debate , the Presidency aims to adopt Council conclusions to support an alcohol strategy in December 2009 .
( SV ) Mrs Malmström , I know that the Presidency has held several constructive conferences and has spent a lot of time on this matter .
My question was about the alcohol strategy , in particular , because I have asked the same question before , about six months ago .
At that time , I was told that the alcohol strategy would be assessed before the summer .
That is why I raised this question , as the matter has not appeared on the agenda .
A lot has happened since the Swedish Presidency proposed an alcohol strategy for the EU in 2001 .
The alcohol strategy was adopted in 2006 and a lot has happened since then .
Some Member States have raised the age restrictions , some have increased taxes on alcohol and some have lowered the blood alcohol concentration limits , for example .
I am very pleased about this .
I would have liked to have seen the Swedish Presidency go a bit further , perhaps , with regard to advertising , but I am nevertheless pleased that a study has now been carried out on advertising , alcohol and young people .
Thank you for your support on this matter .
We have indeed tried to highlight this issue , which is , of course , the framework that the EU affords to work within : holding conferences , producing studies , setting out timetables to ensure that everything continues to move forward , as well as securing the involvement of future presidencies .
I am pleased that we were able to clear up the misunderstanding that clearly arose .
The intention was for there to be an interim report , which of course is just as important and which we will look at and analyse , but that the final assessment would come in 2012 .
In the meantime , there is a tremendous amount to do and I can also confirm that many Member States are doing a tremendous amount , as everyone in all the Member States has been made aware of the effects that alcohol consumption has on health .
( LT ) Minister , at EU level , the number of road accident fatalities is falling , but the ambitious goals will not be achieved next year .
The main cause is alcohol .
In some countries , there is an appallingly high suicide rate , and again alcohol is to blame for this .
Do you not think that on an EU scale , we should strengthen the already strict measures on alcohol consumption , following Scandinavia 's example ?
In particular , consumption should be restricted for young people .
Would Sweden like to initiate this ?
I want to bring the Minister 's attention to the fact that in Scotland , the constituency which I represent , a debate on a minimum pricing of alcohol products is currently happening .
I wanted to take this opportunity to ask the Minister whether there is any discussion in the Council over the issue of minimum pricing of alcohol products .
There is a big debate happening in Scotland and I was wondering what the Council 's perspective is , and whether it is discussing this at all .
President-in-Office of the Council . - One of the five priority themes in the EC alcohol strategy is precisely the reduction of injuries and death from alcohol-related road accidents .
This is , as the honourable Member said , a very big problem and it causes enormous suffering and has economic costs as well .
The Commission has recommended the adoption of a lower maximum limit for inexperienced and professional drivers , while countries who already apply limits should not decrease them .
There is a recommendation on this , and we are working with the Member States .
Many States have already applied those recommendations and there are a lot of awareness-raising activities going on to discuss this issue .
I am not aware of any ongoing discussion on prices .
There might be .
I will check with my colleague , the Minister for Health , who is responsible for that , but I do not think that particular issue is being discussed .
There are many other alcohol-related issues that are being followed up right now , but probably not this one for the moment , because it is , of course , not an EU competence .
Subject : Environmental aspect of gas pipelines
In the European Union , much attention is being paid to the environmental aspects of the new pipelines being constructed to transport gas to the EU ( Nabucco , Nord Stream and South Stream ) .
The Nord Stream gas pipeline , which runs along the floor of the Baltic Sea , is an exceptional project on account of its size and its potential environmental impact on the Baltic region .
In the opinion of the Swedish Presidency , what dangers does the construction of gas pipelines pose to the environment , and what measures can be taken to eliminate those dangers ?
Nord Stream is a unique project for the Baltic Sea area on account of its size and possible consequences .
The Council is aware of the misgivings that exist with regard to the environmental aspects of the Nord Stream gas pipeline project and has taken careful note of the European Parliament 's resolution on the environmental impact of the planned gas pipeline in the Baltic Sea linking Russia and Germany , which was adopted in July last year .
All of the EU Member States and the European Community are party to the United Nations Espoo Convention of 1991 .
This is the Convention on environmental impact assessment in a transboundary context .
This Convention contains a number of relevant obligations that are binding on the parties , with the particular aim of ensuring that an environmental impact assessment is carried out which includes consultation with other parties affected by a particular project .
The impact of the Nord Stream project on the sensitive Baltic Sea environment is of the utmost importance and must be examined carefully .
Natura 2000 areas could be affected , as well as areas where there are mines and where chemical ammunition has been dumped .
The spread of sediment could affect the marine flora and fauna and also have an impact on the fishing industry .
The fact that the gas pipeline is close to important shipping routes could also entail a risk to the environment and to safety .
All of the states around the Baltic Sea have worked together now for more than three years within the framework of the Espoo Convention to determine how these obligations relate to how this project is to be executed .
The Council would nevertheless like to stress that the Nord Stream project is a private undertaking .
It is therefore the parties responsible for the project who must provide information demonstrating that the project observes the relevant legislation , under the scrutiny of the Member States affected .
Thus , the Council cannot comment on the Nord Stream project in any way that could be construed as interference in national legal processes .
( LT ) Thank you Minister , for your truly comprehensive answer .
Evidently , this matter does concern Sweden greatly , all the more so because Sweden is a Baltic Sea country .
I would just like to underline one thing , that we can never devote too much attention to such matters .
I would also like you to say that this probably is the case and that during its Presidency , Sweden will continually follow this matter intently and will take appropriate steps .
I can guarantee , honourable Members , that Sweden is doing that .
We are very vigilant when it comes to the sensitive environment in the Baltic Sea , which is , of course , at risk from any type of project that is to be carried out , and therefore we have imposed very stringent environmental requirements on precisely this project , and it is now in the process of being examined and scrutinised by various relevant authorities .
It is not Swedish territory that is affected by this , but Sweden 's economic zone , and therefore we have been very careful to point out that it is international conventions , like the Espoo Convention , that form the basis for the positions we are to adopt .
We must not make any political or economic judgments .
This is what the Swedish State can look at and that is indeed what we are doing .
Subject : Elimination of barriers to the free movement of labour between Member States
The Swedish Presidency of the Council has recognised that , in the current economic crisis , the key priority is that Member States must be able to respond jointly to challenges and find solutions for overcoming the economic and financial crisis and , above all , reducing unemployment and its adverse social consequences .
The barriers to the free movement of workers from the Member States which joined the Union on or after 1 May 2004 are limiting the rights of those countries ' citizens and could result in clandestine employment and social dumping .
To remove those barriers means protecting migrant workers on the same basis as nationals .
Given the Swedish Presidency 's commitment to an active policy for the EU labour market and to improving adaptability and mobility , can the Council state what concrete measures it has in mind with a view to eliminating the barriers to the free movement of workers from the Member States which joined the Union on or after 1 May 2004 ?
The Council would like to point out that the free movement of people is one of the fundamental rights guaranteed in Community legislation and includes the right of EU citizens to live and work in another Member State .
At its meeting on 9 March 2009 , the Council directed an invitation to those Member States that were still applying transitional rules restricting free movement .
At the time , based on the information available , the Council said that these Member States should consider whether to continue applying these restrictions .
The Member States were also urged to lift the restrictions during the third phase if no serious disturbances , or risk of serious disturbances , to the labour markets could be identified in the Member States concerned .
The Council also pointed out to the Member States that priority must be given to citizens from Member States over labour from outside the EU , and that the protection of citizens from new Member States who were already resident and employed in a Member State will remain during the transitional periods .
The rights of family members have also been taken into account in accordance with the practice in connection with previous accessions .
The Council emphasised the strong elements of differentiation and flexibility in the rules on the free movement of workers .
The Member States have declared that they will endeavour to grant increased access to the labour market to citizens from the new Member States concerned in accordance with national legislation , with a view to speeding up the approximation of their legislation in line with Community legislation .
In November 2008 , the Commission put forward a communication on the impact of free movement of workers in the context of EU enlargement .
The Commission points out that workers from Bulgaria , Romania and the EU-10 Member States helped to meet a higher demand for labour in the receiving countries and thus made a significant contribution to sustained economic growth .
Evidence at hand suggests that post-enlargement intra-EU mobility has not led - and is unlikely to lead - to serious labour market disturbances .
The Commission also notes that the volume and direction of mobility flows within the EU are driven by general labour supply and demand rather than by rules restricting labour market access .
The Commission concludes that restrictions applied by the Member States may delay labour market adjustments and even exacerbate the incidence of undeclared work .
The free movement of labour is an important priority for the European Union .
The movement of labour helps to create more jobs , so that the economy can be adjusted even during an economic crisis .
The movement of workers also helps to reduce social marginalisation and poverty .
With regard to the transitional period for free movement that the honourable Member asked about , the Member States have the right to retain their restrictions up to the end of the third phase of the transitional period .
However , the Council believes that the economic crisis that Europe is currently experiencing should not be used as grounds for continuing to apply the transitional rules .
Even during periods when demand for labour is low , it can be difficult for employers to fill vacancies with applicants from their own country .
The Council regularly reviews the question of transitional arrangements .
The most recent review was at its meeting in June 2009 , when the Council took note of the Commission 's information on the impact of free movement in the context of EU enlargement .
The Commission informed the Council that three of the EU-15 Member States had , prior to 1 May 2009 , notified the Commission of serious labour market disruptions or the risk of such disruptions .
Germany and Austria continued to apply restrictions on labour market access by retaining the requirement for a work permit , while the United Kingdom applies a system of ex post registration , which allows workers to start work but requires them to register within 30 days .
In the information it provided to the Council , the Commission also stated that it would ensure that the provisions of the Accession Treaty are complied with and it reserved the right to request clarification from those Member States continuing to apply restrictions .
( RO ) I would like to ask you whether , as part of the Swedish Presidency 's agenda , you have in your timetable any action aimed at trying to continue to persuade Member States which maintain these barriers to the free movement of labour to lift them .
My second question is whether you wish to include such a proposal on lifting the barriers to free movement of labour as part of the Swedish Presidency 's conclusions .
I would like to thank the honourable Member .
All of the present Trio , the French , Czech and Swedish Presidencies , confirmed in their conclusions that enlargement has brought great advantages to the EU , it has led to economic growth and there is nothing to indicate that serious economic disturbances have occurred .
We have mechanisms in place for the regular review of the transitional rules together with the Commission .
Between these reviews , we can , of course , call on the Member States to take the measures necessary to eliminate discriminatory legislation and ensure that the skilled labour force within the whole of the EU is utilised , but the purely legal aspects are dealt with together with the Commission .
As I said previously , we carried out such a review earlier this year .
( DE ) Madam President , the fellow Member who asked the question naturally focused in her remarks on the situation in those Member States where parts of the population are emigrating to look for work elsewhere .
I can understand this .
However , in contrast , Austria , like Germany , is a country with massive immigration and it could obtain an extension of the transitional period until the labour market is fully opened .
The reasons for this are clear .
Negative displacement and distribution effects resulting from major differences in income , in particular , against the background of the current problems on the labour market , and increased immigration could have resulted in the labour market being significantly overburdened , leading to social tensions that everyone wants to avoid .
Therefore , my question is : will these problems which are affecting Austria and Germany be recognised and are appropriate solutions being planned ?
All EU Member States have , of course , been badly affected by the economic crises and unemployment .
The figures look slightly different , but all of them have been hit hard .
A country is entitled to put in place the transitional rules , which Austria , for example , has done , and the opportunity exists to apply to extend these rules under special procedures if justification is provided to the Commission .
I am not sufficiently informed about the precise situation in Austria . I do not know if the problems are greater there than anywhere else .
As I said , all Member States have huge problems in connection with the labour market .
The Commission states in its report that there is nothing to indicate that free movement has led to disturbances in any Member State .
In my country , Sweden , which is also experiencing very high unemployment , we have not seen any link at all between free movement and unemployment .
The people who have come from other EU Member States have been welcome and have been absorbed into the labour market .
Subject : Harassment by Turkey of aircraft operated by the European Union agency for external border security ( Frontex )
Since May 2009 , six incidents have been recorded in which aircraft operated by the European Union agency for external border security ( Frontex ) have been subjected to harassment , either by Turkish aircraft or through radio communications .
The most recent incident occurred on 8 September 2009 when a Frontex helicopter flown by two Latvian pilots was en route from the island of Kos to Samos .
While flying over the island of Farmakonisi , the helicopter received radio interference from Turkish radar at Datça , demanding that it withdraw from the area and submit a flight plan .
Is the Council aware of this incident ?
What are its comments ?
What measures will it take against Turkey ?
Yes , the Council is aware of the incidents that the Member refers to .
The Presidency would like to say that , as a candidate country , Turkey has to share the European Union 's values and goals in accordance with the treaties .
A clear commitment to good neighbourly relations and peaceful solutions to conflicts is a crucial and important requirement for EU membership .
In accordance with the framework for the negotiations and relevant Council conclusions , the EU has urged Turkey to avoid any kind of threats , sources of conflict or measures that could harm good relations and the possibility of resolving disputes in a peaceful manner .
I would like to assure the honourable Member that the issue of good neighbourly relations is brought up by the EU on a systematic basis , most recently at the Association Council meeting on 19 May and at the meeting between the EU troika and Turkey 's political leaders in Stockholm in July this year .
As regards the particular point about aircraft operated by Frontex , I would like to mention that Frontex is coordinating several joint operations and pilot projects . These are an important contribution to the protection of the Union 's sea , land and external air borders .
One of the operations is Poseidon 2009 , for which Greece is the host .
It is aimed at preventing impermissible border crossings by persons coming from or transiting Turkey and countries in North Africa and trying to reach the Greek coast .
The honourable Member is , of course , aware of this .
Poseidon also includes the stationing of technical facilities in European airspace along the borders of the Greek islands .
Turkey has , of course , been informed of the operation .
With regard to operational cooperation between Frontex and the competent Turkish authorities , negotiations are currently being conducted concerning working methods .
That is very positive .
An agreement would cover information exchange and opportunities for the Turkish authorities to take part in Frontex joint operations .
This sort of work could be an important part of the work to prevent illegal immigration and could help to improve neighbourly relations .
( EL ) Madam President , Minister , I should like to reiterate once again my appreciation of your honest efforts to answer our questions , but may I say that , from what you have said , you are obviously aware of this incident .
We are cooperating with Turkey , but you have not given me a clear reply , which is why I wish to focus on and repeat my question as to whether Turkish airspace was , in fact , violated during the Frontex mission , as it claims .
The reason I say this is that , under this procedure , we are investigating if Turkey is contesting Greek sovereign rights .
Additionally , may I remind you that , during a recent visit to Greece , the Deputy Executive Director of Frontex , Mr Fernandez , claimed that no such violations were taking place and referred to the pilots ' reports on the matter .
So to come back to my question : did the Frontex mission commit the violations alleged by Turkey or not and what are you doing about this ?
It is very difficult for the Swedish Presidency to determine exactly when a violation takes place and when not .
We have been informed on several occasions of the concern that many of my Greek colleagues feel .
We have discussed this and we have also called for , and held , talks about this with the Turkish authorities and our Turkish counterparts and urged them to work to improve neighbourly relations .
It is very difficult for a presidency to determine exactly whether a violation is taking place or not .
This is , of course , based on international conventions and is a bilateral issue between the two Member States .
Mrs Morvai , you indicated you wanted the floor again .
If it is for a supplementary on this issue , for 30 seconds you have the floor .
Madam President , you are probably reading my thoughts because I did not indicate that I wanted the floor , but I wanted to apologise for taking an extra 20 seconds from this extremely lively , huge democratic debate for such an irrelevant question as mass police brutality and political prisoners in a Member State .
I do apologise .
If you have a question , you should submit it in the normal way in writing and then it may , if it is appropriate , be answered .
There are many Members who want questions answered tonight and out of respect for them , we would like to conduct this in an orderly manner .
( Question 8 fell as the questioner was absent )
Subject : Revision of Regulation ( EC ) No 1 / 2005
Can the Council outline the views of the Presidency with regard to the review of Regulation ( EC ) No 1 / 2005 on the protection of animals during transport ?
Is the Presidency sensitive to all aspects of the potential impact of the revision ?
Thank you for your question .
The Council naturally shares the Member 's concern regarding animal welfare .
The Presidency responded to a similar question from Mrs Harkin in September and stated then that one of the aims of the Swedish Presidency is to encourage the debate on animal welfare , and this is listed as one of the priorities of our Presidency .
At the meeting on 7 September this year , the Council received news from the Commission that a draft proposal for a review of Regulation ( EC ) No 1 / 2005 on the protection of animals during transport will be tabled as soon as possible .
At the same meeting , the Council obtained the views of the delegations on the need for new instruments to improve the control and inspection of the international transport of live animals , for example , satellite navigation systems .
An appropriate satellite navigation system could facilitate supervision by the Member States ' authorities , as it is currently very difficult to prove a lack of compliance using the instruments we have today .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1 / 2005 is a more forceful piece of legislation on the protection of animals during commercial transport , as it ascertains the parties concerned and assigns them areas of responsibility and it introduces tighter measures in the form of permits and inspections , as well as more stringent rules for transport .
Certain aspects of animal transport are not covered by the provisions , namely the maximum number of journeys and spatial requirements for animals .
In accordance with Article 32 of the Regulation , these aspects are to be included in a report that is to be presented within four years and may be accompanied by a new proposal .
The Presidency can confirm that we intend to start examining the Commission 's proposal on the review of the regulation as soon as the Commission submits it .
This has not happened yet , but as soon as it arrives , the examination will begin , as we share the Member 's interest in the review of this regulation .
Thank you for your comprehensive answer .
I share the concerns about animal welfare , but I want realistic regulation that also allows trade in animals which is legitimate and properly policed and I would suggest that we do not need additional regulation .
We need absolutely proper implementation of existing regulations and I think your comments about navigation , etc. are helpful in this debate .
Please let science dictate .
I would ask you to concentrate , perhaps , on horse transport .
That is a particular problem , and there the regulations are not being implemented .
Perhaps you would have a comment on that .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I am not an expert in the horse sector of animal transport but I listened to your proposal and I will take it with me .
I agree with you that normally , it is quite often the case that it is the implementation that is lacking , and there is not always necessarily a need for new regulation .
Once the Commission proposal comes , we will look at it , evaluate it and see if there is a need for additional measures or , as you imply , only a need to reinforce implementation .
So we will come back to that as soon as we have the proposal from the Commission .
Following on from my colleague Mrs McGuinness 's question : Ireland being an island nation is very dependent on transport of animals overseas and the restrictions that are being implemented and being proposed to be implemented are regarded by many people in the industry as cost-prohibitive .
So would you take that into consideration when you are doing the review ?
Otherwise , if we do not have live transport , you will have a cosy cartel amongst the factories , which will pull down prices further and drive more and more people out of farming .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I realise the difficulties regarding Ireland 's situation , because it is an island and because of its dependence as regards transport .
I think in all legislation it is important , in particular , that we have a great concern .
We know that there is pressure from our citizens to look at the well-being of the animals but , of course , doing this in an appropriate way and evaluating what has been done .
Are the provisions sufficient ?
Are they needed ?
Is there additional need ?
Do we need implementation ?
We must take all that into consideration before we move on to further regulation .
I am sure that , during the discussion that we will have with Member States , all Member States will have the opportunity to set out their specific situation as input into the discussion .
Subject : A Commission portfolio for sport
Given , on the one hand , the growing child obesity rates in the EU 27 , and on the other hand , the importance of life-long health as the EU population ages , the inclusion of sport as an EU competence under Lisbon is to be welcomed .
To reflect the Treaty 's strengthened recognition of the importance of sport , would the Council be supportive of any initiative to include sport explicitly in the portfolio of one of the incoming Commissioners ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Sport activity is subject to the application of EU law today and , as the honourable Member rightly points out , when the Lisbon Treaty enters into force , it will provide the EU with a legal basis allowing it to contribute to the promotion of European sporting issues while taking into account the specific nature of sport , its structures , based on voluntary activities , and its social and educational function .
However , the Council cannot take a view on the internal organisation of the next Commission which , in line with the Treaty , is a matter for the President of the Commission .
I agree that sport and health go hand in hand .
Sport activities also promote social cohesion , democracy and personal development .
Sport is certainly also entertainment , both when the local football club is playing and when there are international competitions .
It is my belief that a free and independent sports movement also has a responsibility in societal matters such as public health and safeguarding democratic values .
The Swedish Presidency regards sports policy first and foremost as a national issue .
One also has to be cautious with new suggestions and programmes which expand policies at EU level in a way which could damage already well-functioning systems such as the ones civic society has built up over the years .
Thank you very much firstly for taking my question : I appreciate it very much .
Thank you also for your answer , which was comprehensive .
I think you have outlined very clearly the value of sport , especially the health value of it , and I am quite sure that , when the Lisbon Treaty comes into being , we can walk hand in hand to ensure that sport , as a competence of the European Union , can get its fair share of promotion and publicity .
Thank you for taking the question , because Mr Kelly is very shy and he has not said that he was a former President of the Gaelic Athletic Association , the most important sporting movement in Ireland , and that is why his interest is in sport .
He has been very coy about that , but I thought you should know .
Thank you very much for that point of information .
That concludes Question Time .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
Parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
State of play as regards SIS II and VIS ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 19.05 )
Opening of the sitting
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Problem of limited access of developing countries to some vaccines ( debate )
The first item is the oral question to the Commission from Mr Goerens , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Democrats and Liberals for Europe , on the problem of limited access of developing countries to some vaccines - B7-0214 / 2009 )
Mr President , within the context of this question to the Commission , I would like to help explore the routes likely to put an end to an injustice that consists in denying 80 % of the world 's population access to the A ( H1N1 ) flu vaccine in particular , and to vaccines in general .
The problem is not new .
In fact , the question comes up every year in connection with the flu season .
Generally speaking , new seasonal flu viruses first appear in developing countries .
From then on , laboratories in the industrialised countries start producing a new vaccine .
They can only begin production if they have previously obtained strains from the country - generally a developing country - where the new type of flu first emerged .
Once developed , the vaccine is only just enough to protect the populations of the industrialised countries .
The result is that the populations of the South are unprotected against pandemics .
I am addressing the Commission in order to ask it what it intends to do to end this injustice .
Is it morally defensible to have the level of health protection available to a population depend on the financial resources its country has ?
I would therefore like to know whether the Commission can tell us what resources it is able to mobilise to fill this gap .
What , if need be , would be the Commission 's strategy , and what partnerships would it establish with the states concerned and with the institutions of the United Nations ' system , or with the private sector , in the effort to enable citizens in developing countries to have access to the vaccine ?
Does the WHO 's system of protecting intellectual property , which I did not mention in my written version , constitute an obstacle to the production of vaccines by developing countries ?
If so , would the European Union be prepared to initiate a debate within the WHO aimed at removing that obstacle ?
I would like to add one final question .
Can the Commission outline the measures to be taken to improve the standard of health infrastructure in developing countries , an essential precondition for fairer access to vaccines ?
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) I would like to thank the distinguished MEP Charles Goerens for his question , which gives me the opportunity to deal with both the aspects relating directly to the influenza A ( H1N1 ) pandemic and wider aspects concerning the European Commission 's contribution to improving health infrastructures in developing countries .
The Community has taken action against the influenza A ( H1N1 ) pandemic both internally and externally .
In fact , we are dealing with a crisis requiring a global approach , both for reasons of effectiveness in terms of protecting our citizens and from considerations linked to solidarity with less developed countries .
We talk about effectiveness in terms of the rapid alert systems , the close monitoring of the development of the pandemic and actual virus itself , as well as the assessment of the effectiveness of the preventive and curative measures adopted in the countries where the pandemic first occurred , which are all vital elements in preparing and adapting our own responses .
However , we also talk about solidarity because the Europe Union , as a main financer of public development aid and a key partner of a large number of developing countries , must support these countries in facing these new threats .
In our response to these threats , the Commission and the European Union as a whole are not starting their efforts from scratch .
Based on the precedent of bird flu , resulting from the H5N1 virus , the EU has been able to introduce , along with international organisations such as the World Health Organisation , the World Bank and others , effective procedures for exchanging information and coordinating technical assistance , as well as financial instruments such as a trust fund at the World Bank .
As Mrs Chan , Director-General of the World Health Organisation , says , the world has never been so well prepared for a pandemic .
The Commission has already played and continues to play a particularly important role in these systems whose components have now been extended to cover every type of flu threat .
As regards the developing countries ' generalised access to vaccines , the new flu pandemic has revived the debate which has been going on for well over two years within the WHO and the working party making the preparations for the flu pandemic , set up at the request of the World Health Assembly , following the decision made by Indonesia , referred to by Mr Goerens .
This week in Geneva , the WHO is presenting its first recommendations from the group in which the Community has played an active role .
In accordance with the World Assembly 's resolution , the final recommendations must be presented to the WHO 's Executive Council , which will meet at the end of January .
At that juncture , the best possible balance must be identified between , on the one hand , boosting the research into and rapid development of new medical products largely derived from private sector research , for which intellectual property rights nowadays provide a key form of incentive , and , on the other hand , fairness in terms of providing access to the products developed from this research .
The European Community has reservations regarding any restriction on the exchange of biological material required to carry out the relevant research activities .
Active international collaboration on a transparent basis and coordinated by legitimate institutions , such as the WHO and its network , is crucial to the rapid development and distribution of solutions for responding to the pandemic .
In the specific case of influenza A ( H1N1 ) , for which there were no vaccine stocks available , there has also been the issue of production capacity and who has first option on this capacity when huge orders are placed by the countries which have the necessary resources .
The commitment made by some vaccine manufacturers and , more recently , by some countries to earmark 10 % of their production or orders for donations or sale at a reduced price to developing countries is an encouraging sign of global solidarity .
As far as the Commission is concerned , the provision of assistance to third countries in tackling the pandemic is vital and must not just be limited to access to vaccines when they are available .
It is of paramount importance to continue the support provided by the Commission and Member States in various forms , aimed at consolidating health infrastructures , along with assistance for projects , sectoral or general budget support for partner countries , and even support for international organisations .
Respect for the principle of allowing countries to assume responsibility for their own development and the commitments to provide effective aid will need to be guaranteed by ensuring , in particular , that attention will continue to be focused on priority diseases and interventions .
The response to a pandemic is actually based , first and foremost , on having health infrastructures that are better equipped and treat cases early in order to have available , in a fair manner , preventive resources when they are available .
In the event of a severe crisis , the European Commission will be able to mobilise its humanitarian and emergency intervention resources and will also be able to demonstrate flexibility in its use of the resources already allocated to partner countries which have requested assistance .
During such severe crises , non-governmental organisations and , in fact , major institutional networks will definitely have an important role to play .
The Commission therefore knows that it can count on these agencies also effectively swinging into action .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , the inevitable arrival and recurrence of a flu pandemic has thrust the issue of vaccination to the forefront of the news agenda .
However , this has been a long-standing and persistent problem for the developing world .
The oral question this morning raises an excellent point about the hypocrisy and inequity of the Western world demanding materials for vaccines from developing countries to protect their rich citizens , and then having the audacity to sell the selfsame vaccines back to the poor .
Above and beyond the need for the developing world to have similar access to flu vaccinations , we must strive to set up a system whereby the poorest people of the world , who are almost invariably more exposed to disease , have the opportunity which we in the West take for granted to protect themselves from preventable diseases .
Tuberculosis is a good example of the contrast between us and our neighbours in the developing world .
In Europe , children are routinely given the BCG vaccination , which has greater than 80 % effectiveness .
This has led to a situation in Europe where TB is not the persistent threat is once was .
Contrast this with the developing world , where 26 % of avoidable deaths are caused by tuberculosis .
The effect of TB in these countries is exacerbated by the fact that it is a highly infectious airborne disease that spreads easily within confined spaces such as the squalid shanty towns so prevalent in many developing nations .
Add to this the fact that 50 % of AIDS patients in sub-Saharan Africa where HIV / AIDS is rife will develop TB , and we can see how lucky we are to be in the relatively controlled immunised area , having programmes such as we do .
For a shining success story of the power of immunisation and the need for development aid in general , look no further than the example of measles in Africa , where , largely due to vaccination programmes , deaths from the disease fell from 90 % between 2000 and 2006 .
Mr President , it is clear that vaccination works and it is clear that we have a responsibility to the people who are suffering from the absence of vaccinations .
I urge that we in this House keep the pressure on to ensure that this facility is made available to the poorest of the poor .
May I make a point of order before I sit down : please do something about the lifts in this House .
I was going up and down in the lift when the doors jammed and I could hardly get here in time for the debate .
Everybody complains about it .
Something has to be done .
( ES ) Mr Mitchell , with respect to the issue of lifts , which you have raised , I would like to reveal something which may be a secret part of the Bureau 's debates .
At the most recent Bureau meeting , I criticised the situation you have just described and which , shamefully , is not merely a problem in Strasbourg .
In Brussels , too , there have been weeks during which it really was impossible to move around the various labyrinthine Parliament buildings , because the lifts were out of order .
The Bureau shall pass this matter on to the relevant services , so that the lift service can be improved , by one means or another .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , I would like to bring the House away from lifts and back to vaccines which prevent deaths .
I think that is exactly what we should be focusing on .
Of course I support the call that we have heard relating to the A ( H1N1 ) virus but I want to look much wider : in fact , Commissioner , there are systems that work , and vaccines do work .
Look at pneumococcal disease .
It is a bacterial infection that causes pneumonia , meningitis and sepsis , and is relatively unknown despite its deadly status as the leading vaccine-preventable killer of children under five worldwide .
Pneumococcal bacteria are the leading cause of pneumonia , which takes the lives of two million children every year .
This is a global health challenge with solutions .
It might interest you to know that the Commission and many Member States have already made pledges to support immunisation in the world 's poorest countries by supporting GAVI , the International Finance Facility for Immunisation , and the pneumococcal Advance Market Commitment ( AMC ) , something you did not mention .
But we can and we must do more to prioritise pneumococcal disease within existing health and development efforts and to work with developing countries to do the same .
The pneumococcal AMC offers an unprecedented opportunity for countries to protect their children from this preventable killer .
Yet the sad fact is that , of the 71 countries that are eligible , fewer than 20 have applied for AMC funding that will save so many lives .
I would remind the House that expanded access to essential vaccines is a key lever to achieving Millennium Development Goal 4 : a two-thirds reduction in child mortality by 2015 .
We must make sure that we put these vaccines in the hands of countries that need them most .
It is a simple step that will quite simply save millions of children 's lives .
There is before this House a written declaration on this matter , including the pooling of patents .
I urge Members to sign this and do something that matters .
Mr President , as we know , this is the week in which most of our Member States are launching the first wave of influenza A vaccinations whilst , at the same time , we are forced to recognise the meagre progress made in this area in terms of access to the vaccine by developing countries .
This has just been said : millions of people , and primarily children , die each year in these countries from a whole host of diseases , as was mentioned in particular by my fellow Member , Mr Mitchell , earlier .
I am not saying that the solution is simple , especially - not only , but especially - because the question of access to the vaccine is in no way comparable to that of access to medicines , for at least two specific reasons : the small number of producers and control of the refrigeration chain , which is still difficult .
There are positive elements , however : the fact that , for the time being , the virus is not mutating and the announced availability of three billion doses each year .
These are obvious facts and they demand , they encourage the launching of a strategy on a worldwide scale .
In the limited time granted to me , I shall conclude , Mr President , by saying that I therefore think that the European Union must wholeheartedly support the call by the WHO for a fair distribution of vaccines , first and foremost , in the areas of high mortality , and that we must also create the conditions for , and encourage the development of , private and public partnerships so as to effectively combat the shortage of vaccines in the world .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would first of all like to stress the importance of the question that was asked by Mr Goerens , which is a matter of basic justice .
We are all perfectly aware that , in an influenza A pandemic situation , it would be southern countries that bear the brunt of this problem and the consequences of the spread of the virus , and not northern countries .
Every year , we sit idly by as thousands of citizens die as a result of pandemics that have already been eradicated or are treatable in northern countries , and there is a very long list : malaria , dengue fever , yellow fever , tuberculosis .
The list is endless , yet we watch and do nothing about this problem .
In fact , we use the southern countries as suppliers of samples of new strains of viruses , free of charge , so we can improve treatment in northern countries , but we do not provide an effective response to these problems .
I would therefore just like to add some more questions to those that were asked .
Do we actually want to treat this problem as a public health problem or as a business ?
If we want to treat it as a public health problem , then we have to ensure equal access to treatment in all regions of the world and we therefore have to be more effective in our efforts .
That being said , I would like to ask , and I hope that it is not the case , if we are waiting for there finally to be surplus stocks of vaccines in Europe or for the side effects to prove too harmful before we show our generosity and suddenly start sending the necessary vaccines to southern countries .
Lastly , I would just like to ask if the European Union , if we Europeans , and if the Commission feels comfortable with a system or with a model whereby northern countries deal with pandemics by means of a prevention model and southern countries are given palliatives or simply leftovers .
It is now Mr Guerrero Salom 's turn to take the floor , and I would like to say that I am very pleased , and somewhat moved , to be able to give the floor , for the first time , to someone who has been a great friend and colleague for many years .
( ES ) Thank you for your kind words , Mr President .
It is an honour to work for the institution of which you are currently the Vice President .
I have taken the floor to support the interest raised by this issue , namely providing support to developing countries to prevent and combat the H1N1 influenza pandemic .
However , beyond the matter of the pandemic , I would also like to point out that diseases currently have more of an impact on developing countries than on developed ones .
Many diseases , which have been eradicated in developing countries , still claim the lives of tens of millions of people in the developing world .
These countries have to protect the health of their inhabitants , the health of their citizens , but they lack the means to do so .
In order to fight against AIDS , tuberculosis , malaria and other infectious diseases , these countries need vaccines to which they currently do not have access and which they cannot buy .
I would like to encourage the Commission , in the way that the Commissioner has described , to seek to make alliances , promote programmes , motivate donor countries and work towards ensuring that developing countries have access to generic drugs at prices which their citizens can afford .

Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) In addition to what I said at the start of my speech , I would also like to emphasise the following points . The European Commission permanently provides financial assistance for health-related matters to numerous developing countries as part of projects , programmes and budget aid .
In order to comply with national priorities , the Commission will examine , along with its partners , the way in which it can use these resources to reinforce the methods used to combat the pandemic .
What I have already said implicitly I am going to repeat explicitly : the European Commission does not have the technical and financial instruments to purchase the vaccines itself .
However , by cooperating closely with the World Health Organisation and forming alliances and signing agreements with different stakeholders , we will work together in preparing the responses to the requests made on this subject .
That concludes this item .
Financial and economic situation in Moldova ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the economic and financial situation in Moldova .
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) The elections that were re-run on 29 July in the Republic of Moldova were a crucial test of the country 's ability to consolidate its democratic development and continue to progress towards rapprochement with the European Union .
We are pleased that the elections were held in a calm , orderly atmosphere and that the new government has not only expressed its firm intention to favour a pro-European course , but has also adopted a number of measures pointing in this direction .
On the other hand , the new authorities in the Republic of Moldova are facing enormous difficulties .
One of the most serious crises and biggest difficulties is the need to tackle the consequences of the economic and financial crisis .
Among the European Union 's neighbours to the east , the Republic of Moldova is probably in the most precarious economic situation .
Trade and industrial production have collapsed not only as a result of the crisis , but also due to the political unrest triggered by the parliamentary elections in April .
The amounts of money transferred from abroad by Moldovan citizens , which accounted , up until last year , for over a third of the country 's GDP , have dropped far below the usual level .
Exports and imports have fallen dramatically .
The same applies to domestic demand and industrial production .
A sharp drop is forecast for 2009 , by even more than 10 % of GDP .
Given that the Republic of Moldova is already the poorest country in Europe , this decline will hit particularly hard and will exacerbate even further the difficulties the population is struggling with , especially the most vulnerable people in society .
In order to provide aid to the Republic of Moldova and its population , the European Union is prepared to support this country by offering it macrofinancial assistance , on top of whatever may be provided by the International Monetary Fund , and as part of a coordinated effort with the latter .
In addition , we will provide specialist assistance and speed up payment of our usual aid to this country .
With regard to macrofinancial assistance , as is necessary for this type of assistance , our support will depend on concluding an agreement on a support programme between the Republic of Moldova and the International Monetary Fund .
Representatives of the IMF are currently in Chişinău , and we await their report with interest .
We cannot go ahead with preparing a macrofinancial assistance programme before launching the programme with the IMF .
Therefore , it is too early for us to be able to know what form the macrofinancial assistance programme which the European Commission might provide will take
We expect the country 's authorities to ask for help , not only to consolidate their currency reserves , but also to cover their budget deficit .
I must also mention that the Republic of Moldova is eligible for both grants and loans .
The final composition of this assistance package will depend , of course , on the needs which will be identified .
In the meantime , the European Commission has already sent a mission of experts to Chişinău , headed up by the Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs , DG ECFIN , to provide the authorities in the Republic of Moldova with help in drawing up their economic programme .
The mission 's objective deriving from the recent meeting with the authorities in Chişinău was to help them evaluate the country 's response to the current economic situation .
The Commission 's services have been used on this occasion to gather the information required to prepare a macrofinancial assistance programme .
The Commission remains available to continually offer the authorities in Chişinău specialist consultancy in this area .
At the same time , we are endeavouring to speed up the payments from the budget support operations featuring as part of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
In September , the European Commission approved an increase from EUR 30.5 million to EUR 34.5 million of the ceiling for payments earmarked for budget support this year .
Of course , the aim of our assistance in the form of budget support is , first and foremost , to encourage reforms in the agreed sectors , and not only to plug gaps in the budget .
However , in the current situation , it is more than a means of supplementing the limited budget resources .
It is also a way of helping the population of the Republic of Moldova to overcome the real difficulties they are facing .
We welcome , in particular , that Members of the European Parliament have requested urgent support for the Republic of Moldova .
In the coming months , we will call on you to support the efforts we are making in this area .
We are confident that Parliament will promptly approve the macrofinancial assistance package for the Republic of Moldova when it is tabled before it .
This will enable us to ensure that this assistance is provided in good time .
Before I conclude my speech , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to refer briefly to the situation in Transnistria .
I would first of all like to stress how important it is for us not to lose sight of this problem against the backdrop of the significant political changes which are taking place in the Republic of Moldova .
The talks aimed at resolving the conflict should be resumed as soon as possible in the 5 + 2 format .
We are optimistic about this as the new government has reaffirmed its support for this principle in its programme .
The European Union has an increasingly important influence in this process .
We are counting on the new government in Chişinău to adopt a proactive approach to this problem , which will help resolve the conflict .
As far as we are concerned , we have just launched two project packages , with financing from the European Commission , for strengthening confidence in the health , environmental protection , social and economic sectors .
This action is part of our constant wider efforts aimed at resolving the conflict .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Republic of Moldova is at a crossroads , both politically and economically .
We are fully committed to supporting the country 's future development .
We will continue to do our utmost , at this particularly critical juncture , to ensure that our support is substantial and effective and that it is delivered at the right moment .
The Republic of Moldova is going through a serious economic , financial and institutional crisis caused by the global economic and financial climate , and especially by eight years of Communist government .
The early elections held in July 2009 and the victory of the Alliance for European Integration mark an important step towards fulfilling the European aspirations of Moldova 's citizens .
The victory was achieved through the effort of the parties in the Alliance against Communist methods and against both the influence of the situation in Transnistria and the influence of the Russian Federation .
We must admire those who achieved this victory almost single-handedly by successfully gaining the trust of Moldova 's citizens .
Moldova needs help .
The stability of the new government in Chişinău depends on this , as does the future development of this former Soviet state towards the west or east .
I strongly believe that Moldova will receive assistance from a number of quarters .
This must include us .
The European Union has no option other than to respond positively to the efforts of the Alliance for European Integration in Moldova .
This specifically means negotiating as soon as possible an association agreement between the European Union and Moldova , initiating very quickly a constructive dialogue aimed at introducing a visa waiver for Moldovan citizens and providing the Republic of Moldova with financial support so that it can cover the budget deficit .
The European Commission must provide Moldova as soon as possible with the macrofinancial assistance it so desperately needs .
Commissioner , I listened closely to what you were saying and I am pleased that the Commission is paying attention to the Republic of Moldova and that you are preparing a macrofinancial assistance package , except that it all depends as well on collaboration with the IMF .
What I would ask is for you , the Commission and the IMF not to deal with Moldova in parallel , but to collaborate with each other so that we do not end up with the scenario where the IMF is expecting the Commission to act and vice versa .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( BG ) It gave me particular pleasure listening to Mr Orban talk about the European Commission 's intentions for and its approach to Moldova .
I believe that we need to give Moldova very clear signals from the European institutions and the European Union as a whole , and provide the necessary support , both financial and economic .
However , I must stress that political support is also required for the current government and its attempts to extricate Moldova from the difficult situation the country is in .
After two successive elections , this government will obviously endeavour to address the population 's real problems , something which appeared to have been given a back seat during these last months , if not for years .
In addition to this , we must bear in mind that at the moment , the political situation in Moldova , even if it seems more stable and positive , can very quickly shift in a different direction .
I believe that it is still completely unclear as to whether Moldova will manage to elect its president and if this does not happen , the country will obviously go ahead with new elections next year .
This would be the worst possible development , not only for the country itself , but also for the people of Moldova .
This is why we support the Commission 's efforts .
I believe that our group and Parliament will support the European Commission 's intentions .
In addition to this , we must very clearly warn Moldova , its government , and the current opposition that it is time for Moldova to face up to the population 's real problems , and that there must be no political games at its citizens ' expense .
It seems to me that such a strong warning will be understood in Moldova by the opposition as well at the moment .
We also support the idea of quickly signing an Association Agreement which , as mentioned by Mr Marinescu , should also include a visa waiver , a serious problem that has been causing tension between Moldova and Romania , and this should include the creation of a free trade area too .
We think that , apart from the urgent measures being proposed by the Commission , we must get the Eastern Partnership , launched in the middle of this year , to start operating properly .
We must also show real results in line with this European Union policy .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( RO ) The Republic of Moldova is in an extremely difficult economic situation .
The financial crisis in the European Union has also affected the countries adjoining us , and it is our duty to help them .
The economic crisis in Moldova is not only a consequence of the global crisis , but is primarily due to a lack of immediate action that was required when this crisis broke out in the Republic of Moldova .
In fact , because of the elections , the former Communist administration distorted local budgets by making preferential allocations to authorities controlled by Communists .
In addition , the decision was also made to keep an artificial exchange rate between the leu and euro , at a level which had to ensure that the population in this country next to us was not affected by the crisis .
So now , with winter approaching , local authorities are at risk of being unable to pay for thermal energy , and the government will have problems paying salaries and pensions .
We welcome the initiation of negotiations between the government of the Republic of Moldova and the IMF and World Bank .
I am confident that they will be concluded with an agreement which will take into account the economic , political and social realities in the Republic of Moldova .
The Republic of Moldova does not need to have conditions imposed on it that are impossible to fulfil , given the delicate political and economic situation in the country .
In April , we had a few occasions where we discussed the Republic of Moldova in the European Parliament .
We all agreed that the European Union must provide financial support .
This is all the more important now when liberal , pro-European forces are in power .
This is why , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I am clearly asking the Commission to ensure that the proposal it is going to draft includes specific offers of macrofinancial assistance because the Republic of Moldova needs help immediately to be able to cover the budget deficit , which is likely to reach 14 % of the country 's GDP by the end of 2009 .
In the medium term , the Eastern Partnership may serve as an important instrument , but it must become operational as soon as possible and be allocated sufficient funds .
We are also asking for a proposal to be included in the future association agreement on creating an expanded , comprehensive , common free trade area , along with a proposal on a visa waiver for Moldovan citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , possibly the political situation in Moldova will relax tomorrow as a result of the election of a president supported by the Coalition for European Integration .
Otherwise , as we have heard , new early elections will have to be held and , if it comes to that , the EU should provide constructive help .
This cannot , of course , be limited to observing the elections and I should like here to address the problem of how voter participation can be increased and the result can be made more transparent .
Around one million Moldovans work and live abroad in the west , especially in Italy , Portugal and Austria .
Their percentage of participation in the elections was in single figures at the last elections and there are logical reasons for that .
For example , in Italy , it was only possible to vote in Rome and Bologna and numerous Moldovans scattered around the country did not make use of this opportunity due to the cost involved .
We , the European Parliament , the Commission , the Council and also the Moldovan Government , should ensure that more ballot boxes and special polling stations are set up at the next elections , so that Moldovans living abroad can take part in these elections , because it is from them that we can expect a clear commitment to Europe , which is why I should like to direct your attention , your focus , not only to economic and financial support , but also to the need for us to provide conscious and constructive political support .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , Moldova is Europe 's poorest country and is also landlocked , but has recently had a successful democratic election .
The new parliament must now choose its president wisely .
However , it would undoubtedly be more prosperous and secure if it did not suffer from an artificial territorial division .
Very little progress has been made towards a resolution of the frozen conflict in Transnistria - a problem which goes back some 17 years .
This is largely because Russia bankrolls the illegal regime in Tiraspol and continues to garrison troops in Transnistria .
We can usually judge Russia 's sincerity by its degree of commitment to resolving conflicts like this one , but the fact is that in Transnistria , as well as in Georgia and Ukraine , Russia cannot resist interfering .
Russia maintains that Moldova , as a former Soviet Republic , is in its sphere of influence .
Such concepts are outdated .
Moldova , as a manifestly sovereign and European country , could one day join NATO and even the EU .
The EU must redouble efforts now to resolve outstanding issues in Moldova and give it the appropriate financial assistance it requires , but this will not happen by naively resetting relations with the Kremlin .
I would like to talk about both of these problems and also about the following report on Georgia .
We are given too little time to assess such complex issues .
I feel obliged to state that Czech President Václav Klaus was not mistaken in his statements either on the situation in Moldova or on the border conflict between Georgia and Russia .
That is all in the past , of course , while we are facing a new set of problems today , despite the fact that we have a Commission President but no new Commission .
I would like to applaud the report on the Georgia-Russia conflict at least , and its effort to make an objective assessment of the entire situation .
We have announced the ambitious Eastern Partnership programme and I would like to make some brief proposals in relation both to Moldova and Georgia .
Firstly , the Eastern Partnership project must not be regarded as a policy instrument against Russia , but as an instrument for resolving issues jointly with Russia .
Secondly , the question of the territorial integrity of both Moldova and Georgia must be resolved in accordance with international law , and not through the so-called Thessaloniki-Kosovo variant .
Thirdly , both countries have expressed interest in closer cooperation with the European Union and this must involve appropriate financial support as well as real political support , for example , by relaxing the visa regime .
Fourthly , both countries need a lot of help in the area of consultancy , particularly in relation to the running of public institutions such as the offices of the president , the parliament , the public prosecutor and so on .
Fifthly , both countries have an urgent need for assistance , particularly over the establishment of a legal framework for freedom of expression and a free media , through which they can give their own citizens a greater feeling of confidence .
In order for all of this to be fulfilled , the European Union must be ready and able to complete the job of integrating these countries into the new Europe through political and financial support and other mechanisms as well .
Failing this , the Eastern Partnership will be regarded simply as a piece of geopolitical manoeuvring and it will remain just an empty idea .
Failing this , we risk simple disillusionment and more words spoken at the end of our election period about the need for new orange , pink or whatever other revolutions .
We may indeed provide funding for these but they will not amount to a real resolution of the situation or an improvement in the lives of the inhabitants .
Mr President , the financial and economic situation in Moldova can be summed up in a few words .
It is a total disaster , as Dr Aneli Gabani , one of Europe 's leading experts on Moldova , informed me yesterday .
A new government team may have taken office in Chişinău on 25 September with a promising name and programme - the Alliance for European Integration - but the Communist Party remains strong and is already preparing its return to power by forcing new elections , as expected .
If the European Union wishes to support the current Moldovan Government 's European course , Brussels must attend to this very quickly .
Therefore , the Council and the Commission must urge the IMF to come to Moldova 's assistance as quickly as possible without immediately demanding social austerity .
Let us allow the reform-minded cabinet a political breathing space .
It goes without saying that the European Union itself must also provide generous funding in this case .
After all , Moldova 's political future is on the European agenda here today .
( RO ) I , too , wish to welcome the Commission 's intention to support the Republic of Moldova .
The Republic of Moldova needs support that has to target the country 's population .
This is the only way in which the Republic of Moldova 's citizens will be able to acquire the confidence they need to find a path towards stability and growth .
The macrofinancial assistance package which was agreed on here must obviously be put together as urgently as possible .
Action must not be delayed because , if there is any delay , we will end up with disappointment in Moldova instead of confidence .
In addition to this , I believe that the government in Chişinău must be supported politically because , after a long period of time , the country is , at last , genuinely opening up to the European Union .
The name chosen by the government coalition is certainly no coincidence .
It is made up of parties who really want a different option to the one that has been chosen by Moldova until now .
This political support is vital , all the more so as there is a risk , and I strongly emphasise this point , that Moldova will be regarded as a local problem , at the very limit , a problem for the Romanians inside the European Union .
It is anything but this at all .
It is a European problem , and I am pleased that there are Members with a whole variety of perspectives speaking on this subject .
After all , Moldova is close to Europe and must be supported at a time when this opening is present there .
Otherwise , we risk falling back into a cycle of delays and procrastination , which was typical of the Voronin administration .
Democratic developments and support from the EU may actually also lead to a resolution of the situation in Transnistria because this region was in stalemate .
This was because the government in Chişinău was reluctant to end the stalemate and adopted an ambiguous , unconstructive position on this .
On a final note , Moldova 's citizens require visas .
The situation there is by no means any worse than the situation in the Western Balkans , and citizens from the Republic of Moldova must therefore enjoy freedom of travel .
( RO ) As I also said here on Monday in the European Parliament , Moldova needs concrete actions , not promises .
Moldova is currently in the most difficult economic situation among all the states on our continent .
This is precisely why the institutions of the European Union must identify solutions for providing immediate macrofinancial assistance to the Republic of Moldova .
This aid is intended to cover the budget deficit equivalent to 14 % of GDP .
There has been a need for a very long time to initiate negotiations for a new agreement with Moldova .
They have now become a possibility and we hope that they will be conducted at the fastest rate possible .
However , the parliament in Chişinău is in a difficult position .
The risk of new elections is still present .
The election of a new president , initially scheduled for tomorrow , had to be postponed for another 10 days .
I am delighted at the enthusiasm with which the Commission announced the start of these negotiations and I hope this enthusiasm continues .
We cannot afford to disappoint the Moldovan people .
They need us , they need Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , in our discussions in this House on Moldova , a lot of attention has been paid to the country 's very poor economic situation , but frankly speaking , the situation today is far better than it was a year ago .
We see Moldova making clear progress towards an economy capable of providing for its citizens ' well-being .
Paradoxically , Moldova is now in a better situation than it was a year ago , while Ukraine , which was held up as an example for all to follow , is in a worse situation .
We can see progress in what Moldova and its government are doing .
The European Union must hold out a clear European perspective to this country and give firm support to the present authorities to prevent the old political nightmare from returning .
Moldova 's current situation is the result of eight years of rule by communists , and if we do not want to be instrumental in returning that incompetent team to power , let us help the present Moldovan Government and the Moldovan people .
Madam President , I would also like to thank the Commissioner and the Commission for all the declarations concerning Moldova and the steps the Commission wants to take in the future .
Being from Poland , I know how important such steps are and the declarations on strengthening weak democracy in transition in their countries .
The developments in Moldova are important for its people but are also very important for the entire region .
This is what I want to stress .
During the transition process , the reforms are very fragile in many post-Soviet countries and the successes in Moldova will be an important example and an important signal to other pro-reformist groups in the post-Soviet region .
Talking about the fragility of the government right now and the situation in Moldova , we have to remember experiences at the beginning of the 1990s in this country , when the difficult economic situation led to a failure to pay pensions and salaries and to a break in reforms .
Right now , we are talking about helping the economic situation but we also have to remember the need to strengthen institutions .
At the heart of all democracies are the institutions : political institutions , institutions concerning the rule of law , the judiciary system and the freedom of the press .
Poland has recently done much to help Moldova during the elections and prior to them , but I think we particularly have to use the Eastern Partnership as an appropriate measure because it offers many possibilities .
I think that not only is the Commission taking important steps but we in Parliament - when we receive all the documents - also need to speed up our process and our decisions to help resolve the situation .
Madam President , the pro-European Government in the Republic of Moldova cannot be left to become victim of the serious economic situation .
I call for more substantial assistance than the package already agreed to by the Commission and I insist on this .
Financial assistance must support the population and must support the reforms which the country has to implement , as encouraged by the Union .
These reforms need to be backed by enhanced and quick financial support from the Union , coupled with a monitoring mechanism to ensure and support the proper management of its funds .
Finally , the new agreement with the Republic of Moldova should be an association agreement as in the case of the other countries under the European neighbourhood policy .
Visa liberalisation should be negotiated and helped to happen .
( RO ) The economic crisis is also being strongly felt in the Republic of Moldova .
Romania and the Republic of Moldova have particularly close economic relations .
My country is the number one destination for Moldovan exports and the second biggest source of imports .
However , these commercial exchanges have been hit hard by the harmful introduction of a visa scheme by the former Communist administration .
However , these exchanges have been resumed following the removal of this scheme .
The granting of the EUR 100 million credit promised by the Commission must be speeded up .
With this in mind , an IMF mission may visit Chişinău in the near future .
Poland has also promised to provide substantial aid .
The European Union must take into account that the outcome voted for by the citizens of the Republic of Moldova in July showed that they are opening up to Europe .
Considerable intervention is required now from the European Union before the onset of winter so as not to allow any chance for the anti-European forces to take advantage of the difficult situation the Republic of Moldova is currently in .
So far , not a single euro has reached the Republic of Moldova .
( RO ) The will of Moldovan citizens has brought about a radical change in Chişinău with a pro-European government that sincerely wishes to commit to a proper project for the Republic of Moldova , a European project .
Moldova is currently facing serious economic and social problems , and the European Union must demonstrate that this symbolic word of ' solidarity ' does not only apply during election campaigns .
We must show that we , the European Union , are up to fulfilling the expectations of the citizens in this country .
Faced with the disastrous situation left by the Voronin regime , the effects of the economic crisis , not to mention the onset of winter , the Republic of Moldova needs help now .
We must not forget , talking about the IMF , that many European Union Member States are major players in the International Monetary Fund , and the decision must be made now .
( LT ) I was , in fact , an observer during the elections in Moldova , and am familiar with this situation .
It is a state with a rather complicated historical past - there is Trans-Dniester , Gagauzia , Moldova and many other matters .
Almost all post-Soviet system states firstly require a certain amount of financial support .
Therefore , I would really urge you to begin talks as soon as possible and to initiate talks with the International Monetary Fund , as we all really ought to support this state and this government that has been formed since the last elections and which is following the path to democracy .
I think my colleagues were quite right in what they said on specific steps for the future , that is , on opening the opportunity for a free trade zone , on the visa regime .
These are everyday matters that we will also have to solve in the future .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to put on record the reasons for my vote .
I am in favour of the European Union providing support to Moldova to deal with a critical situation .
I am in favour of financial support provided by the International Monetary Fund and the European Union , namely urgent support and financial aid to the people of Moldova .
I am in favour of providing political support to the coalition government in Chişinău , as this move will open the gates to hope .
These gates need to be held open with financial aid .
The people of Moldova must be able to leave their country and travel , which is why I am in favour of a proper visa policy .
I am also strongly and decisively in favour of the agreement being an association agreement .
Madam President , EUR 100 million does not seem to be a sufficient sum .
We desperately need to provide immediate and urgent assistance .
( RO ) The increasingly encouraging messages which the European Union has been sending Chişinău recently are being welcomed there with great enthusiasm .
This is because the majority of this country 's citizens are pinning great hopes on becoming part of Europe .
These aspirations are easy to understand .
The European Union has demonstrated on more than one occasion its ability to get its members out of difficult economic situations and that it has the mechanisms required to do this .
However , there are motives which arouse a certain concern , linked to the danger of the Moldovans ' enthusiasm waning .
The primary reason for this is that the model of the agreement being proposed to Moldova does not offer the same guarantees on integration as the Stabilisation and Association Agreement offered to states in the Western Balkans .
On the other hand , the negotiations on the agreement will require more time , which was already stated from the start .
I believe that the European Union also needs to propose quickly an alternative option , such as a huge economic aid plan , perhaps even a mini-Marshall Plan for Moldova .
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) I have made one extremely important observation : the political support is there in Parliament for strengthening ties with the Republic of Moldova and bringing this country closer to the European Union .
I must specifically reply to some of the issues that have been raised just now .
One of the most important of these related to the coordination between the European Commission and International Monetary Fund on granting macrofinancial assistance .
As I have said before , we work closely with the IMF on coordinating our assistance procedures .
It is still too early for us to say how these agreements will turn out , but we think that the European Union may wish to ensure that the adjustment programme also includes a series of reforms that we regard as essential to ensuring good governance and sustainable growth in the future .
Based on the experience gained from macrofinancial assistance programmes for other countries , it is possible that , as part of the negotiations on the exact procedures involved in providing this aid , certain conditions may crop up specifically linked , for instance , to good governance , which was mentioned by several speakers , and to harmonisation of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
I want to emphasise once again the following fact : based on the rules which we need to follow , we are not able to grant macroeconomic assistance alone .
Therefore , an agreement needs to be concluded between the authorities in the Republic of Moldova and the International Monetary Fund .
Without this agreement , the macrofinancial assistance which we have spoken about more specifically cannot be provided .
On the other hand , I want to assure you that we are coordinating our actions with the International Monetary Fund .
An IMF delegation is currently in Chişinău .
As I have already told you , our colleagues from DG FIN are also in Chişinău , coordinating the dialogue with the International Monetary Fund , as well as with the authorities in the Republic of Moldova .
Another issue that was mentioned concerns what other assistance the European Union can give the Republic of Moldova that is geared towards the population , to show that we actually want to support not only the authorities in the Republic of Moldova , but the population as well .
Let me give you just a few examples .
This Community assistance has brought and will continue to bring specific benefits to the population .
We are cofinancing road infrastructure projects , the modernisation of Chişinău airport , the expansion of the Republican Clinical Hospital in Chişinău , which is the largest in the country , as well as the consolidation of primary medical assistance .
In spring this year , we supplied medical equipment with a value of EUR 4.5 million to 60 clinics in the Republic of Moldova .
This country is the largest per capita beneficiary of Community assistance after the Palestinian Territories .
As part of the European Neighbourhood Policy , the assistance budget , which rose to EUR 40 million in 2007 , increased this year to EUR 62 million , and is forecast to continue growing .
We cannot clearly quantify at the moment the size of the financial assistance package as part of the macroeconomic support and the other programmes and types of support we are going to provide .
A figure for this will be given when we reach the stage of concluding an agreement with the authorities in the Republic of Moldova , one which will specifically meet the needs that this country has .
There were two further issues raised .
One of these concerns the timetable for the negotiations for concluding a new association agreement with the Republic of Moldova .
I wish to tell you that last week , the European Commission sent a delegation to Chişinău for technical consultations with the authorities on negotiating a new agreement .
The agenda for these talks includes the format , objectives and timetable for the negotiations , as well as the components in the future agreement .
We are therefore in negotiations on this issue .
The last matter I would like to mention is about the issue of the visa waiver .
According to the joint declaration made on 7 May 2009 , which marked the launch of the Eastern Partnership , the European Union is going to adopt measures that gradually move towards a visa waiver , with the long-term objective of achieving this for every country which is a member of this partnership .
The conditions for this are fulfilment of the requirements relating to good governance and security , and guaranteeing security of movement .
At the present juncture , the European Commission is waiting with particular interest for the Council discussion about initiating a structured dialogue on a visa waiver with the Republic of Moldova .
Until then , we have been and are still giving strong encouragement to the authorities in the Republic of Moldova to continue their reforms in the areas of justice , freedom and security , which will undoubtedly facilitate the discussions about easing the visa regime .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The European Commission 's report on the economic and financial situation in the Republic of Moldova is completely unequivocal .
The government in Chişinău is going through difficult times caused not only by the global economic recession , but also by economic decisions which were wrong or put off for too long by the previous government .
Apart from this , the certainties that we are dealing with at the moment are that the Republic of Moldova has clearly declared itself in favour of the European option and it wants to be much more than a mere state bordering the European Union .
At present , Moldova is looking for support in getting out of the economic downturn , as well as for allies .
Moldova is inextricably part of Europe and the support from the Community could take the form of specific measures , apart from giving encouragement and making statements of support and rapprochement .
We are living in an interconnected , global Europe where no government can work miracles on its own , especially when they are expected overnight by a people forgotten for far too long by their own leaders .
A hand of cooperation extended by Europe to Moldova and a greater rapprochement between Chişinău and Brussels will instil greater confidence in the investors in this country .
This will then be reflected in the long term by stability and growth .
The Republic of Moldova 's path towards democracy has been difficult and it has now turned towards Europe .
However , the new government majority in Chişinău is in a fragile position as it is also getting over the postponement of the vote by its parliament on the appointment of the President of Moldova .
At the same time , the difficult economic situation facing the new government may have serious social and political repercussions .
In these circumstances , what is needed is urgent , huge support from the European Union in many areas , including the three strands in the future Association Agreement : the political agreement , the free trade agreement , and the visa waiver .
Financial support is crucial for ensuring this state 's stability and encouraging democratic and economic reforms .
Indeed , the EU and IMF must allocate considerable macroeconomic aid to cover the budget deficit and social costs for the subsequent period .
I must express the hope that the presidential election in Moldova and the changes which will occur in the European Commission and EU Presidency will not affect the priority that must be given to European assistance for this state in our immediate vicinity , on whose territory the closest unresolved conflict to the EU 's borders is taking place .
This factor must not be overlooked because it directly affects the stability of Eastern Europe and the security of Europe 's borders .
The Republic of Moldova is a very important partner for the European Union , and the situation within the country reflects on the stability of the entire region .
The new government would like to join the European Union in the future , which is why we should support it to keep the changes the country is undertaking on the right track .
In this context , it is very important to use the opportunities afforded by cooperation in the framework of the Eastern Partnership , which would involve signing an association agreement and liberalising visa policy .
The European Union needs to remember how important it is to support post-Soviet states trying to democratise their political life .
The announcement made by the Swedish Presidency about initiating as soon as possible negotiations on a new agreement with the Republic of Moldova , intended to replace the current Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , is more than welcome in view of the new political situation in this state .
The Republic of Moldova 's European destiny has been reinforced by the pro-European majority government formed in the parliament in Chişinău .
I believe that especially now , at a time when the effects of the economic crisis are being felt deeply , the Republic of Moldova must be supported by the European Union , which also means financially , while identifying mechanisms that will help encourage reforms in the Republic of Moldova which , in turn , will bring this state closer to fulfilling its desire of joining the EU .
Mechanisms involving economic cooperation and commercial agreements are powerful instruments for making the Republic of Moldova 's European destiny become a reality .
The preferential commercial terms granted by the European Union in early 2006 and Moldova 's participation in CEFTA in 2007 , along with all the Western Balkan states , some of which are EU candidate states , link the economy of this country to the European single market .
This is the point where it can await the prospect of its integration into the EU .
I believe that the European institutions must attach particular importance to not only political relations with the Republic of Moldova , but to economic and commercial relations as well .
Report of the Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on the Conflict in Georgia ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the report of the Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on the Conflict in Georgia .
Madam President , on a point of order , I wish to protest against manipulation by somebody in the secretariat .
A list was provided for the debate on the fact-finding mission to Georgia , but names of certain speakers , including mine , have been deleted .
I therefore request my speaking time in accordance with what had been arranged until the last minute .
I request the floor after Mr Kasoulides .
Mr Landsbergis , it appears that there are only speakers on behalf of the groups , and you already have a speaker on behalf of the PPE Group .
However , what I can offer you is to take you under the catch-the-eye procedure .
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) I am pleased to have the opportunity today to discuss Georgia with you .
Less than one year after the armed conflict with Russia , Georgia is facing numerous challenges which are of direct interest to the European Union , and we must give this country our undivided attention .
The report from the Independent International Fact-finding Mission on the Conflict in Georgia , overseen by the Swiss ambassador , Heidi Tagliavini , was compiled at the European Union 's request based on the Council 's decision .
However , it is totally independent and the European Union has not been involved at all in the process of drafting it , nor had anything to do with its content .
Consequently , I will not go into detail on its results .
We believe that the report has achieved its main aim , which was to provide explanations for the events which took place in August 2008 , as well as for the main causes of the conflict .
The report clearly highlights , as often happens in conflict situations , that no single party is to blame for the conflict .
Both Georgia and Russia are criticised for their actions .
Another lesson identified in the report is the need for quicker and more decisive action by the international community in extremely tense situations which may degenerate into violence .
The European Union firmly maintains the commitments it has assumed with regard to Georgia 's territorial integrity .
At the moment , we should focus our efforts on avoiding future conflicts and resolving ongoing tensions peacefully , as this is the only way to long-term prosperity and stability in the region .
Ladies and gentlemen , the war has left a profound impression on Georgians and the country is still facing fundamental problems , such as meeting the basic needs of thousands of displaced persons .
As a result , I am pleased to say that the implementation of the package of post-conflict assistance prepared by the European Commission with support from Member States and other parties is working well .
As you are aware , the European Commission 's package provides assistance of up to EUR 500 million for the 2008-2010 period .
Some of the areas which the package focuses on include the needs of displaced persons inside the country and on economic measures aimed at generating economic growth and stimulating job creation .
In addition , the European Commission has proposed that Georgia should benefit from macrofinancial assistance amounting to EUR 46 million to help this country overcome the impact of the financial and economic crisis .
At present , the European Union monitoring mission in Georgia is still the only international presence monitoring the situation in the country .
This mission plays an essential role , but we would still like to see its activities extended across the whole territory .
The talks in Geneva , co-chaired by the European Union , OSCE and the UN , offer a unique opportunity for political dialogue with all the partners .
We will continue to undertake every effort to promote constructive discussions which will lead to concrete results .
At the moment , the working party for displaced persons inside the country and humanitarian aspects , co-chaired by the European Commission and UNHCR , is discussing a set of measures intended to be accepted for returning refugees and displaced persons within the country and other displaced persons .
At the same time , in Abkhazia and South Ossetia , the two mechanisms for preventing and responding to incidents are yielding some positive results in terms of reducing the number of incidents and facilitating the crossing of the borders by these persons .
Taking into account the events of the recent past , it is important to reinforce stability , security and prosperity in Georgia .
The need for economic and political reforms in this country is greater than ever .
The Eastern Partnership , launched in Prague in May , is an important framework for strengthening the support we give Georgia , both bilaterally and through multilateral cooperation with other partners in the region .
One key element is the proposal to establish stronger political and commercial relations .
According to the Eastern Partnership , the External Relations Council agreed in September that the directives on negotiating new agreements must be prepared for all three countries in the Southern Caucasus , including Georgia .
Apart from strengthening our political relations , we will propose that the new agreement with Georgia should include the creation of an expanded , comprehensive free trade area .
It is important to mention that such an area would ensure the gradual alignment of Georgia 's economy with the EU internal market .
It goes without saying that this ambitious long-term objective will still require Georgia to make and support efforts aimed at implementing reforms .
Negotiations on an expanded , comprehensive free trade area will only start after the necessary conditions have been fulfilled .
Allow me to add that , as far as relations with Georgia are concerned , our action to step up contacts between people is making progress .
The Commission has concluded the negotiations on an agreement to facilitate a visa waiver and ensure readmission , the text for which is available in the Council .
We hope that the procedures can be finalised as soon as possible .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we all agree that Georgia is a key player in our neighbourhood .
Consequently , it is of paramount importance for us to keep our commitments in this country in order to help it resolve the numerous challenges it is facing , particularly with regard to pursuing its reform programme .
As Georgia makes real progress in implementing political and economic reforms , the EU 's relations with Georgia will become deeper and closer .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , first of all , we take note of the report just given to us on the independent fact-finding mission .
It is very difficult in circumstances like these to say who started things and who followed .
What is important is that the facts remain on the ground a year after this conflict , and that they violate a number of principles which the European Union has to support .
First , as you said Mr Commissioner , there is the principle of support for the territorial integrity of Georgia .
All our diplomatic and other actions should never encourage UDIs or separatisms .
Faits accomplis created by the use of force are not acceptable and can never be acceptable .
Secondly , there is the right of displaced persons to return to their homes and properties : the basic freedom of movement , as you said , to cross the dividing lines .
Ownership of property and settlement should be at the centre of our policies and initiatives need to be undertaken to address these humanitarian and human rights issues independently of the outcome of any political settlement .
Thirdly , the hostilities in South Ossetia have proven that there is no such thing as a frozen conflict .
The term frozen has a notion of appeasement .
A lack of interest on the part of the international community may lead to chronicity and an unsettled conflict is a potential threat to peace and stability .
One year after the conflict , I underline once more the successful role of the European Union and the French Presidency in achieving a speedy ceasefire and the mission which monitors it .
The presence of European monitors is a guarantee that no side can claim from now on arbitrarily that the other has started hostilities .
Efforts now should be diverted towards a political settlement , however difficult this is , and the political negotiations launched in Geneva immediately after the hostilities should be encouraged to continue .
We support the efforts for a new association agreement , under the framework of the Eastern Partnership , which goes beyond opportunities for trade and investment .
We also support an agreement to facilitate the procedures for issuing short-stay visas and on readmission between the European Community and Georgia , and we are satisfied with the post-conflict assistance package , which is operating well .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , representatives of the Commission , we welcome the impartial and independent investigation of , and the subsequent report on , the 2008 conflict in Georgia , conducted by the International Fact-Finding Mission headed by the Swiss diplomat , Heidi Tagliavini .
Before the outbreak of hostilities in South Ossetia on the night of 7 to 8 August 2008 , which claimed many civilian lives , we had been witnesses to months of provocation from all sides .
The Russian military intervention , including its invasion of Georgia , was disproportionate and unjustified .
Both sides to the conflict were guilty of breaches of international humanitarian law , which has also been confirmed by the report and by various organisations , such as Human Rights Watch .
What are we to do now ?
Russia must fully honour the peace accord .
First of all , it must withdraw from the areas it has occupied since 7 August 2008 .
It should provide immediate , free and unlimited access to South Ossetia to members of the EU Monitoring Mission and international agencies , including the UN , so that they are able to supervise the ceasefire and deliver humanitarian aid .
Approximately 25 - 30 000 Georgians remain displaced in South Ossetia and the de facto authorities of South Ossetia must facilitate their return to their homes .
Georgia 's territorial integrity must remain beyond question .
There are , however , worrying signs of authoritarianism in Georgia .
The abuse of the legal system by President Saakashvili , the mounting hostility towards any opposing views , the steadily diminishing freedom of speech and the sometimes confrontational nationalist rhetoric are all to Georgia 's detriment .
Georgia will only be able to return to the pro-European and democratic path and become attractive to other countries in the region if it upholds the ideals it embraced during the Rose Revolution .
All actors should avail themselves bona fide of the opportunities presented by the Geneva negotiations .
The situation in the Caucasus must be given serious attention at the next EU-Russia Summit .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , speaking on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I have the opportunity to convey my approval to the rapporteur .
The report has an extremely important role even if it only refutes the widespread myth - a myth spread by the Russian Federation - that Georgia started the war .
At the same time , this report is balanced , and criticises both sides in the conflict , even saying that they could not prevent the conflict .
The report is certainly significant because it very clearly states the fact that the Russian Federation - right from the start of the conflict - organised training on South Ossetian territory , and provided the South Ossetians with military technology and also other military equipment .
Another essential moment in this report is definitely the question of ' passportisation ' , which the Russian Federation has been implementing for many years , both in Abkhazia and in South Ossetia , and thus creating a conflict with international law , not to speak of the undermining of good neighbourly relations .
Though the report says very clearly that this passportisation has not made the people living in South Ossetia or Abkhazia into citizens of the Russian Federation , only de jure are they still Georgian citizens and also because of this , the Russian Federation 's claim that they were protecting or sending people to protect their citizens in South Ossetia definitely does not hold water .
Another important part of the report is certainly the fact that it speaks of the ethnic cleansing on South Ossetian territory in the Georgian villages .
This is a very important moment .
Unfortunately , however , the report does not deal with the ethnic cleansing which the Russian Federation carried out in Abkhazia from 1991 when , because of Georgia 's independence , almost a quarter of a million Georgians were forced to leave Abkhazia , their own country .
Also , finally , Madam President , I would like to say that the most important thing of all is , of course , the reference in the report to the fact that Georgia 's independence , autonomy , sovereignty and territorial integrity must be respected .
For us , the question today is can this really be done , and if we now , before long , are celebrating 20 years since the fall of the Berlin Wall , then I would like to ask , ladies and gentlemen , when will we be able to celebrate the day when Abkhazia and South Ossetia are united with Georgia ?
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I would like to join the previous speakers in warmly congratulating Mrs Tagliavini and her team for the report they were able to deliver .
The report made it very clear that both sides were responsible for the escalation to the conflict that finally took place in August 2008 .
It is clear that Russia had been building up a military presence in South Ossetia , which was Georgian territory .
However , it is also clear that those provocations led to an overreaction by Georgia 's President Saakashvili .
It is important to have said that both sides were responsible , and we now have to look at how things can develop in the future .
That was the very big achievement of this report .
I also agree very much with everybody who has said that the territorial integrity of Georgia , and of all countries , has to be respected .
International law has to be respected .
However , it is also important to look into some of the reasons : the aggressive language , xenophobic language and nationalistic language that were part of the build-up to this conflict .
Another thing is to ask what the EU will do now .
We have a monitoring mission , which is important , but it has to have access to all parts of Georgia in order to support displaced persons and others .
In our discussions now - the member of the Commission has suggested moving to a free trade zone with Georgia , and Parliament will be discussing microfinancial assistance for Georgia - it is clear that the EU also has to consider placing conditions on Georgia , for example , to reduce the amount of its military budget .
The defence budget has been building up over recent years in Georgia , which is then short in other areas , such as social issues , civil society and media freedom .
The EU has to monitor that very closely .
In brief , it is important that the EU supports efforts to tone down the aggressive language , and financial assistance has to come with conditions .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the ECR Group and on behalf of the delegation of the European Parliament for cooperation with the Parliament of Georgia , of which I am the chair , I welcome the report which the Commission has submitted .
The report is credible and has not been questioned by any of the parties to the conflict .
We are monitoring the situation in Georgia closely and we are also monitoring details of the preparations for Georgia 's membership in NATO .
We fully back the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Georgia as an independent state .
We cannot accept the idea that Georgia or any other country lies within the exclusive sphere of influence of the Russian Federation or of any other country .
In connection with the military conflict which took place in Georgia a year ago , we are monitoring with great unease the situation in South Ossetia in particular .
We are uneasy about the situation regarding adherence to ceasefire agreements and we are particularly uneasy about the situation of the refugees who were forced to leave their homes and who are unable to return .
The EU 's humanitarian assistance is unfortunately not getting through to Abkhazia and South Ossetia at the moment .
Both ethnic Georgians and other inhabitants are suffering in these areas at present .
It is also a matter of great regret to us that the independent peace observers sent to Georgia by the EU have not even been able to work in these areas .
The report states that both sides in the conflict violated international law .
It is not our role to judge , but nonetheless it is clear from the report that the steps taken by the Russian Federation go far beyond the general concept of necessary defence .
We are extremely concerned by the information on the ethnic cleansing and violence against civilian populations which took place both during and after the conflict , according to the report .
In the future work of the inter-parliamentary committee , we will be supporting an immediate end to all violence , an immediate lifting of blockades preventing the delivery of humanitarian aid to those who really need it , access for international peace observers and the greatest possible alleviation of the impact of the conflict on innocent civilians .
We will support all steps that lead to an ending of the conflict and to a restoration of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Georgia .
Madam President , ' there are no winners , ' says the worthwhile report by the commission of investigation on the armed conflict in Georgia in the summer of 2008 .
I do not share this conclusion .
Of course there was , and is , a winner : Russia .
With the help of the Georgian President , the Kremlin is completing , resolutely and by military means , the political annexation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
The loser is the Georgian State although , incidentally , it can console itself with the support of the Russian Orthodox Church , which continues to assert that Abkhazians and South Ossetians are Georgian citizens .
I should like to emphasise this commendable stance on the part of the Moscow Patriarchate , which I am sure is an example for wavering Member States to follow .
The Tagliavini commission rightly criticises the mass provision of Russian passports to Georgian citizens in Abkhazia and South Ossetia as being contrary to international law .
This erosion of Georgian sovereignty is currently being mirrored exactly by the erosion of Ukrainian national sovereignty in the Crimea , where Russia is handing out new passports liberally to Ukrainian citizens .
Therefore , an important political lesson that the European Union should draw from the Tagliavini report is that it should actively assist Kiev in the defence of its national independence against any of its neighbours .
European projects in the Crimea are an excellent opportunity to do so , and the same is true in Georgia .
( DE ) Madam President , the conflict in the Caucasus in 2008 , also called the 5-day war , was a regrettable armed military conflict on Georgian territory between Georgia and Russia , which also affected the so-called ' renegade provinces ' of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
Due to what was unfortunately often one-sided reporting by the international media on the facts and background to the war , I should like to clarify a number of points : the US sharply condemned Russia 's military action , describing it a demonstration of pure intimidation and power and defended Georgia 's stance .
The first thing that needs to said here is that Russia was not the aggressor and reacted to the war started by Saakashvili .
He knew full well when he implemented his reunification programme that he was facing an all-powerful adversary , but he was counting on NATO and the US to cover his back , which is why he decided to wrest renegade provinces back by force .
Russia 's reaction was doubtless excessive , but was taken in accordance with international law in a so-called self-defence situation .
Thus , US support for Georgia was obviously not only aimed to protect the democratic right of self-determination , but also - it must be said - had military and political objectives , especially as Georgia was functioning as a strategic vassal state in the Caucasus on the Russian border .
The Georgians should be cautious in allowing the US to cover their back .
You only have to think of Hungary in 1956 , when the US again offered their support , as we know .
In any event , the outcome was devastating : the Hungarians were abandoned by the western world in their fight for freedom .
Finally , I should like to refer to the report of 30 September 2009 , in which the investigation committee set up by the EU Council of Ministers argued in detail that the justification under international law cited by the Georgians for the attack is invalid .
Madam President , Ms Heidi Tagliavini , head of the mission , wrote the following comments in a separate press summary : ' It must be said that the conflict of 2008 was predictable and preventable ' ; ' But the international community looked the other way , as if it had given up not only on solving the underlying conflict , but also on upholding an increasingly fragile cease-fire . '
Who would prefer to uphold increasing uncertainty and armed violence with an openly approaching tragic outcome ?
Ms Tagliavini noted three legal personalities as defining the indifferent international community : the United Nations , the OSCE and the European Union .
Now we , the European Parliament , are among the three great hypocrites who saw , knew and did not want to prevent the recent bloody stage of that 17-year war .
Other main conclusions of the mission remain of global importance as well .
They are : no more peacekeepers from a neighbouring country as they usually defend particular zones d 'état but not peace .
The impact of a great power 's coercive politics and diplomacy against a small and unsubordinated neighbour should be considered , not to mention eventual loss of important parts of territory through creeping annexation .
There are no winners in this conflict .
When the international community is among the big losers , the political culture of cooperation has suffered .
Two more quotations : ' Established principles of international law such as respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity of states were ignored ' ; ' falling back from civilised standards of political interaction in Europe is a consequence ' .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I had the opportunity of visiting Tbilisi myself in September last year .
The question of Georgia 's territorial integrity and stability has a strong bearing on the stability of the region at large , which unfortunately has a stable history of instability .
There is no one truth , there are several truths and they often contradict each other .
When decision-making politicians lose hold of their senses , the consequences are unpredictable and wide-ranging .
Direct and collateral damage is huge , but the consequences will affect innocent people first and foremost .
Neither interference by the major powers nor support for this or that side can lead to success .
We need action that will restore and strengthen confidence , which is currently non-existent .
The Caucasus is a complex region and , like the Balkans , has more history than it is able to digest and cope with .
Quick fixes and xenophobia will never be a path to success .
However , while disrespect for the rights and legitimate freedoms of minorities is the main cause of conflict , the causes are wider than that and include those of an economic nature , primarily energy and geopolitics .
However , geopolitics demands that the major powers act responsibly , because grass always grows sparsely where the elephants roll .
We have to teach those elephants the lesson that not all the grass is , or will ever be , theirs .
( PL ) Madam President , I believe that the present debate has fallen into the pattern of focusing mainly on curing the symptoms resulting from the grave situation in Georgia .
Georgia is currently a country where the European Union 's reputation as a major force on the international scene is being decided .
The truth of the matter is that nobody has honoured Mr Sarkozy 's plan , and it has already been consigned to the historical archives ; that Russia is persisting in its military integration of Abkhazia and Ossetia ; and that the European Union will not be able to build its status as a power whose word commands respect as far as the situation in Georgia is concerned .
The best evidence of this is that Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner is absent from today 's debate , and only Mr Orban is putting forward the Commission 's position .
Mrs Wallis evidently does not believe the matter is sufficiently important , judging by the strict limits she has imposed on the speaking time allowed for this question .
( HU ) This is an issue that concerns the major powers , although it is a human rights situation .
As pawns in the major powers ' games , civilians , minorities and democracy are always the victims in this situation .
Where there is separation and division , security is replaced by uncertainty and guns do the talking instead of having negotiations .
What can be done ?
The European Union must show some credibility .
The EU must adopt a minorities policy which guarantees minorities the right to use their mother tongue , promote their culture and enjoy autonomy in France , Romania , Greece and Slovakia as well .
The key to the situation in Russia , Georgia , South Ossetia and Abkhazia lies in the EU .
The EU must come up with a solution and be able to set an example for these countries .
Madam President , although it is factually correct that President Saakashvili did indeed launch an attack on South Ossetia in 2008 , this was only after provocation including severe economic sanctions and a build-up of Russian troops in the occupied territories .
The report does not seem in my view to fully reflect the fact of the disproportionate response by Russian forces , which involved bombing civilian areas of Georgia like Gori , and allowed systematic ethnic cleansing of Georgians from South Ossetia and the occupation of Georgian territory by Abkhazian forces .
Saakashvili , in my view , was indeed intemperate in seeking to regain control of sovereign Georgian territory , and made a terrible political mistake - though it was , after all , Georgian sovereign territory .
However , Russia now is determined illegally to establish a sphere of influence in other countries in its neighbourhood , the so-called ' near abroad ' , which are , of course , sovereign territories which should be respected in international law .
Madam President , there is one conclusion to draw from the conflict , which is that the international community has , for far too long and too readily , agreed to the existence of so-called frozen conflicts which , as my colleague , Mr Kasoulides , has put it , equals appeasement .
The central fact of this conflict is that Georgia did not invade Russian territory , whereas Russia invaded Georgian territory with massive military force and was about to occupy its capital .
It was an unprecedented breach of international law and undermines the credibility of Russia as a reliable partner .
As international reaction to this invasion has remained ambiguous , Russia can feel itself a winner , which means that there is a likelihood of similar aggressions , for example , in the Crimea or even in the Baltic Sea area .
Therefore , we need a clear commitment from the EU to be present in Georgia and to guarantee its free choice and territorial integrity .
It will be of utmost importance to have a presence there .
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) I would like to be very brief and start by saying that , as very many speakers have mentioned , the principle of Georgia 's territorial integrity is crucial to the actions we carry out .
It is a fundamental issue which we bear in mind in every measure we take .
I want to make it very clear by saying that the Commission will still continue in many different areas to support cooperation and ties with Georgia , enabling this country to advance and move closer to the European Union .
This support and these efforts will be implemented , as has been said , in many areas .
We will continue to be present at the negotiations in Geneva where there is a political dialogue in which all the parties are involved .
This is essential to resolving this situation .
We will also continue to provide assistance to displaced persons .
We are in the process , as well , of initiating negotiations on the association agreement , including a free trade agreement , which obviously includes issues related to easing the visa regime .
I would finally like to say that in preparing for these negotiations , we certainly want the authorities in Georgia to fulfil certain conditions and certain obligations deriving from the rule of law and from respect for human rights and for fundamental rights , definitely along with other economic conditions , and which are linked to trade exchanges .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 10.55 and resumed at 11.05 )

( PT ) Mr President , pursuant to Rule 151 of the Rules of Procedure , on personal statements , I would like to say that I feel that my name is used abusively in amendments to the budget regarding coercive abortion , which were tabled by Mr Deva and Mr Szymański .

The amendment to which they refer , and which I submitted in an opinion on the report ' A special place for children in EU external action ' , said the following , and I quote :
' Calls on the EU to firmly pursue the elimination of all forms of discrimination against girls ( since conception ) and commit adequate resources to overcome the subsequent asymmetries ' .
( PT ) My text seeks to protect girls from discrimination before birth , namely against selective abortion based on sex , but does not aim to prevent all activity linked to termination of pregnancy .
My text is different , in its wording and in its aims , from that of Mr Deva and Mr Szymański in the amendments to this budget .
It is therefore not right to draw a parallel between them and , still less , to mention my name in this regard , which I feel is a reprehensible attempt at political manipulation .
I shall vote against Amendments 727 , 732 and 734 , tabled by Mr Deva and Mr Szymański .

Sakharov Prize 2009 ( announcement of the winner )
I would like to start with some important information about the Sakharov Prize for 2009 .
This morning 's Conference of Presidents of the European Parliament awarded the Sakharov Prize for 2009 to Memorial , the organisation of Oleg Orlov , Sergey Kovalev and Lyudmila Alexeyeva and all other defenders of human rights in Russia whom it represents .
We have awarded this year 's prize to Memorial .
We sincerely hope that by doing so , we will contribute to ending the circle of fear , uncertainty and violence surrounding human rights defenders in the Russian Federation .
We also hope to advance our message that civil society activists everywhere must be free to exercise their most basic rights of freedom of thought and freedom of speech and freedom of the written word .
We need to be free to follow our thoughts because this is essential in getting at the truth .
Let me share with you my great satisfaction in being able to announce this prize as the President of the European Parliament and , in particular , as a man who comes from Solidarity .
At one time , we had serious problems very similar to those that our colleagues and partners in the Russian Federation have today .
I am very pleased that truth and freedom will always win in the end .
This is how it was in many countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
The fact that the Russians who are seeking the truth today are unable to go about their business freely is a major problem for the whole of Europe as well as a personal tragedy for themselves .
The purpose of this prize is for us Members of the European Parliament to express our great support for their activities .
( Applause )
I would like to make a couple of general points : since 1988 , which is over 20 years ago now , the European Parliament inaugurated the annual Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought to honour persons or organisations for their contribution to the development of human rights and fundamental values .
We should also remember today all those extraordinary people who , through their own efforts and dedication , opposed the harsh realities of oppression , persecution and exile .
They are often ' ordinary ' people who show exceptional courage and dedication .
They often risk a great deal , even their lives .
We have awarded the prize to writers , journalists , politicians , professors , lawyers and organisations fighting for freedom of labour , and even associations of women fighting enforced disappearance .
Freedom of thought is a universal value .
I would like to use this occasion to say that the two nominations that did not receive the Sakharov Prize this year do enjoy our great support , and that we should also mention their names as persons who have made a particularly strong impression on us .
The fact that we mentioned their names , the fact that they were with us in so many debates , speaks a great deal of our great support for what they have done .
It is not just the winner of the prize but also the nominees who deserve our great respect and deep recognition .
( Applause )
The prize giving ceremony will be on Wednesday , 16 December in Strasbourg .
1 .
Draft general budget of the European Union - 2010 financial year ( vote )
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , in the Committee on Budgets , we voted on more than 1 100 amendments to the 2010 draft budget .
Inevitably , there are a small number of technical adjustments that I hereby request be put to the vote in plenary .
Regarding the European Economic Recovery Plan , the Committee adopted two new paragraphs to be added to budget lines 06 04 14 01 , 06 04 14 02 and 06 04 14 03 .
They should be in addition to the existing budget remarks but , due to a technical error , they are shown as replacing them .
Amendment 832 should , therefore , be adjusted accordingly .
After verification of the margins , the vote in committee left a margin of EUR 1 775 000 in Heading 3b .
I propose allocating this amount to the Europe for Citizens programme .
This would mean that Amendment 889 on budget line 15 06 66 should be modified to give total commitment appropriations of EUR 32 255 000 and the retabled Amendment 547 is therefore covered .
The words ' sustainable and environmentally-friendly actions ... ( Green New Deal ) ' should be added to the remarks instead of the words ' Green New Deal ' in the remarks adopted on the following budget lines :
04 02 17 ESF - Convergence
04 02 19 ESF - Competitiveness
13 03 16 ERDF - Convergence
13 03 18 ERDF - Competitiveness
Similarly , on the budget line 13 03 20 ERDF - Operational technical assistance for the European Regional Development Fund , the first two new paragraphs should be replaced by the following :
' Part of the appropriation is intended for financing sustainable and environmentally-friendly actions ( Green New Deal ) that provide for reconciling economic , social and environmental development requirements and for recovery of European regions after the economic and financial crisis ' .
The budget line number of the Pilot Project on an all-inclusive cooperation between public authorities , commercial firms and not-for-profit enterprises on integrating people into society and employment should be changed to another line , 04 03 12 , for technical reasons .
The budget line number of ' Preparatory Action - Erasmus for journalists ' should be changed to 09 06 05 for technical reasons .
If Amendment 943 on the EPSO budget line 26 01 20 is adopted , the corresponding budgetary annex for this Office should be adjusted accordingly .
I ask the Sittings Service to make the necessary corrections in the Minutes - if the plenary will support me .
Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , just allow me to say a word of thanks to the Secretariat for the enormous work they have done .
This adjustment list usually features every year and represents good work from the Secretariat .
We discussed it with the groups and coordinators and I received support for this change , which is in the spirit of the general proposal .
The most important thing is that we in the Committee on Budgets were united in using all the legal possibilities that we have to fill up the margin almost in each heading , which means that any vote which gives additional money is risking the legality of the budget .
I draw your attention to this and I hope that the spirit of cooperation will remain .
We have slightly different views but this is normal .
( Applause )
Mr President , according to the voting lists , Amendment 464 from the Green / EFA Group will fall if Amendment 870 from the Committee on Budgets is adopted .
The voting list follows the rule introduced in formulae by Thomas von der Vring , according to which the amendments adopted by the Committee on Budgets shall be put to the vote first in plenary , and if these are adopted , all other amendments to the same budget line fall .
However , this practice , which is not included in Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , was introduced for the sole purpose of ensuring that the overall position on the budget adopted by Parliament would remain within the financial limits set for the European Parliament .
As Amendment 464 only proposes to place funds in the reserve , it definitely cannot pose a problem of exceeding the limits .
In fact , the two amendments are in no way mutually exclusive and can therefore definitely both be voted on .
I therefore urge you to apply Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure and also allow a vote on Amendment 464 .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , the order was set previously and was carefully checked , but I would ask the rapporteur to take the floor .
I ask you , as the most knowledgeable , to say a few words on this matter .
rapporteur . - Mr President , it is not usually the rapporteur who decides on whether something is incorrect or not .
We have a practice and a custom .
I must inform the plenary that if we vote first on the Committee on Budgets amendments , which were not questioned by the Verts / ALE Group , then their subsequent amendment will decrease the European Regional Development Fund by EUR 300 million in payments .
So that is a real contradiction .
On the one hand , there would be an increase , and on the other hand , a decrease .
We should stick to our decision , for it is written clearly in Amendment 464 that the payment is not increased .
There is zero increase .
Therefore , it is in conflict - there cannot be an increase of EUR 300 million and , at the same time , no increase .
( ... ) so that we may proceed to the vote .
That is the opinion of our services which investigated the matter , and of the rapporteur .
I therefore propose that we proceed to the vote .
- Before the vote on Amendment 812 :
( PT ) Mr President , I should like to ask for the floor pursuant to Rule 173 of the Rules of Procedure , which deals with failure to respect the Rules of Procedure .
I would like to ask for an amendment to the order of voting , since it seems to me that the order according to the voting list violates Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure .
I therefore ask that Amendment 70 , which proposes an appropriation of EUR 600 million to support the milk sector , which is facing an extremely serious situation , as we all know , be voted on immediately before Amendment 812 , which proposes an appropriation of 300 million .

I would point out that this appropriation of EUR 600 million was unanimously approved in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and won broadly majority support in this House , in the last sitting on 17 September , when we voted on a resolution on supporting the milk sector and the crisis it is facing .
Thank you .
It is clearly a matter of the financial resources available to us , which means that the decision on this matter is a serious one .
We would indeed like assistance , but we have to know what is available .
The proposal here is to vote on Amendment 812 first , that is the proposal .
I would like to ask the rapporteur to take the floor on this matter .
How are the finances , what are the financial possibilities ?
rapporteur . - Mr President , again , the order of vote is not my decision .
It was stated by my colleague , Mrs Trüpel , a few minutes ago that there is a so-called informal rule that the Committee on Budget 's amendment is to be voted on first .
Why ?
Because the Committee on Budgets is the parliamentary body in which we can measure whether we have leeway or not .
It is not in our interest to change the rules during the voting procedure , and I am against that .
The voting list has been distributed .
The groups have decided how to vote .
Any change will result in confusion and later on will produce a lot of difficulties .
If we change our rules for one case , for whatever reason , we will be lost .
Each body should respect its own customs , rules and regulations .
( ES ) Mr President , a technical error has occurred .
I intended to vote against Amendment 444 .
( FR ) Mr President , I perfectly understand the argument stated by the rapporteur , leading us to vote firstly on Amendment 812 .
If , however , this is merely an argument about procedure , the vote in favour of Amendment 812 did not necessarily imply that Amendment 70 had lapsed .
It is customary in parliamentary assemblies to vote first , as Mr Capoulas Santos requested , on the amendments furthest removed from the initial text .
We are making an exception for the reasons outlined by the rapporteur ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Thank you .
We understand .
We have a definitive voting procedure in place .
I ask the rapporteur to take the floor .
According to the services and in our view , this second amendment falls .
Can the rapporteur confirm this ?
rapporteur . - Even after the vote there is no reason to start the debate again .
We are now in favour of voting .
Mr President , this is just to be helpful .
Some of us have been hearing different numbers being called .
So that we avoid any misunderstandings , can we pay attention to the screen up here ?
Just in case there are any problems with us hearing or with communication .
I am not blaming anyone , but let us be clear and watch the screen .
Ok .
We will all go by the screen .
It may be that I am reading the numbers too fast .
I shall read them more slowly .
Thank you .
- Before the vote on Amendment 937 :
Mr President , I rise very quickly and on a point of order .
You said a few minutes ago that you were bound by the rules , and what can you do when you are bound by the rules ?
I fully understand that , and so does the House .
Can I assume , and can we assume , that you will be bound by the rules of this House for your whole term of office ?
Because your predecessor felt he was not bound by the rules , and on the basis of explanations of vote he tore the rule book up because he did not feel bound by it .
I leave it with you , sir .
Thank you very much .
Ladies and gentlemen , particularly during the vote , we can only take the floor on points of order .
Please do not raise matters other than points of order , because if you do , we cannot hold the vote .
That is a great inconvenience to all of us .
( Applause )
2 .
Draft general budget 2010 ( Section III ) (
3 .
Draft general budget 2010 ( Sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII , IX ) (
4 .
Adjustment of basic salaries and allowances applicable to Europol staff (
5 .
Common organisation of agricultural markets and specific provisions for certain agricultural products ( single CMO Regulation ) ( vote )
Before the vote on paragraph 79 :
Mr President , I would first of all like to apologise to colleagues for this intervention , but I wonder if someone could explain what ' CMO ' actually stands for .
It stands for ' common market organisation ' , although it will be slightly different in different languages !
6 .
Progress of SIS II and VIS ( vote )
7 .
Democracy building in external relations ( vote )
8 .
The institutional aspects of setting up the European External Action Service (
Madam President , I should like to propose an oral amendment to the Greens .
If they accepted it , I would recommend a ' yes ' vote .
If we introduced the sentence ' There should be no duplication of external service in the Council or in the European Council ' , I would recommend that plenary vote in favour .
Mr President , we could vote en bloc .
I propose we vote from 56 to 28 .
( Applause )
9 .
Preparation of the TEC meeting and the EU / USA Summit ( 2 and 3 November 2009 ) ( vote )
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , at a time when the national governments are having to trim their budgets and when all our constituents are having to make savings in their household budgets , how typical that the European Union , uniquely , should presume to be substantially increasing its budget .
This is going to have immediate and tangible fiscal consequences in the Member States .
In my own nation , for example , our budget contributions will rise by 60 % over the next 12 months .
To put that in context , my last party conference saw our party pledging to make annual savings of GBP 7 billion a year across the whole of government spending .
We are spending twice that simply on this one item of our gross contributions to the EU budget .
You can disguise it as stimulus spending and a reaction to the credit crunch and all the rest of it , but you know that is not true .
What we are actually doing is taking money out of people 's private pockets or purses and spending it on their behalf through bureaucracies .
If that had been the more efficient way of allocating resources , we would have lost the Cold War .
We now see the truth , which is that the core function of the EU is the employment of its own employees , which is why its budget always rises .
Mr President , I would like to make it clear that I supported draft Amendments 732 and 733 and it is a pity that this House did not support them .
I welcome any measure that prevents the funding of family planning programmes which will involve a course of abortion programmes and forced sterilisations .
Furthermore , the mandating of those receiving funding to actively combat sex-selective gender imbalance for babies born in certain Asian countries is to be welcomed .
This amendment would have given the opportunity for the EU to back up its words of condemnation with positive action and to deny support for such schemes .
( CS ) Mr President , I too would like to express my irritation that we have not managed to agree today on the condition that European funding in the development aid budget must not go towards activities such as family planning through enforced abortions or mandatory sterilisations .
I would like to protest against methods under which , particularly in many Asian countries , women are forced to have abortions , especially in cases where they are carrying female babies .
It is said that 35 million girls have been disposed of in this way .
We must not support those who organise this kind of thing and we must stop sending them any funding from Europe .
The underhand voting we have seen today from liberals , communists and some socialists in the adoption of our budget has blocked such an assurance .
( HU ) The multitude of proposed amendments included a textual amendment which hit the nail on the head .
It says : ' rejects the idea of using the Community budget to finance a more militarist and neo-liberal EU . '
Parliament rejected this amendment .
It thereby demonstrated that it had not learnt from the crisis of recent years and had not learnt from the conclusion reached even by the former advocates of the liberal market that it is no longer possible to continue along this path .
The European Union 's budget always relies on the supremacy of the liberal market , which can cause Europe 's population such serious harm , as we have already experienced in the recent past .
( FR ) Mr President , whilst various institutes and programmes , which are all along the politically dominant lines of communication and the education or re-education of populations , have received billions of euros , a procedural trick has deprived our milk producers of the aid they were entitled to expect .
Indeed , two amendments were submitted to us : Amendment 812 , which perhaps had the Council 's backing , for only EUR 300 million , and Amendment 70 , for EUR 600 million .
It makes sense that Amendment 70 should be put to the vote first .
Moreover , this is very clearly stated in Rule 161 ( 2 ) of our Rules of Procedure : ' If two or more mutually exclusive amendments have been tabled to the same part of a text , the amendment that departs furthest from the original text shall have priority and shall be put to the vote first ' .
The rapporteur cited an informal rule , but the formal rule takes precedence over supposed informal rules , and this procedure has been used to declare lapsed the second amendment that brought this allocation up to EUR 600 million .
It is a scandal !
( LT ) I voted for the 2010 budget , because the funds which are earmarked in this budget really will ease the situation a little for citizens of EU Member States affected by the economic , social and financial crisis .
Moreover , in this budget , more funds have been earmarked for social needs , and this is particularly important at the current time .
I also supported those provisions that set aside additional funds to increase employment and secure jobs .
It is also very important that we allocated specific funds for the dairy sector .
Of course , we could have allocated more money to the dairy sector , as representatives of the Social Democrat Party proposed , but it is good that at least some of the funds in this draft have been set aside for this .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the budget because all the items have either remained the same or been increased , when all Member States are grappling with decreasing revenue .
And here we are spending more money in Europe !
That is beyond me .
I also voted ' no ' because it is now laid down that , in addition to his or her salary and the reimbursement of travel and other costs , each MEP is entitled to EUR 4 202 for general expenditure .
Members are supposed to spend this substantial amount on office and telephone costs , for example , but not one of them is obliged to account for the way this sum is spent .
This means that , every month , each MEP is receiving a blank cheque that would surprise even Santa Claus .
I find this utterly reprehensible .
If this House takes itself seriously , it must stop this practice .
This can be done by joining me in voting against the budget , and I would also call on each Member to voluntarily scrutinise the way this EUR 4 202 is spent .
( HU ) I obviously voted in favour of the proposal intended to alleviate the crisis in the dairy sector .
I want to emphasise again that this is just a handout which is not even enough to put out the fire .
However , I would have considered it wrong to vote against this .
I am disappointed and sad that I did not receive any reply , even after repeated attempts , to my three questions .
The first question was about what the European Union wants to do to ensure that it does not continue in the future to lurch from one crisis to another , be it in the dairy sector or with similar crises elsewhere .
What lesson has the European Union learnt from this awful crisis which has ruined and is ruining the lives of many families ?
My second question to the Commissioner , when she was here , and therefore to the Commission as well , was how this money can be distributed to Member States or whether it is possible to do so in such a way that small producers whose livelihoods are at risk will be the first to receive it .
My third question which I did not receive an answer to was about what action new Member States want to take against the discriminatory situation they are in .
100 % of our market had to be ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( DE ) Mr President , I should like to make three comments on the resolution on the dairy sector : firstly , I expressly welcome the fact that the Commission can now react more quickly to market disruptions in the dairy sector .
Secondly , I am delighted that we have together managed to grant European dairy farmers financial support .
Thirdly , precisely because money is not everything , we must now use our time to prepare for the period after the milk quota .
That is why I hope for intensive dialogue between politicians and the industry , because the question of how we are to configure the dairy market for dairy farmers post-2015 has still not been answered and that , from my point of view , is the main problem .
( CS ) I fully support extending the scope of Article 186 to include the milk and dairy products sector .
This will make it possible to react flexibly to sudden changes in the global and European milk markets in order to avoid negative impacts on producers or a distortion of economic competition .
I am doubtful , however , about the effectiveness of using quota purchasing financed from the budgets of individual Member States to solve the crisis in the milk sector .
Not all EU states have the same possibilities when it comes to financing this measure .
I believe that this will undermine the competitiveness of farmers in these states and therefore , of course , economic competition too .
As an MEP from the Czech Republic I would therefore prefer in this case to see quota purchasing financed from the Community budget , which can be used by all states on an equal basis .
I have therefore abstained from the vote .
( PL ) Mr President , after many months of waiting , after long discussions in the Committee on Agriculture , after massive farmers ' protests in various Member States , we have approved additional forms of support for dairy farmers .
Yet this is not enough , as these farmers have suffered huge losses , with many on the brink of bankruptcy , which has undermined the authority of the European Union , and of us MEPs .
Did it have to be this way ?
Why the Commission 's belated response ?
Does it mean that we are not monitoring the market properly ?
If so , it speaks poorly of the state of administration in the European Union .
We MEPs have been the ones raising this issue for months on end .
Let us not forget that belated intervention is far less effective , and ends up costing more .
We should learn lessons for the future from this .
We need long-term stability for the difficult , labour-intensive and costly activity of milk production .
It is our duty to our hard-working farmers .
Thank you , Mr Siekierski .
I have received another two explanations of vote , both of which are from new Members .
I should point out that , under Rule 170 , no further requests to give explanations of vote shall be accepted once the first explanation of vote has begun .
I shall allow these two explanations as an exception , but I should like to ask the services to bring this to the attention of the groups in a suitable manner once again .
Unless we proceed to some extent by the book , then things will get out of hand .
Mr Seán Kelly has the floor .
Mr President , firstly I would like to say that I , too , am delighted that we have today voted through the budget funding for the dairy sector , which does show that the European Union listens and reacts - obviously within the limits of its budget .
It would be better if we could have more money to give to the dairy sector but hopefully we can improve that matter in the future .
Half a loaf is better than no bread at all .
Secondly , I would like to point out that in the English interpretation today , a number of mistakes were made .
Mr Buzek very kindly said that it may have been because he was speaking too quickly .
It does not matter , and it is not a question of blaming anybody , but 908 was called 909 , 444 was called 445 , and 440 was called 444 , so , if there are queries subsequently , that matter should be taken into consideration .
Of course , the screen unfortunately did not work for a while either , but that was an electronic error , not a human one .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted to amend the Regulation establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets , although I have my doubts as to whether the new way of calculating penalties for exceeding national quotas should be effective from April 1 this year .
It means rescinding laws retrospectively , which undermines the principle of legal certainty .
However , I have voted in favour , as this amendment will release EUR 280 million of funding for milk producers and holds out the hope that the milk producers have weathered the worst of the storm .
There remains , however , a fundamental question regarding the future of milk production in the European Union , and within this area the most important issue is the future of milk quotas .
At the moment , there are contradictions in the actions of the Commission .
On the one hand , there is a proposal to increase quotas and eliminate quotas in 2015 .
On the other hand , the motion tabled today is that supply be reduced .
We have to decide one way or the other .
I am for a continuation of quotas .
Mr President , the French philosopher René Descartes famously conjectured that all our senses might be being manipulated by a malicious demon .
Sometimes when I listen to these reports , I get the impression that we are inhabiting that Cartesian universe , a world in which the European Union stands only for the values of democracy and freedom and justice and extends its values through trade accords , rather than war .
And then , back in the real world , what is the European Union doing ?
It is cosying up to the tyrants in Beijing and isolating Taiwan .
It is refusing to talk to the anti-Castro dissidents in Cuba .
It is trying to jolly the ayatollahs out of their nuclear ambitions .
It is the chief paymaster of Hamas-controlled Palestine .
There is no connection between this report about spreading democracy and the actual behaviour of our institutions .
I do not say that the European Union is hypocritical because , of course , we apply the same standards within our own borders , happily swatting aside referendum results when we deem them to have gone the wrong way .
Externally , as well as domestically , we disdain representative government and we are contemptuous of the democratic will .
Let me repeat that the Lisbon Treaty should be put to a referendum .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !
Mr President , I do not think anyone can disagree with the need to promote and support democracy throughout the world , and outside the EU as well as within the EU .
However , if you look back at lessons from history , I remember when the United States used to go and promote democracy around the world and people would say , ' What about your own backyard , what about the African-Americans who cannot vote or who are denied the ability to vote ? '
Years ago , Britain and other colonial masters used to say to the colonies ' Let us spread democracy ' , yet denied the vote to women .
Now you look at what the EU is doing .
The EU is talking about spreading democracy across the EU , and my colleague Mr Hannan has already given many details of such hypocrisy .
But there is one thing that we should remember .
When we talk about spreading democracy , let us make sure we have our own house in order .
When the French and the Dutch voted ' no ' in the referendum on the Constitutional Treaty , we said we would have a period of reflection , and then we ignored the votes .
When the Irish voted ' no ' first time round , we said ' Oh , tell you what , we agree with democracy but only if you vote the right way .
We will give you another chance . '
It is time we put our own House in order .
Mr President , once again I find myself having to remind colleagues that the European Constitution or Lisbon Treaty is not technically in force .
Every clause , every article of the Brok report is based on that Treaty already having justiciability , which of course it does not .
I have to say there is something a little bit suspicious about having held back this report until the Irish referendum was safely in the bag and all the votes counted , and then suddenly coming out with a proposal to have EU embassies around the world answerable to this House and a single European diplomatic corps .
Of course , we all know the reality that an EU foreign policy exists de facto if not de jure .
We have delegations around the world , which dwarf any of the national missions ; we have , in all but name , EU ambassadors ; and now once again we see that a report is belatedly regularising what had become practice over many years in the European Union .
So now , when we object , we are told there is no point in complaining now because this has been common practice for many years .
Thus , do European policies go from being unthinkable to inevitable without any intervening stage ?
Mr President , I supported this resolution because I attach great importance to the upcoming EU-US Summit .
At the recent G20 meeting , many promises were given which will be difficult to achieve if countries act on their own .
In this regard , the EU and the US should take the leading role in the implementation of G20 commitments .
Therefore , we need better and more effective coordination between the measures taken by the US and the EU .
We do not need to have a strategic EU-US partnership .
I hope that the Commission will take this request by the European Parliament on board .
Mr President , I would like to thank everyone for their patience and I include all the interpreters , who do a wonderful job .
We all agree on the importance of the EU-US relationship and I think we all welcome the summits and discussions at the TEC level and the various other transatlantic dialogues .
But it really is important that we recognise that the whole world looks at these summits and looks at the moral leadership that we can offer , not only at EU level but also the US Administration .
Surely one of the best ways of stimulating our economies , particularly in this time of crisis , is to make sure that we really live the word when we talk about open trade .
I have been very disturbed when we look at our common agricultural policy , and we seem to be supplementing our common agricultural policy and increasing protectionism , which does great harm to farmers in the developing world .
Also , if you look at the Obama Administration and its recent tariffs on Chinese tyres , we are descending into a spiral of protectionism .
It is about time we went back to our principle of open trade to stimulate the world economy .
Written explanations of vote
The contribution of the European budget for 2010 to encourage economic growth , competitiveness , cohesion and job protection is a vital response to the recent economic crisis .
As a specific stimulus for the European economy , I would highlight the European Economic Recovery Plan , which encourages , among other things , projects in the energy sector ( electricity grid , natural gas grid and carbon capture and storage projects ) , finances measures relating to broadband Internet , extending the so-called information highways to rural communities , creates a fund for the dairy farming sector , as a new challenge of the common agricultural policy , and other Community aid programmes , such as distribution of fruit and milk in schools .
I would particularly like to highlight the amendment to the draft general budget for 2010 tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which makes promoting first-time employment for young people , by means of training in association with businesses , traineeships and entrepreneurship courses , an additional objective of the Erasmus programme .
The group of amendments to the EU 's budget for 2010 which make up ' Block 3 ' contains interventions and support measures that I oppose as a matter of principle .
This includes various storage measures , for example , for alcohol , and extensive EU support for the wine sector .
It also includes EU support for milk and fruit in schools , which may well be important , but it is not something that the EU should be taking decisions on .
At the same time , the group contains important investments in animal welfare and the control of animal transport , for example , which I welcome .
However , since the voting procedure forces me to take a view of the group of amendments as a whole , I have chosen to abstain from voting on Block 3 .
Amendment 886 has a commendable purpose - investment in sport .
However , this matter does not belong at EU level .
I therefore voted against it .
Amendment 905 is based on an attitude to migrants that I cannot accept on principle .
For example , funds are to be provided to explain to people living in Africa how dangerous it is to get to Europe .
We should not build walls around our continent .
I therefore voted against this amendment .
Amendment 909 contains resources for monitoring European citizens .
This is something that I cannot accept and I therefore voted against it .
in writing . - UKIP members voted in favour of these amendments fundamentally because we oppose ANY increase in the budget and because the limitation in the use of these budget lines , as proposed by the ECR , may result in a reduction in payments out of the budget .
However , we wish to emphasise also that EU-money , which is amply funded by the British taxpayer , should not be used to impose policies , such as coercive abortion , on minority- and other populations , which are suffering under anti-democratic regimes .
Such use is against the law in the UK .
It is also against the law in other client-states of the EU , and in contravention of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights of the United Nations , to which the UK is a signatory , and against the European Convention on Human Rights , to which the UK is also a signatory .
Whether or not the sum involved runs into millions , the local populations affected would have been justified in associating the UKIP with the tyranny of their own governments , if the UKIP delegation had voted against these amendments .
I voted in favour of Amendment 812 of Block 3 so as not to penalise the aid for dairy farmers , however ridiculous it may be ( EUR 280 million ) .
However , it is unacceptable that the adoption of this amendment should lead to the rejection of Amendment 70 , which grants aid of EUR 600 million instead of EUR 280 million , as Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is requesting .
I protest against this rule of the lowest budget proposal at the expense of farmers .
I believe the measures announced by Commissioner Fischer Boel at the end of the meeting of the Council of Agriculture Ministers in Luxembourg , and in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in Strasbourg ( on 19 October ) , are inadequate .
The package , which is still to be approved by the Ecofin Council on 19 November , amounts to EUR 280 million and will be provided to Member States in the form of a financial envelope , based on production and annual quotas .
According to the calculations , Portugal will receive a financial envelope of EUR 6 to 7 million to tackle the drop in producer prices , which is more than 50 % in relation to 2007-2008 prices .
I believe that EUR 0.003 per litre of milk produced in Portugal ( calculations provided by producers ) is a pittance for a problem that has been dragging on now for so many months , especially if the Minister for Agriculture uses this money for the expected reforms , as he has already announced .
This sum of EUR 280 million sends an important signal from the European Commission , but it is inadequate compared with what producers actually need to overcome the crisis .
Negotiation of the budget is among the most important Community processes in which Parliament , the Commission and the Council share decision-making power .
Today , on completion of the first reading , Parliament is reasserting its role as budgetary authority by successfully increasing both commitment appropriations and payment appropriations in relation to the Council 's proposal , though still by less than we would like .
Crucial issues that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has been supporting with regard to reviving European economies in the context of the current crisis have now been endorsed , by means of an emphasis on the cohesion policy to promote growth and competitiveness , especially of SMEs , the main driving force of job creation .
As a Portuguese Social Democrat MEP , I have reason to be particularly pleased with the approval , by a large majority , of an amendment from our delegation , which is aimed at creating an Erasmus programme for first-time employment , one of the proposals that we tabled in the last European elections .
Support for milk producers and a guarantee of more security for citizens , including with regard to energy supply , have also been safeguarded .
This is not the end of the process , as the three institutions will have to reach a common position that will be voted on at second reading in December .
Against the current backdrop of economic , financial and social crisis , it was essential for the budget of the European Union for 2010 to place a special emphasis on this situation and for it to become an effective tool to overcome the crisis .
I therefore voted in favour of the draft EU budget for 2010 , as I believe that it comprehensively responds to these needs .
Parliament is determined to do all it can to guarantee adequate financing for all activities and policies which encourage growth and job creation , and which provide solutions for European citizens .
More specifically , this means improved energy security , increased support for research and innovation , particularly in the area of clean technologies , promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises and increased support for lifelong learning .
In this regard , as proposed by the Portuguese Social Democrat MEPs , I wish to highlight the importance of creating an Erasmus employment programme , aimed at young people seeking first-time employment , to help achieve these goals .
Lastly , I must stress that I do not agree with the Council 's additional reductions in the budget headings in support of the Lisbon Strategy , given that such cuts go against what should be done to encourage growth and economic recovery .
Whilst cohesion policy plays an essential role in efforts to combat the economic crisis and climate change , the Council had proposed substantially reducing the payment appropriations allocated to it in 2010 .
Aware as we are of the importance of European funds and of the expectation that exists on the ground , it was essential for we MEPs to re-establish , or even in some cases increase , the amounts suggested in advance by the European Commission .
This vote is the expression of the political Europe that we need , one that is capable of taking budgetary decisions that ensure a good future for solidarity , competitiveness and growth , for the benefit of its citizens .
The MEPs have today confirmed their support for a European cohesion policy that really does have the resources to meet its ambitions .
Approving also of the general direction of the reports by Mr Surján and Mr Maňka on the European Union 's draft budget for the 2010 financial year , it is therefore with determination that I have voted in favour of their adoption .
I support the Surján report as a possible compromise with regard to the EU budget .
I regret that the Council has reduced yet further the Commission 's preliminary draft budget , which , in my opinion , already fell short of what is needed .
We cannot have more Europe with a meagre budget that is clearly inadequate .
I particularly disagree with the cuts made in the budget headings in support of the Lisbon Strategy .
The discrepancy between the public declarations to prioritise tackling the economic crisis and supporting ' competitiveness for growth and employment ' , and the appropriations provided for in this draft budget , could not be greater .
I welcome the increased appropriations in the area of freedom , security and justice and I would stress that building a Europe of citizens also depends on proper implementation of these budget headings .
I did not vote in favour of creating a EUR 300 million fund and for immediate support targeted at milk producers as I believe that the producers of dairy products are facing a collapse in prices , which is causing insecurity .
In fact , the position adopted by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament ( S & D ) for a EUR 600 million fund would have been a quicker and more effective means of combating the causes and , above all , the effects which have led to a significant decline in the dairy product market , which is continuing in the context of the current economic crisis .
I also believe that the set of support measures adopted by the European Commission has come too late .
Indeed , the EUR 600 million fund would have provided real support for the Member States facing this crisis .
The group of amendments to the EU 's budget for 2010 which make up ' Block 3 ' contains interventions and support measures that we oppose as a matter of principle ( in the same way as we are critical of - and vote against - EU support for tobacco growing ) .
This includes various storage measures , for example , for alcohol , and extensive EU support for the wine sector .
It also includes EU support for milk and fruit in schools , which in itself is important , but we believe this matter should instead be dealt with at national level .
At the same time , the Block 3 group of amendments contains important investments in animal welfare and the control of animal transport , for example , which we would , in principle , welcome , as we strongly support these issues in other contexts , but since the voting procedure forces us to take a view of the group of amendments as a whole , we have chosen to abstain from voting on Block 3 .
I believe the increases proposed by Parliament for the different headings and the amount of EUR 1.5 billion to finance the European Economic Recovery Plan are vital for the EU to recover from the economic crisis we are in , as well as to strengthen the European Union 's role on the world stage .
As I have said before , I believe it is particularly crucial to allocate necessary funds so that small and medium-sized enterprises , which are among the main victims of the crisis , have support that enables them to survive this crisis .
The increase relating to the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme will make it possible to promote the enterprising spirit and the innovation vital for the EU to assert itself in the global market and for socio-economic development in the internal market .
I regret , however , that only EUR 300 million has been allocated for the creation of a fund for the dairy farming sector .
In my view , the serious crisis that the sector is currently experiencing would justify the allocation of more funds , initially EUR 600 million , to help producers overcome the difficulties they are currently facing .
I therefore believe that EUR 300 million is inadequate and I hope that allocation of this sum can still be substantially revised , in light of the needs of the parties affected by this decision .
As regards Parliament 's position , I would like to highlight : a ) the amendments to reallocate the funds tabled by the Commission and later withdrawn by the Council ; b ) the European Economic Recovery Plan as a priority for the European Parliament , which must provide ' fresh ' money for its funding ; c ) the proposals to step up funding for energy security , research and development , support for SMEs , and lifelong learning ; d ) the creation of a fund for the milk sector to the value of EUR 300 million , an inadequate amount , but the maximum sum possible ( I believe it is vital to have a mechanism to regulate and maintain milk quotas ) ; e ) funding of broadband for rural communities from the margin available under heading 2 ; f ) the draft amendment we tabled to strengthen and change the Erasmus programme , to make it also an instrument to create first-time employment opportunities for young people .
I hope that the total budget with payment values in the order of EUR 127 billion is used in full , given that there is a delay in implementing funds equal to a financial year .
In the midst of an economic and social crisis , with drastic effects for jobs and people 's living conditions , the draft Community budget for 2010 , which we are discussing today , falls very short of what is required and , once again , shows what ' European solidarity ' really means .
Instead of responding to the social crisis , a significant portion of the budget is set aside for increasing military spending and for supporting economic and financial groups , in keeping with the escalation of the European Union 's militaristic and neoliberal tendencies .
Although it represents an increase in relation to the draft budget of the Council and of the European Commission , Parliament 's proposal still falls short of what was allocated for 2010 in the Multiannual Financial Framework 2007-2013 by around EUR 6 billion , while the final amount - to be decided in December - is still unknown .
We welcome , however , the approval of our proposal to create a new budget heading for actions in the textile and footwear industry , with a view to creating a Community programme for the industry .
This proposal is aimed at tackling the crisis in the industry , resulting from the exponential increase in imports from third countries , particularly in the regions most dependent on the sector .
Regarding the EU budget for 2010 , we support the basic principles behind it and wish to emphasise that it needs to give people good value for money .
The framework set up under the financial perspective should be respected , and we therefore welcome the fact that the budget will be kept well within this framework .
We want to cut back on agricultural and regional aid dramatically and reduce the total budget .
We want to put more of our shared resources into research and development , growth , infrastructure and security .
I would like to begin by expressing my regret that the Council has reduced yet further the Commission 's preliminary draft budget and that , despite the assumption that the priority of the 2010 budget is citizens and tackling the economic crisis , there is not adequate funding under heading 1a - Competitiveness for Growth and Employment . The budget cuts made by the Council take funds away from implementation of the Lisbon Strategy , which runs counter to tackling the current economic crisis .
I would , however , like to welcome the fact that the amendment made by the Portuguese Social Democrat MEPs , which was an election promise to Portuguese voters , has been approved , in that it concerns the creation of the Erasmus first-time employment concept as a way of promoting employment for young people and helping tackle the economic crisis .
Lastly , I disagree with the cuts made by the Council in heading 1b - Cohesion for Growth and Employment , at a time when the Structural and Cohesion Funds are important to encourage growth and economic recovery , but also because a large number of important policies aimed at fighting climate change and supporting growth and employment are funded under this sub-heading .
I voted in favour of setting up a new fund for dairy products which will provide support to producers in their efforts to overcome the crisis in this sector , although this support should have been envisaged much earlier .
I regret that we could not vote to obtain EUR 600 million as was envisaged by the own-initiative report voted for on 1 September by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and as the S & D Group would have wished .
If EU farmers cannot enjoy more support from the EU , this is down to ill feeling from the European right .
in writing . - The proposed anti-grassroots EU budget for 2010 reflects every aspect of its reactionary objectives , proving yet again that the EU is a transnational imperialist union in the service of capital .
The capitalist crisis is being used to make deep , reactionary , capitalist restructurings at the expense of the working classes and to increase the profits of monopoly undertakings .
Programmes are being financed to overturn labour relations , trample on labour and social rights , promote flexible forms of work and overturn the terms of collective agreements .
Systems of insecure work and holding young people to ransom with internships and lifelong learning rather than jobs are being strengthened .
The concentration of land and the uprooting of farmers from the application of the CAP are being strengthened for the benefit of the food industry and trade .
The means and mechanisms of prosecuting and repressing the labour movement , such as Frontex , Europol and Eurojust , are being increased and strengthened , as are personal databases and mechanisms for imposing the EU 's imperialist policy , the common foreign and security policy , and military infrastructures .
The vote in favour of the EU budget by the centre right and centre left parties in the European Parliament marks an all-out attack on the working classes .
We voted against the EU budget because it serves big business , causing even greater hardship for the peoples .
in writing . - British Conservatives continue to believe in better value and greater accountability within the European Parliament budget .
However , once again the Parliament has sought to greatly increase the budget beyond that set by the Council of Ministers .
Therefore , Conservatives have voted to decrease many areas of EU spending .
We continue to support areas where the EU adds value , such as research into new technologies , access to information for EU citizens , the European Ombudsman and the Court of Auditors .
However , we have also voted against a large number of other budget lines which are unjustified and wasteful in a time when we should all be showing economic prudence .
Specifically , we have voted against funding for the Committee of the Regions , and we have supported moves to scrap some of the most profligate budget lines such as tobacco subsidies , as well as a number of other lines regarding agricultural subsidies and schemes , and waste in administration .
in writing . - The ECR Group believe in better value and greater accountability within the European Parliament budget .
However , once again , the Parliament has sought to greatly increase the budget beyond that set by the Council of Ministers .
Therefore , the ECR have voted to decrease many areas of EU spending .
We continue to support areas where the EU adds value , such as research into new technologies , access to information for EU citizens , the European Ombudsman and the Court of Auditors .
However , we have also voted against a large number of other budget lines which are unjustified and wasteful in a time when we should all be showing economic prudence .
Specifically , we have voted against funding for the Committee of the Regions , and have supported moves to reduce some of the most profligate budget lines regarding agricultural subsidies and schemes , and waste in administration .
In this debate on the general budget of the European Union , I am in favour of the specific conditions of the crisis that we are currently experiencing being taken into account when we discuss the allocation of funds to the various sectors of the European economy .
I would like to draw attention to the pressing need to create a fund for the dairy farming sector in view of the difficult circumstances faced by producers , and I hope that effective support measures are adopted for this sector of activity .
It is vital to allocate the necessary funds so that small and medium-sized enterprises , which are among the main victims of the crisis , have support that enables them to survive this crisis .
The increase for the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme will make it possible to promote the enterprising spirit and the innovation that are vital for the EU to assert its position in the global market and for socio-economic development in the internal market .
I welcome the fact that the policy of zero-based budgeting at the beginning of each legislative term , which I tabled on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , has been adopted .
As a result , Parliament 's budget will reflect real needs and will increase transparency , budgetary discipline and efficiency .
I also support a distinction between fixed costs and variable costs , with the latter justified by a cost-benefit analysis .
In areas such as communication policy , this cost-benefit analysis is important to ensure better results and resource management .
I would stress that this draft budget does not take account of requirements arising from the future entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , which will probably require the drafting of an amending budget .
I would highlight that excellence in lawmaking should be Parliament 's main priority , and the necessary resources should be allocated to this end .
I also believe that it is vital to adopt a long-term policy on buildings , which should take account of building maintenance costs .

I voted in favour of the first reading of the 2010 budget , that is EUR 127.5 billion in payments , whilst hoping that the second reading will enable us to achieve more ambitious results , in particular , regarding the resources afforded for a recovery plan that is in proportion to the challenges to be confronted in terms of jobs , social cohesion , climate change and the fight against poverty .
It was for me , above all , a matter of defending support for microcredit , which is a priority for the socialists , by providing resources for the social economy whilst maintaining the PROGRESS programme in its entirety .
The resources for this budget are indeed limited , due in particular to the restricted financial perspective of which it forms part .
Serious efforts will need to be undertaken in the discussion of the new budgetary perspective .
I welcome the fact that the total amount of Parliament 's budget is below the self-imposed limit of 20 % of expenditure under heading 5 ( administrative expenditure ) of the multiannual financial framework .
In a year of crisis , it is important for Parliament to project an image of discipline and cost control .
The approved budget does not include adjustments that may be necessary if the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , particularly with regard to legislation .
In this regard , there may have to be an amending budget should the Treaty of Lisbon enter into force .
It is important to note that Parliament 's main priority is its legislative role ( in the opinion of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) ) and that Parliament should be allocated the necessary resources so that it can do excellent work .
As regards information policy , I welcome the agreement on funding for political parties at European level and for political foundations at European level , which should help improve communication with citizens and their participation in EU political life .
It also calls for a more in-depth discussion on the long-term budgetary principals in this area .
I voted in favour of this report .
I would like to welcome the fact that the total level of Parliament 's budget is below the self-imposed limit of 20 % of expenditure under heading 5 ( administrative expenditure ) of the multiannual financial framework .
It is important , however , to note that the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , and the consequent increase in Parliament 's responsibilities , means an amending budget will have to be drafted and the limit of 20 % of administrative expenditure will be difficult to maintain .
Parliament 's main priority should be excellence in lawmaking and the necessary conditions should be created for this to become a reality .
I would also like to applaud the work carried out by the shadow rapporteur of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , José Manuel Fernandes , who was instrumental in making this report a document of great importance for Parliament .
Of his work , I would like to highlight the proposal , which has just been approved , to implement a policy of zero-based budgeting at the beginning of each legislative term , which will enable Parliament 's budget to reflect only real costs , and will increase transparency , budgetary discipline and efficiency .
Since 1998 , Parliament has consistently rejected all initiatives submitted to it when consulted about detailed issues relating to Europol , so long as Europol has remained intergovernmental in scope , subject to neither democratic nor legal control .
Now that this decision to turn Europol into an EU agency , funded by the Community budget , has been approved and Parliament 's supervisory role has been enhanced , it is no longer necessary to maintain this course of action .
I therefore voted in favour of this initiative by the Czech Republic , which is aimed at responding to an administrative issue , namely adjusting the basic salaries and allowances applicable to Europol staff , so as to adapt them to the increase in the cost of living in the Netherlands .
I would highlight , however , that any decision on adjusting the salaries of Europol employees must be made unanimously by the Council .
I voted for this proposal for a decision aimed at adjusting the basic salaries and allowances applicable to Europol staff .
This report thus aims to adjust their remunerations to the increase in the cost of living in the Netherlands , as well as to the changes in salaries in the public service in the Member States .
This support has been even more necessary since Europol became a European Union agency funded by the Community budget .
I voted in favour of including milk in Article 186 in order to enable the Commission to respond rapidly to crisis situations , since it introduces an instrument that is important to use .
However , use of this instrument must not distance Parliament from this process , all the more so as codecision draws closer , which is why it is vital that the Commission oversees these actions .
As regards voluntary adjustment of the additional levy scheme , commonly referred to as ' fines ' , intended to secure internal funding to restructure the dairy farming sector , I believe that it is a measure that creates national responses although , in my view , it would be more appropriate to adopt European responses to a crisis that concerns Europe as a whole .
In conclusion , I believe that having fought so hard over recent months to have measures put forward by the Commission , we are in no position to reject any contribution at this very difficult time for European milk producers and their families .
in writing . - I voted in favour of these changes to the Single CMO because I believe that the EUR 280 million package is realistic and will be positively received by the dairy industry .
I am therefore persuaded that it will be necessary to grant temporary powers to the Management Committee under Article 186 in order to deliver this support .
However , I believe that the Commission should enjoy these powers for only a maximum of two years in order to ensure the smooth delivery of this package .
I cannot , however , support the national milk quota buy-back scheme that the Commission also proposed and which included plans to raise a superlevy on producers exceeding quota .
We should not be penalising the efficient , who are the future of the industry .
This package is a short-term measure to address a short-term solution , yet the industry needs a clear long-term strategy for the future .
With regard to the inclusion of milk under Article 186 and the quota buy-back scheme , I am delighted that the implementation of this decision has not been deferred to a later date ... something which , at a certain point , we might have feared on the part of some because the milk year ( which runs from 1 April to 31 March ) is already well under way !
Whilst I am in favour of the measures that have been suggested , I would nevertheless like to go further : indeed , these measures are still far from being adequate , especially since , with regard to the buy-back quota , the ball is again back in the court of the Member States and national funding .
What is more , we are talking here about medium- and long-term measures .
However , there is an urgent need for short-term Community measures .
This is essential : expectations in the field in this regard are very high .
Finally , within the context of Article 186 , it will , in future , be necessary to monitor the annual renewal of the mechanism and to afford the Commission the opportunity of renewing this measure automatically each year .
This will also enable Parliament and the Council to put greater pressure on the Commission .
I voted in favour of the proposal for a ' Single CMO ' regulation since , in view of the serious crisis that the milk sector is experiencing in Europe , urgent measures are required to restore market balances and to guarantee an adequate income for farmers , as stated in the objectives of the CAP , which were reaffirmed in the Treaty of Lisbon .
These proposals are an acknowledgment of the failure of the Commission 's policy for the dairy farming sector .
There are several reasons why we voted against : 1 ) the amount proposed by the Commission to stabilise the milk market is clearly insufficient and will only be made available in 2010 , therefore not making it possible to tackle , to the extent that would be required , a clearly urgent situation , particularly in the case of small and medium-sized producers ; 2 ) inclusion of milk and dairy products under Article 186 , which appears in this proposal , guarantees the Commission power , assigned by Parliament and by the Council , without specifying the actions that will be developed ; 3 ) the proposed measures do not change the objectives of the last CMO reform to completely liberalise and dismantle market regulatory instruments , quotas and production rights - guidelines that lie at the root of the current crisis ; 4 ) the approved funds are , above all , intended for restructuring of the sector which , for the Commission , means thousands of producers abandoning their activity , with all the social and environmental consequences that go with it ; 5 ) the proposal will exacerbate existing imbalances in the distribution of funds among producers and among countries , which will only make things worse for countless producers .
I voted in favour of new anti-crisis measures on the price of milk in order to support the producers who are currently struggling in a particularly difficult environment for their profession .
These measures were slow in coming , even though milk producers have been talking about their problems since last spring .
The EUR 280 million budget proposed by the Member States is inadequate ; we must show that we are more ambitious and support an aid package of EUR 600 million to allow our producers to emerge from the slump in which they find themselves .
I am extremely concerned about the future of this sector since nothing is being done to free producers from the grip of market mechanisms alone , even though the European Court of Auditors has announced the need for tools to manage the milk market , at the risk of undermining milk production in a large number of vulnerable areas and of failing to see that it is through high added-value products that Europe can position itself in the world market .
in writing . - Dairy farmers are under serious pressure right now .
In Ireland , where the dairy industry is strategically important , almost every dairy farmer in 2009 will be making a loss .
This is not a sustainable situation for one of Europe 's key industries .
I voted on today 's amendment to show solidarity with the farming community at a time of crisis .
My only regret is that we are not voting to give them EUR 600 million instead of EUR 300 million as was originally suggested by this house .
However the vote on that matter was blocked at committee level by the centre right parties in the parliament .
EUR 300 million is better than nothing but more drastic action is needed in future to support this industry .
in writing . - I abstained in the final vote on the Single CMO Regulation ( Rule 142 ) because the proposed measures from the Commission do not go far enough in my opinion .
The crisis in the dairy sector is a problem that needs urgent action , and that is also why I voted in favour of the urgent procedure under Rule 142 for the Single CMO Regulation adjustments .
However , the current Commission proposal is too weak and I would like to see , in the very short term , adequate and supporting measures that are effective in combating the crisis in the dairy sector .
Voting in favour of this proposal would preclude any future , more effective , measures .
The crisis in the dairy industry has brought numerous farmers to the brink of bankruptcy .
After months of waiting for better milk prices , the European Commission has finally taken emergency measures to save dairy producers .
Aid for private stocks of cheese is to be increased to EUR 15 million , which will mainly benefit the Italians .
The intervention period for milk powder and butter is to be extended and export refunds are to be increased .
These measures should stabilise milk prices in the medium term .
A milk fund of around EUR 280 million is to be distributed to the Member States in order to finance national aid measures .
However , this is little more than a drop in the ocean .
The Commission is offering the Member States a voluntary quota buy-back scheme in order to motivate milk producers to partially or definitively give up milk production .
Productive operations that deliver too much are to be asked to dig deeper into their pockets .
These measures involve a high national cost because in times of general economic crisis , there is no margin left in the national budgets .
I have no high hopes here .
The most tangible measure in the crisis package is the inclusion of milk in Article 186 of Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 , so that the Commission can take fast measures to combat the crisis .
However , it would seem questionable to me to limit this measure in time .
With this reservation , I voted in favour of Parliament 's position .
I voted against the resolution on the dairy sector , as I think that the Commission 's proposal of allocating EUR 280 million to the sector comes too late to be implemented this year and , in any case , this measure will not be sufficient .
For this reason , I have given my support to the proposal to allocate EUR 600 million to the sector .
On the other hand , including milk and milk derivatives in Article 186 grants certain powers to the Committee set up by the European Parliament and to the Council , although no specific indication has been given of what practical action is to be taken .
Nevertheless , the measures adopted do not change the aim of the most recent reform of the CAP , namely the complete liberalisation of the dairy market , which our Group rejects .
These measures favour the agro-food industry and the large distribution chains , to the detriment of smaller and medium-sized producers , and contribute to the concentration of production and an increase in the profit made by the industry , which has grown in recent years , thanks to a drop in the prices paid to milk producers and an increase in the final purchase price .
I supported the creation of a ' milk fund ' to help the sector in crisis , and specifically to come to the aid of those farmers facing the most urgent problems .
In particular , I voted for the amendment requesting EUR 20 million more than the amount announced by the European Commission , bringing it up to EUR 300 million .
This is an amendment to the Single Common Organisation of Agricultural Markets ( CMO ) Regulation enabling , in particular , the European Commission to take emergency measures on its own initiative in the event of serious disruption in the milk market , as has been the case for several months now .
This budget is clearly not enough to get all the producers out of the tricky situation they are in .
However , given the current budgetary margins , it would unfortunately have been irresponsible to have asked for more .
In addition , in asking for more , we also ran the risk of getting nothing at all .
I would point out that these are only foundations that have been laid .
The debate continues with regard to the regulatory structure that will need to be put in place after 2013 and , on this matter , the European Parliament will pursue its efforts to arrive at an effective , responsible framework for the agricultural markets .
In addition , the Treaty of Lisbon will provide us with new weapons in this regard .
Reports have been adopted in Parliament 's plenary sitting in Strasbourg containing three specific measures ( EUR 280 million in direct aid for producers , a temporary rule for calculating buy-back of quotas and inclusion of milk in the CMO under Article 186 ( emergency measures ) ) .
I believe that these measures are important , but they are inadequate , one-off measures for a problem that has already taken on very serious structural proportions .
The sector needs useful and effective management mechanisms so it can intervene in the market when necessary , as opposed to the approach recommended by the European Commission , which supports liberalisation and deregulation .
This crisis in the dairy farming sector has plainly shown that the CMO for milk still requires instruments , particularly the quota mechanism , in order to tackle market imbalances .
The package , which is still to be approved by the Ecofin Council on 19 November , amounts to EUR 280 million and will be provided in the form of a financial envelope to Member States , based on production and annual quotas .
According to the calculations , Portugal will receive a financial envelope of EUR 6 to 7 million to combat the collapse in production prices , which is more than 50 % in relation to 2007-2008 prices ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
The Commission 's and the governments ' measures for the crisis in the livestock farming sector go hand in glove with the more general anti-grassroots CAP and , more importantly , the decision taken by the EU on the full liberalisation of the dairy market .
The most serious thing is that the proposed headings are being used to speed up restructurings to boost the profits of the food industry , thereby strengthening the business groups of the dairy sector at the expense of livestock farmers .
The measures do not address the acute problems that small and medium-sized dairy farm owners have been demonstrating against : namely , the high costs of production and derisory producer prices .
More to the point , they do not address the acute problems of all livestock farmers , in cattle breeding , in meat production and in sheep- and goat-farming .
Industrialists and merchants are doubling their profits , both from derisory producer prices and from the exponential prices paid by workers for these staple foodstuffs .
We voted against the proposal , because its objective is to further concentrate production in this sector .
The solution for poor and medium-sized farm owners is to fight against the monopoly-friendly policy of the EU and for a different type of development which liberates livestock farmers from exploitation , guarantees them an income and future and generally serves the nutritional needs and well-being of the people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that the European Union 's internal borders were abolished without , at the same time , and even beforehand , external border controls being strengthened and the initially envisaged security instruments , however minimal , being fully operational , presents a real problem .
Subject as we are to the principle of reality , we will not oppose this resolution , in which concern is expressed about the delays incurred by the new systems for exchanging information on criminal and visa-related matters .
However , all that is , in fact , just a pretend problem : the real problem is Schengen itself , its pseudo-acquis now included in the treaties , and the policies conducted by Brussels in relation to visas , immigration and the movement of persons ...
Today , Europe is awash with legal and illegal immigrants , and crime , which is becoming increasingly violent , is soaring , because the nations have been stripped of the right to control their own borders .
Schengen has encouraged a boom in cross-border crime and in the illegal flows of persons and of goods , which themselves are sometimes legal and sometimes not , without any real benefit for Europeans .
Therefore , until these systems become operational , at least invoke the safeguard clause and re-establish the controls !
I fully support the resolution on the situation as regards SIS II and VIS .
The development of SIS II has overrun , and numerous technical hitches have already delayed the entry of new countries into the Schengen system .
This calls for constant monitoring by the European Parliament of progress in the establishment of SIS II and VIS .
SIS II is a key political project for the entire Union .
Its long-awaited implementation and proper operation is essential for the further expansion of the Schengen area , and for the resulting free movement of people within the EU by the next citizens to be entitled to do so ( Bulgaria , Romania , Cyprus and Liechtenstein ) .
SIS II is also a key element in combating crime and illegal immigration .
Polish border guards managed to detain 50 % more illegal aliens in the first half of 2008 compared with the same period the previous year thanks to Poland joining the Schengen area ( from a 2008 report of the Ministry of the Interior and Administration ) .
Over 350 people wanted under the European Arrest Warrant ( EAW ) have been arrested on Polish territory and some 600 people wanted by the Polish justice system have been detained abroad .
The database of missing children , which was not in SIS I and is planned for SIS II , is particularly important .
Our trustworthiness in the eyes of our citizens depends on major projects such as these .
A united Europe cannot afford further delays and negligence .
Adoption of this resolution cannot fail to prompt a couple of comments on its aims and content .
Firstly , the European Union , instead of claiming to be a champion of democracy , which it is not , and making ' practical recommendations ' to other countries , should , first of all , concern itself with the state of democracy within the EU .
The process of ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon is a recent example , among other possible examples , of how the so-called ' European project ' goes against the democratic participation of the European peoples and against their interests , wishes and aspirations , pressuring them , blackmailing them and disregarding their decisions regarding the route they want their collective future to take .
Secondly , in terms of its external relations , instead of promoting the revival of the arms race and militarisation of international relations , EU countries should contribute to democracy by promoting a genuine policy of peace and international cooperation , based on respect for the sovereignty of each country and the principle of non-interference , as well as respect for international law and the United Nations Charter .
We are , unfortunately , a long way from this contribution being made .
An EU with an increasingly stark democratic deficit cannot set an example and , much less , help ' consolidate ' democracy in the world ; hence our vote against .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this resolution exposes , as usual , the so-called good intentions of this House regarding human rights : the European Union 's role is seemingly to enlighten mankind as a whole as to its notions of democracy , to finance the democratic developments in all countries , and so on .
How , then , can it be credible , this Union that applies in such a half-hearted manner , if at all , the safeguard clauses that do nonetheless exist on this subject , in all its foreign trade agreements , when it continues to trade and to finance , no matter what ?
How can it be credible , given the way in which it acts even in Europe , imposing on the nations a European constitution , rechristened the Treaty of Lisbon , when some of them clearly stated that they did not want it ?
And how can you , ladies and gentlemen on the left of this Parliament , be credible after yesterday 's dreadful farce concerning Italy , where you demonstrated a sectarian and partisan spirit the like of which has never been seen before ?
I voted in favour of the Brok report on the institutional aspects of setting up the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) , which will be extremely important if the Union 's external relations are to be rendered more consistent and effective .
It is important to ensure that setting up the EEAS , as a result of the innovations introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , will make it possible to preserve and further develop the Community model in the Union 's external relations and maintain the Union 's interinstitutional balance .
Setting up the European External Action Service is the natural corollary of the process whereby the European Union is acquiring more and more external competences .
It could become an important instrument for coordination and for the EU to assert its position externally if it can resist the pressures from the directorates and base its action more on working with the diplomatic representations of Member States than competing against them .
I regret that , in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , it has not been possible to gain support for an amendment that I proposed , which called for European world languages to be considered when establishing the future internal language arrangements of the EEAS .
This is all the more clear since the priority of the EEAS should be to establish bridges , contacts and links with the rest of the world , and it should therefore adopt , as its chosen work tools , the most suitable languages for establishing them directly .
It is therefore incomprehensible that , in considering this issue , Parliament is choosing to disregard the external aspect of multilingualism and the strategic nature of those languages , which is acknowledged not only by itself , but also by the European Commission .
I endorsed the European Parliament 's opinion on the structure of the future EU diplomatic service .
I hope that the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) will embody an essentially Community-based approach and will enable the EU to exert its diplomatic influence effectively and democratically .
The EEAS must come under the Commission for administrative and budgetary matters and must be officially part of the Commission .
I also hope that the new commissioner for development will be able to remain fully autonomous and to safeguard his prerogatives with regard to this service , as opposed to the idea that he could concentrate powers in sectors relating to the European Union 's external action , including EU trade policy and EU enlargement .
It is important for Parliament 's voice to be heard by the Council , which should lay down the guidelines for this new body in its meeting of 29-30 October 2009 .
in writing .
I voted against Mr Brok 's report on the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) , as I view it to be the clearest example of the militarisation of the European Union .
The service , which is to be launched following the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , covers all aspects of EU security and defence policy .
According to the report , the EEAS and the High Representative ( and Vice-President of the European Commission ) will assume the role of EU external representatives , supported by a network of 5 000 civil servants , without being subject to any kind of parliamentary control .
The High Representative will be in charge of the civil and military management of crises and will be responsible for human rights , but will not be accountable to the Member States .
Furthermore , the EEAS will be established by a Council Decision , with the Commission 's approval .
Parliament will merely be consulted , which reflects the anti-democratic nature of the scheme .
I think that the European External Action Service is not in the spirit of the European project that our Group wishes to defend , namely a Europe created for and by the citizens , rather than the Europe that is currently being built on an economic model based on avoiding any intervention in the economy .
in writing . The EU European External Action Service ( EEAS ) , set up under the reactionary Treaty of Lisbon , is a mechanism for promoting increased imperialist aggression and the EU 's anti-grassroots strategy .
The rush by the political representatives of capital in the European Parliament - conservatives , social democrats , liberals and greens alike - to vote for the EEAS proves their devotion to the economic policies and military options of euro-unifying capital :
• independent representation of the EU at all international organisations , independently of its Member States , as provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon ;
• establishment of the EEAS , an autonomous EU service , with civil and military powers , based on the directions taken in the CFSP and the APCA and manned by senior civil and military servants of the EU under the orders of the High Representative ;
• use of the EEAS as a tool to promote the imperialist policy of the EU with its own embassies and diplomatic action independent of the Member States .
The way was paved for these developments in the Treaty of Maastricht , which founded the EU CFSP and APCA and signalled an escalation in military aggression and the militarisation of the EU .
The Greek Communist Party voted against the report , which reveals every aspect of the Treaty of Lisbon and the dangers which its application harbours for the people , who are fighting against the EU , this transnational union of capital and its anti-grassroots policy .
I did not take part in this vote because I reject the idea of strengthening our economic relations with the United States yet again .
The EU-US partnership is not the most important for Europe and is not what the Doha Round needs : the EU must diversify its choice of partners if it wants to keep as much of its independence as possible .
To do so , it must increase the number of agreements with developing countries .
Rather than Americanising European standards , we must prioritise the introduction of a multipolar development model in which Europe will at last find its rightful place and full meaning .
EU-US relations undoubtedly represent the EU 's most important strategic partnership .
We have a shared responsibility to promote common values , such as respect for human rights , democracy , stability and peace , but also to find better solutions to various global dangers and challenges , as is the case with the economic and financial crisis , climate change , nuclear proliferation , fighting international crime and terrorism , and eradicating poverty , among other issues .
With regard to cooperation in the judicial , policing , and internal and external security areas , I would point out that , for future negotiations to be successful , it is vital that security measures do not violate civil liberties and fundamental rights , not to mention the need to respect privacy and data protection .
I would repeat , once again , that European personal data should only be transferred to third countries if two fundamental principles have been considered : necessity and proportionality .
Full compliance with European and national legislation on data protection should also be taken into account and adequate procedural guarantees provided .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the upcoming EU-US Summit and the Transatlantic Economic Council ( TEC ) Meeting as it highlights the need to strengthen transatlantic relations at a time when major international challenges call for a coordinated global response .
I would highlight the TEC 's role in promoting and ensuring a coordinated response to the global financial crisis and the importance of transatlantic relations in reaching an international agreement at the COP 15 in Copenhagen , which includes an adequate financial package to help developing countries fight climate change , in terms of both mitigation measures and adaptation measures .
Owing to the strategic importance of the United States for the EU , and vice versa , a transatlantic partnership should be strengthened at the next summit so as to consolidate the ability to take action to deal with the challenges currently facing us , from the current serious socio-economic crisis , to issues such as disarmament , the fight against terrorism , climate change , respect for human rights , etc .
Coordinated action between the US and the EU is also vital to reach a more mature stage in economic and trade relations between both sides , leading to the creation of a de facto transatlantic market by 2015 , with reduced bureaucracy and , as a result , a more stable and attractive environment for businesses in both markets , which offers them lower operating costs .
Furthermore , if equivalent measures , particularly in terms of financial regulation , are not adopted by the US , the EU will find itself at a competitive disadvantage , which will be extremely harmful to the European economy .
I therefore reiterate the need to protect the EU 's interests by means of a coherent and coordinated policy between the EU and the US in the various areas of common interest .
I voted against the resolution on the upcoming Transatlantic United States-European Union Summit because , in spite of the great hopes raised by his arrival at the White House and his historic election in a country where ethnic minorities still face discrimination , President Obama has , until now , only made symbolic gestures .
The current president of the United States shares the same economic model of non-intervention in economic matters as the previous administration , has continued the same military policy as his predecessor ( he sent more troops into Afghanistan and is setting up new military bases in Colombia ) , he has yet to close the Guantánamo camp or lift the embargo on Cuba .
He has placed no pressure on Israel or Morocco to comply with international legislation .
To this day , the United States continues to impose the death penalty in 38 federal states .
It has yet to ratify the Ottawa Treaty on the control of the weapons trade or the Kyoto Protocol .
For these reasons , I have voted against this resolution .
I voted in favour of this resolution because I attach great importance to the European Union-United States Summit to be held in early November 2009 .
During the recent G20 meeting , many promises were made that will be hard to keep if countries act on their own authority .
In this regard , the EU and the United States should assume a leading role in the implementation of the commitments made by the G20 .
Consequently , we need more effective coordination between the measures taken by the United States and the EU .
That is why I encourage these joint meetings between Europeans and Americans and , more specifically , the discussions at Transatlantic Economic Council ( TEC ) level .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Guinea
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Guinea .
Mr President , I believe that the level of interest in this matter far outweighs the crowd of people that have hurried into this Chamber this afternoon , which I regret once again for my group and for the others .
Mr President , Guinea-Conakry needs the support of the international community .
Following the death of President Conté , a military junta seized power .
Criticised by the international community , it did , however , receive domestic support because it promised a rapid transition to a civil regime with free elections .
Captain Dadis Camara , who led the junta , made a firm commitment not to stand in the presidential elections , but after a disastrous management of the country - no budget , no public tender bids , no basic services for the population - he acquired a taste for power and clung to it so tightly that he is now standing in the elections .
His electoral campaign relies on all of the country 's organisational , media and economic resources .
In the face of this violation of the commitments formerly made by the junta , the opposition organised a demonstration , which was brutally repressed by the presidential guard .
It left 150 dead and more than 1 000 injured , and many women were raped and disembowelled .
The reaction of the European Parliament and , I hope , of the European Union , will be clear .
We call for the suspension of the European Union fisheries agreement .
We call on the African Union to impose sanctions on the military junta and to organise a dialogue within a reconciliation committee .
We call for the installation of a transitional government to prepare for the presidential and legislative elections , the junta being definitively outlawed by the international community .
I hope that these reactions , which are appropriate for the tragedy that has taken place , will set a precedent , and that in other cases of flagrant breaches of human rights , the European Union will have the courage to act just as promptly .
author . - Mr President , when you look into the situation of Guinea and learn about the atrocities that have taken place there in recent months , the first legitimate question to ask is why it has had so little media coverage .
There have been only a few lines here and there , as though there had not been hundreds of people killed , terrible acts of torture and horrifying acts of rape aimed at annihilating human dignity .
It is true that various international institutions have condemned the military junta that came to power after a coup d 'état , but I believe that much more should have been done to raise awareness among ordinary citizens , including European citizens .
This is why I am pleased that at least the European Parliament , speaking on behalf of the citizens who sent us here , has an appropriate reaction and the resolution we will vote on today appropriately addresses it .
However , I consider that what is of the utmost importance is not only to criticise and condemn the current regime but also to eliminate any possibility of European funds intended to help the people of Guinea being misappropriated .
28 September is an important date for the people of Guinea because it is the day when the referendum on independence took place .
From this year on , however , 28 September will be a day marking the massacre perpetrated against opponents by the government installed by violence in Conakry .
Keeping this military junta in power is not an acceptable option .
In fact , during all this time , Captain Dadis Camara , who assumed power , has promised that he will drop out of the contest and not present himself as a candidate .
The date for this has now expired and soon , the ultimatum given by the African Union will too .
It is obvious that now that the military are in power , they are lying and must not be taken at their word .
This is why a democratic government is needed , based on elections , and the international community must exert pressure to this end .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I already spoke in the debate during the Brussels mini-session , two weeks ago .
Therefore I shall not go back over my speech .
My fellow Members have already made a number of points .
For my part , I should like to say how pleased I am that all of the political groups within Parliament can today jointly respond to the appeal launched by Guinean civil society , by condemning the repression carried out by the military junta that has been in power since December , a repression of the peaceful demonstration staged to mark Guinea 's independence .
This Guinean civil society is asking us to come to its aid , and it would , in fact , be totally unacceptable for the European Union to release funds as part of the fisheries agreement that we know full well today will go straight into the pockets of the military junta in power and not be used to help Guinean fishermen , as the texts intend .
The Guinean regime is the most corrupt regime in the world today .
It is not I who says so , but the bodies in charge of monitoring the situation .
I therefore sincerely hope that , together , we will be able to vote for the joint resolution in its entirety , including the paragraph calling for the suspension of the fisheries agreement , and I hope that we will have the support of the Council and the Commission on this matter .
Mr President , when , at the end of last year , Captain Camara headed the military junta which took power in Guinea after the death of President Conté , the international community unfortunately held the naïve belief that Captain Camara would hold free and democratic presidential elections in which he would not take part .
We now know that when , on 28 September , over 50 000 opposition supporters gathered in the national stadium to protest against Captain Camara 's change of tack and broken promises , he sent the troops against them .
Over 150 people died , over 1 200 were wounded , and there were numerous cases of rape .
I am pleased that Javier Solana , the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Policy and Security , was so quick to speak out .
I would like to thank the French Government for suspending military cooperation with Guinea .
However , three weeks have passed since the massacre , and these actions have yielded no visible results .
For this reason , I believe that the European Union should focus on exerting pressure on Guinea , together with the UN and the African Union , and to apply the severest possible sanctions .
Only then will we be able to talk about the handover of power by Captain Camara .
Mr President , I welcome the decision announced by the Commissioner for Fisheries , Joe Borg , a couple of days ago that the Commission is withdrawing its proposal for a fisheries agreement with Guinea .
The Committee on Fisheries has already voted against such an agreement .
We did this two days after the massacre in Conakry , when more than 150 people were shot dead by government troops controlled by Moussa Camara .
I hope that this is the first step towards the European Union reviewing its trade policy with developing countries .
We have a huge responsibility as one of the world 's most important and largest players when it comes to trade and also development .
There must be consistency between our trade and our relationship with this type of regime .
Over the years , we have tried to improve the fisheries agreement by saying that some of the money from the agreement should go to supporting local fisheries .
However , the Commission 's own evaluations have shown that the money is not actually used for the purpose stated in the agreement , but instead goes directly to support this type of regime .
The European Union must cease to provide this support .
Mr President , we already talked about Guinea two weeks ago .
Nevertheless , the situation in the country deserves our continuing attention and response .
On Monday this week , the Committee on Development heard an eyewitness report of the events of 28 September given by the former prime minister and head of the opposition UFDG party , Mr Diallo .
It seems to me that calling upon the junta to respect freedom of speech , freedom of assembly or human rights in general will not be enough .
If the junta respected these principles , these values , it would not be a junta , so we cannot expect that it will listen to these appeals .
A man of action - and Captain Dadis Camara is definitely one - will only be stopped by action , and not by words .
That is why I appeal to the European Commission to act .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Guinea is currently being rocked by tragic events that have shocked the international public and flouted the law .
Indeed , on 28 September 2009 , the military junta led by Captain Dadis Camara carried out the bloody repression of a peaceful demonstration bringing together all of the opposition parties .
Now , the Cotonou agreements base relations between the European Union and its ACP partners on respect for human rights and democratic principles .
Therefore , Captain Dadis Camara 's unilateral decision to postpone the elections and to refuse to raise the issue of his candidacy for Guinean president is a serious failure to honour the commitments made to hold free and transparent elections within one year .
The European Union must therefore take immediate action in line with the principles and the permanent values that underpin its action so that this violence , which represents so many human rights violations , stops .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted that the compromise resolution is fully in line with our values and principles , but I am particularly anxious to emphasise here Article 10 of this text , namely the suspension of the fisheries agreement protocol between the European Union and the Republic of Guinea until the democratic process has begun .
I can hear people wondering whether such a decision would have disastrous socio-economic consequences for the population but , faced with the violence of 28 September , we must recognise that the Guinean Government is scarcely concerned about the living conditions of its citizens and that it leaves us with no other option than to be firm .
Since its independence in 1958 , Guinea has only ever known dictatorial regimes .
Mr President , I will not repeat all of the intelligent and sensible things that have already been said by my fellow Members .
I would firstly like to say that I am very pleased that this issue is being debated here today .
I will briefly say a few words about the debate we had in the committee about the fisheries agreement on 30 September .
In fact , when we debated this issue , you would have thought that the EU was in the process of entering into a trade agreement with any old Western democracy .
Nowhere in the discussion or in the documents was it mentioned that the agreement in front of us was with a nation in which the situation is as it is today and which has already been described very well in this House .
Many people perhaps thought that fisheries and human rights are completely separate issues and that we should not mix the two together .
Personally , I cannot understand how , as a politician , anyone could think in that way .
The fact that the votes in the committee were 11 to 9 in favour of not concluding the agreement is also very worrying .
This means that there was quite a large group in Parliament that , at least at that stage , thought that it was perfectly alright to enter into a trade agreement with a country like Guinea with the sort of regime that it has .
I am pleased to say , firstly , that there is now a much higher level of agreement for us taking a clear line with regard to Guinea and , secondly , that there is broad support for the Council actually having withdrawn this agreement now .
I am extremely pleased about this .
Some people may well think that those in favour of the agreement being withdrawn are not thinking about the fishermen who will be affected , but that is by no means the case .
Of course , we must find a sustainable solution for them , but we cannot sweep human rights under the carpet simply because we have a number of fishing boats that need to be provided for .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group .
Mr President , I had the honour of participating in the meeting of the Committee on Fisheries when it voted , albeit by a very narrow margin , against renewing the fishing agreement with Guinea , precisely because of the massacres , rapes , and all the human rights violations which have taken place and have yet to be investigated .
Today , I would like the European Parliament to adopt this resolution in plenary .
This step would send a clear message , both to the European institutions and to the government of Guinea , that we are not prepared to contribute taxpayers ' money to keep a corrupt government in power that is involved in criminal activities .
I would be happy if , for once , and I hope that this will set a precedent , human lives and human rights were viewed as more important than an economic agreement .
Such a move would please me all the more because the Commission has already taken that step , as has the Committee on Fisheries .
It is now high time that the European Parliament also ratified this decision during its plenary session .
Thus , this is a great opportunity for us and I hope , as has already been mentioned , that article ten will remain intact .
( Applause from certain quarters )
Mr President , at least 157 dead and over 1 200 wounded is the result of the Guinean army 's intervention in a peaceful opposition demonstration at the stadium in Conakry in September .
This is the biggest massacre since Guinea 's independence in 1958 .
In taking power in December last year , President Camara promised to tackle corruption and anarchy and then to hand over power in democratic elections .
Today , the military junta continues to rule the country with no respect for the basic principles of the rule of law or fundamental rights .
Gangs of soldiers are regularly involved in attacks , robbery and rape .
As representatives of democratic countries , we must demand the immediate withdrawal of the junta and that all responsible for the bloody massacre of civilians , shooting into crowds and the public raping of women be brought to justice .
Guinea is a country with huge economic potential , yet in spite of this , it is one of the world 's poorest countries and one of the most corrupt states in Africa , and further dictatorship by the military junta could lead to civil war and destabilise the situation in the whole of West Africa .
( FR ) Mr President , 150 deaths and countless instances of sexual degradation have been recorded today .
It was an unprecedented violation of the Guinean civilian population that was carried out on 28 September .
It was also a disproportionate repression by the military junta in power , and the witness accounts leave no room for doubt .
We must be extremely firm in the face of such barbarity , and I welcome the targeted sanctions against Captain Moussa Dadis Camara 's junta that were decided on yesterday by the EU Member States .
Condemning the events is clearly not enough .
We must demand that the events be investigated in full by a genuine international commission of inquiry , and that the crimes that have been committed do not go unpunished .
Moreover , I myself , would like , in the 30 seconds that I have left , to call on the Union to use all the means in its power to combat the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war .
This is a fast-growing phenomenon in many armed conflict zones .
It is women , often the very elderly or the very young , who are the victims .
In all cases , however , it is vulnerable people who are targeted .
Support for the rule of law and good governance must automatically be accompanied by respect for human rights , for gender equality and for protection of the most vulnerable , as minimum conditions for any type of new cooperation agreement .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on 28 September , the people of Guinea took to the streets to appeal for the commitments that had been made to be honoured , and for free and democratic elections to be held , as promised .
They have suffered the worst possible repression by a regime that was already devoid of all legitimacy and which , that day , lost all dignity .
Men were repressed , women were disembowelled with bayonets , and raped , and the political opponents and trade unionists were tortured and maimed .
The European Union must today support the African Union , ECOWAS and the United Nations in refusing to allow this crime to go unpunished and , above all , in showing solidarity towards the Guinean population .
This country , which has an abundance of assets , will never be able to use them for its development as long as corrupt dictatorships can seize them for the benefit of a clan .
That is why I welcome the firm approach announced by the European Commission , one which our Parliament is able to demonstrate today .
We cannot weigh strict economic interests against the commitments that were made by the European Union 's partners , particularly those who signed the Cotonou Agreement , concerning respect for human rights and respect for democratic principles .
Today we have a commitment to the people of Guinea : to support them in their fight for freedom and democracy .
Mr President , I asked for the floor simply to make a comment on the suggestion to suspend the existing EU-Guinea fisheries protocol .
I doubt whether a brutal regime which does not hesitate to dispense with the lives of 156 of its citizens and is responsible for so many other atrocities will be moved by such a disproportionately small sanction on that issue .
We should also bear in mind that there are legal obligations regarding this agreement towards people employed in the fishing industry in Guinea who have nothing to do with the brutal regime .
That is why the EPP is hesitant to support this suggestion .
Mr President , the story of Guinea-Conakry follows a depressingly familiar African script : a dictatorial ruler ; a military coup ; one authoritarian regime replaced by another ; and most of the people still living in abject poverty .
Substantial mineral and oil resources could make Guinea one of Africa 's most prosperous nations .
Instead , the wealth fuels conflict and misery , not only in Guinea , but throughout a region that has witnessed appalling bloodshed and chronic instability in the past 20 years .
In the past , I have pressed the European Commission to help develop a kind of Kimberley Process for resources other than just diamonds to ensure that the activities of mining companies do not support civil war or ruthless dictators such as Captain Camara in Guinea .
I am therefore especially concerned about the massive deal struck between Guinea and Chinese companies , and I hope that the Commission and Council will express to Beijing our expectations that its business activities there should neither provoke internal strife nor further undermine human rights in Guinea .
However , like Mr Kasoulides , I suspect the proposals to rescind the EU fisheries agreement will only serve to punish local communities , not the military junta .
( FI ) Mr President , since we have been praising the Commission here for the decision it has made over the Guinea fisheries protocol , specifically on account of human rights violations , I would like to ask the Commission if it now intends to carry out a systematic survey of other similar situations , or at least prepare to act consistently and just as firmly if such serious human rights violations occur elsewhere .
( FI ) Mr President , recently a Finnish voter asked me how I would define human rights .
I said that I should not define them on my own , and that it was not worth doing so ; otherwise , they would not get any further than my own front door , the idea being that human rights have already been defined and that countries are committed to a respect for them .
They are binding on the international community .
That is why we appeal to them .
Guinea is a signatory to the Cotonou Agreement , which requires human rights and democracy to be respected .
This is a basic premise .
We really must insist that a country 's democratic development should get properly under way when we conclude more cooperation agreements on the basis of Cotonou .
As we have heard , the situation in Guinea at this time is intolerable and calls for a swift response and possible sanctions .
Guinea has important reserves of ore and , consequently , great opportunities for development .
At the same time , it is one of the world 's most corrupt countries .
It is quite deplorable that Chinese state-owned companies and businesses that invest in Guinea do not insist on any sort of commitment to human rights .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place after the debates .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The main objective of the new partnership agreement between the EU and Guinea-Conakry is to strengthen cooperation between the European Union and the Republic of Guinea so as to encourage the establishment of a partnership to develop a policy of sustainable fishing and responsible exploitation of fisheries resources in the Guinea fishing zone , in the interests of both parties .
The financial contribution under the protocol is set at EUR 450 000 per year , for fishing opportunities relating to the category of highly migratory species .
The entire amount is intended for establishing a national fisheries policy based on responsible fishing and sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources in Guinean waters .
The above is in line with the Portuguese Communist Party 's proposal regarding fishing agreements with third countries , which is why I voted in favour of this document .
2 .
Iran
The next item is the debate on seven motions for resolutions on Iran .
Mr President , Iran is characterised by linguistic , religious , ethnic and political diversity .
The Shia majority lives alongside Sunnis , Zoroastrians , Christians , Jews and Baha 'i .
The Persian majority shares the country with countless ethnic minorities that make up almost half of the population : Azeris , Arabs , Kurds , Baloch and others .
The cities are teeming with a modern middle class and young people ready to live in 21st century Iran .
All this commotion and complexity frightens the regime that would rather have a simple Iran : simple in terms of religious fanaticism , in isolation of the country and simple in terms of public opinion cowed by violent repression .
This resolution describes the systematic violation of human rights to which Iranians are subjected in their own country , including frequent application of the death penalty , even against children , the stoning of men and women , extensive limitations on freedom of expression and persecution of religious and ethnic minorities .
With this resolution , Parliament is sending out two separate messages .
The first is for the people of Iran : Europe sees in Iranians and , particularly in its young people , the hope for a future in which their country will embrace democracy and freedom and will take on an important role in the region , as it deserves .
The second is for the Iranian regime : we are telling it that Iran will never fulfil its unquestionable potential as long as violence and obscurantism are the main features of a political regime that merely pays lip service to the values of justice and peace and continues to brutally oppress its people .
author . - Mr President , any government derives its legitimacy from providing for the well-being of its own citizens .
Any regime that fails at this most basic responsibility loses its legitimacy in the international community .
Current self-isolation is leading to destruction in Iran and has a toxic impact on neighbouring countries and on the rest of the world .
We cannot stand by and watch minor offenders being hanged , people being raped and arbitrary violence wrought upon citizens by their own regime .
We stand here to restate that there cannot and will not be impunity for those guilty of committing crimes against humanity , and we will continue to stand with the Iranian people as they exercise their right to free speech and peaceful protest for freedom and democracy .
The European Union has a responsibility in keeping these universal rights on the agenda , including when trade interests or the nuclear programme of Iran are at issue .
Only when the Iranian regime earns its legitimacy from its citizens can it be a credible player in the international community .
author . - Mr President , this situation is rooted in a very special clerical dictatorship , which is notorious for its indiscriminate suppression of human rights and civil liberties .
The situation has even worsened since the June elections .
Arrests , torture and executions of minors and women have increased .
In fact , Iran has the highest number of executions in the world after China .
The latest information , which is not reflected in the draft resolution , is that yesterday , Iran 's regime hanged five prisoners in Tehran 's Evin prison , including Soheila Ghadiri , a 28-year-old woman .
She is the fourth woman to be hanged by the regime in the past month .
Such barbaric sentences have nothing to do with crimes allegedly committed by the prisoners but are rather an effort to intensify the atmosphere of terror in the country , especially among women and young people , who have displayed their resolve to establish democracy and oppose the elections .
Regardless of how many people are here in this House , when we speak in Parliament , we are also speaking for the millions of people in Iran who have gone out on the streets and have risked their lives and safety to protest against elections that they believed to be fraudulent .
These millions of Iranians , inside and outside the country , expect something from us and , therefore , the starting point cannot be anything other than that of solidarity and of collaboration in aiding these millions of Iranians , who are fighting for democracy and for human rights and who , it should be pointed out , are running risks much greater than those normally feared by diplomacy .
I would say , then , that the starting point cannot be anything else .
It is true that Western policy has very often been a simplistic policy that is ignorant with regard to Iran .
It is true that Europe has too often been reactive with policies that proved to be wrong with regard to Iran .
It is true that very often we have not wanted to accept that Iran should have the respect from the international community that , as a major regional power , it certainly craves .
As put by an Iranian artist in exile after the protests , the West did not want the Islamic Republic and now we do not even have a republic .
However , none of this can excuse a regime that has repressed freedom , an oppressive regime and , now , a regime based on the increasingly flimsy foundations of fraudulent elections and oppression of its people .
The Iranian people expect solidarity and support from Parliament , and we seek to provide it with this text .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we know about the political and social conditions in which the citizens of the Islamic Republic of Iran live .
We are aware of religion 's significant interference in political decisions and the sphere of fundamental human rights .
The latest example was the killing of Behnood Shojaee , a young man recently executed even though he was a minor at the time of the crime .
This is the latest episode in a chain of serious violations of human rights which have entailed the repression of political opponents , homosexuals , journalists , intellectuals and anyone who is fighting for the social and civil development of Iran .
The situation has deteriorated during the regime of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , who began his presidency by repeatedly denying the Holocaust and the State of Israel 's right to exist .
Since 2005 , the number of executions in Iran has quadrupled , and Iran is the only country in the world which executes minors guilty of crimes .
The systematic use of torture in prisons and the use of medieval punishments , such as amputation and stoning , is well known , but the regime is in difficulty as shown by the tens of thousands of people who were brave enough to protest in the streets following the last elections .
The young woman , Neda Agha-Soltan , killed in the street as she was standing up for her rights as a woman and as a citizen , has become the symbol not only of the repression , but also of the desire for freedom of a people that Europe must help .
How can we help ?
One way is with the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights .
Another tangible proposal is to name streets or squares in our cities after Neda Agha-Soltan .
This would not only commemorate her sacrifice , but would show our solidarity with Iranian opposition and provide greater information and awareness of such a serious situation among European citizens .
I would like to see a picture of Neda Agha-Soltan next to the picture of Aung San Suu Kyi displayed on one side of the European Parliament building in Brussels .
One final comment : how can President Ahmadinejad have any credibility in the negotiations on the nuclear issue when he is persecuting and going against his own people who are calling for greater democracy , greater freedom and greater respect for human rights ?
author . - Mr President , while we sit in this Chamber having grand debates , the hangmen in Iran are working overtime .
As we heard from Tunne Kelam , yesterday they hanged another five people , including a young woman , the parents of whose victim had pardoned her .
So she had actually been excused the death penalty but was subsequently hanged .
But we follow a policy of appeasement in the EU .
Only this week , we have agreed that we will encourage the Russians to enrich the nuclear fuel rods , on behalf of Ahmadinejad , in return for his guarantee that he will stop his own nuclear enrichment programme .
But he has not given that guarantee , nor has he given open access for inspectors to look at his nuclear facilities .
We are only bolstering the Mullahs when we continue this policy of appeasement .
We need to take tough sanctions .
Toughness is the only language these Mullahs understand .
Mr President , at the beginning of this part-session , President Buzek pointed out that the abolition of the death penalty is a basic concern of the European Parliament .
It applies to all regions of the world that this inhumane and barbaric penalty must be abolished .
He referred to the executions taking place in Iran .
Four death sentences in particular are mentioned in the motion for a resolution before us .
The persons in question have been sentenced to death because they allegedly took part in the protests against the elections , but they were all in custody at the alleged time of the offence .
So this could still go to appeal and we need to keep an eye on these cases .
The fact that minors were still being executed in Iran at the time of the offence has also been addressed .
Iran is the only country which was still executing minors at the time of the offence .
Iran has ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child and is therefore obliged to pass a national law prohibiting the execution of minors .
A bill has been tabled before the Iranian Parliament and we must call on our colleagues there to do everything they can so that the passage of this bill stops being blocked .
I consider this a very important task .
To close , I should like to express my high respect for all men and women in Iran who are risking so much , who are taking to the streets , who are engaging in various activities to demand respect for the rights to which they are entitled under the Iranian Constitution .
Their determination , their commitment and their courage deserve our unreserved solidarity .
Mr President , on 2 October this year , the Iranian police stopped a man from boarding an aircraft at the last minute .
The lawyer , Abdolfattah Soltani , was due to receive the International Human Rights Award for 2009 in my home town of Nuremburg for his courageous work on behalf of victims of political persecution .
Despite having a valid passport , the Iranian powers refused to allow Mr Soltani to leave the country for no legal reason .
His wife was allowed to leave .
She rightly stated , and I quote : ' It pains me that in a country that calls itself a theocracy , acts are committed that have nothing to do with God ' .
Iran is bound under international law by its ratification of the UN Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , which stipulates the human right that everyone shall be free to leave any country , including his own .
I find it scandalous that Iran is trampling this right underfoot .
I am therefore lobbying for the Soltani case to be included in our joint resolution today , in our resolution on Iran , and I ask for your support .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I would like to use this time to express our concern over the situation in Iran and especially of Iranian opposition members in Camp Ashraf in Iraq , which has been the symbol of resistance for people in Iran .
The Iraqi Government should stop following the orders of the Mullahs in Tehran .
Iraq should understand that the Iranian regime has no future and is holding on to power for repression and executions .
So , if Iraq is a sovereign country , they should respect and implement the European Parliament resolution of 24 April 2009 on Ashraf , which calls on Iraq to stop any forcible displacement of Ashraf residents within Iraq .
The Mullahs in Tehran want Ashraf to be destroyed , and we in Europe must support these defenceless Iranian refugees .
It is our moral duty .
We should ask the EU Presidency and the Commission to ask the UN to become more involved by sending a permanent team - and even a peacekeeping force - there to prevent more attacks and prevent these people being moved by force to other parts of Iraq .
Mr President , there is no doubt that the human rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran has deteriorated sharply in recent months .
An apt illustration of this is the current developments in the repressive apparatus provided by President Ahmadinejad to nip in the bud even the appearance of any kind of opposition to his administration , which is of dubious legitimacy .
The notorious thugs known as the Basij have now been incorporated into the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps , another sinister organisation .
What can the European Union still accomplish here ?
The answer is two things in particular .
Together with the United States , we , the Western world , must focus on individual cases of serious human rights abuses in Iran ( I also refer you to our resolution ) .
In direct conjunction with this , we must make it clear to Tehran that these abuses are not to be tolerated and will have serious consequences .
When national interests - particularly of an economic nature - come into play , the Iranian pragmatists will appear of their own accord .
In doing so , they can even make reference to the late Ayatollah Khomeini , founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran .
When it came down to it , he , too , opted resolutely to put the national interest before religious requirements .
Commission , Council , I urge you to seek out the ayatollahs ' weaknesses , primarily in the interests of a more tolerable fabric of life for the Iranian people and in the interests of the security of the Jewish State of Israel , not forgetting the Arab world , and also the European Union .
( HU ) A few days ago , President Barroso was here and I asked him what could be done to resolve the human rights crisis that had been going on in a European Union Member State , Hungary , since autumn 2006 .
I mentioned on several occasions that many hundreds of people were subjected to such heavy-handed police brutality that they suffered serious injuries , while several hundred people were put arbitrarily under arrest and several hundred people went through lengthy criminal proceedings where they were proved innocent .
The President replied to this that these were internal matters and the European Union cannot interfere in internal matters .
I would like to ask about the double standard that is being applied and about what legal basis the European Union has for interfering in a country outside the European Union when it is reluctant to protect human rights in a European Union Member State .
I would also like to take the opportunity to ask our Iranian friends , those belonging to the opposition and even those belonging to the government party , to help Hungarians protect their human rights .
( FI ) Mr President , Iran would have an important role in the Middle East peace negotiations but , to our regret , the country seems to be slipping ever further away from the democratic rule of law .
Firstly , there is reason to cast serious doubts on the election results last June that allowed President Ahmadinejad to remain in office .
Since the elections , the general human rights situation has become even worse .
Furthermore , since Ahmadinejad 's rise to power in 2005 , the number of executions that have taken place has quadrupled , and Iran executes the most people in the world after China .
Secondly , freedom of religion and opinion are in a sorry state .
For example , the seven Baha 'i leaders are still imprisoned only on the basis of their religious convictions .
In our resolution , we are appealing to the Iranian authorities , and I hope that at the same time , we can , in this way , show our support and respect for the courage that many Iranians demonstrate in their fight for fundamental freedoms and democratic principles .
We have a special respect for those brave Iranian women who had a decisive role to play in the demonstrations following the elections in Tehran .
( NL ) Mr President , Iran is ruled by a strict regime based on a radical interpretation of Islam and of the Koran .
In Iran , those who want no part in this fall into disfavour .
Iran is a frightening country , particularly for the Christians there .
There is literally no life for Muslims who have converted to Christianity in Iran .
Last year , the Iranian Parliament adopted a law making the abandonment of the Islamic faith a capital offence .
Nor is there any life in Iran for demonstrators .
Three people arrested during the demonstrations against the outcome of the presidential election have now been sentenced to death .
It is utterly wrong and incomprehensible for a court to pronounce such a sentence .
An appeal against this sentence may still be possible , but it is clear to everyone that even demonstrators must fear for their lives in Iran .
I call on the Council and the Commission to give these demonstrators strong support in further proceedings and , in particular , to vigorously oppose the brutal Iranian regime .
( LT ) The human rights situation in Iran is clearly deteriorating .
The presidential elections of dubious legitimacy that took place this year and the mass protests by people following the elections mirrored the increasingly tense and fearful political and social situation in Iran .
I would like to point out that this year in the Reporters without Borders report evaluating press freedom , Iran ended up at the bottom of the list , that is 172nd out of 175 , and was only above Eritrea , North Korea and Turkmenistan .
The situation for journalists in Iran is one of the worst in the world ; free information on the internet is blocked and people writing blogs are persecuted .
We know only too well the story about the renowned blogger , Fariba Pajooh , who was arrested very recently and whose future remains uncertain .
I appeal to the European Commission .
Commissioner , we must establish a Commission delegation in Tehran as soon as possible in order to begin a dialogue with Iran 's government institutions on the worsening human rights situation in this country .
Mr President , I fully agree with the comments of Mr Czarnecki .
The attack last July on the Iraqi PMOI camp at Ashraf in Iraq can only be described as savage and barbaric .
Eleven people killed , and a lot more could have been killed ; numerous people brutally injured - you have to see the video to realise the barbarity which actually occurred .
The army and the military indulged themselves in the most sadistic form of brutality .
As a result , 36 people were arrested ; they had no option but to go on hunger strike .
They were released two weeks ago because of international pressure - and international pressure after 72 days on hunger strike : that is what brought people to heel in relation to the Malaki government .
So these people are refugees ; they are entitled to go to bed at night and get up in the morning , safe .
We need , as Mr Czarnecki said , two things : first of all , we need a permanent UN presence there to replace the United States and , secondly , an absolute guarantee of no displacement .
Mr President , I wish to make three small points to add to what my fellow Members have said .
Firstly - and here I refer to what Mrs Gomes said - in spite of everything that is going on , in spite of the tragedies that are occurring in Iran and the regime , we still have every faith in the political future of that country and in the strength of its civil society .
My second point is that it has not been emphasised enough that we condemn the latest suicide attacks , which took place in Sistan and Baluchistan , even though the victims were Revolutionary Guards , as well as , sadly , dozens of civilians .
We are against this type of violence , even though we fully understand the reasons why it takes place but , at this point in time , we must side with the opponents of the regime .
Lastly , our Parliament , I believe , condemns the death penalty , no matter who it affects - children , women , adults - or which country in the world carries it out .
I , too , wish to deplore the deterioration in the situation in Iran with regard to human rights , in the wake of the elections in June .
This deterioration is certainly being signalled by the huge wave of arrests and the violence being shown to the regime 's opponents .
In addition , as has already been mentioned , freedom of information is being put under serious threat , with the risk of persecution being targeted against journalists .
One major sign of concern is the fact that both torture and the death penalty are being used wholesale in Iran .
In fact , Amnesty International recently highlighted the fact that , following the elections , the number of people convicted and then executed has multiplied significantly .
Finally , I wish to show my support for the notion of establishing a European Union delegation in Tehran .
Such a delegation can work together with civil society on the ground , thereby supporting the rights of the activists campaigning for freedom .

( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have a proposal to make to you : human rights , democracy and the rule of law are issues that are too important and too urgent to deal with on a Thursday afternoon .
Unfortunately , there are only a few of us here .
A month ago , we debated the murder of journalists .
Today , it is the horrendous human rights situation in Guinea , Iran and Sri Lanka .
I know that many of you share my opinion .
Let us find another - a better - date for this important debate .
Madam , you are supposed to talk on the subject under the catch-the-eye procedure .
You are using other Members ' speaking time .
The catch-the-eye procedure is closed .
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) Let me begin by conveying our condolences to the families of the victims of the terrorist attack carried out in the Sistan-Baluchistan province in Iran .
The Commission condemns terrorist attacks carried out anywhere in the world , along with the loss of life entailed .
The European Commission is deeply concerned about the current state of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Iran .
When talking about this subject , we can mention examples such as the executions of minors , discrimination against people belonging to different minorities , significant restrictions on freedom of expression and assembly , ill treatment of prisoners , denial of the right to a fair trial , as well as large-scale oppression and intimidation of human rights supporters and political opponents .
The European Union has maintained direct contact with Iran and has openly made its point of view known to the Iranian authorities regarding developments in the country .
The European Union supports the fundamental freedoms and the universal values they are based on , and feels duty bound to express its view any time and anywhere these principles are flouted .
Unfortunately , in spite of the numerous appeals and statements of condemnation from the European Union and the international community , the human rights situation has deteriorated even more since the presidential elections that took place in Iran in June 2009 .
Large numbers of people have been executed by hanging in Iran just in the last few weeks .
One of these people , whom you have already mentioned , Behnoud Shojaee , who was a minor at the time he committed his crime , was executed in spite of repeated appeals from the EU to have his sentence commuted .
More minors are likely to be executed shortly in Iran .
We are also concerned about the situation of seven Baha 'i leaders in Iran , who have been under arrest for over 17 months and must answer serious accusations , such as espionage and anti-state propaganda .
The latest scheduled hearing was postponed again on 18 October , leaving these seven people since then without any clear prospect of proper judicial proceedings .
Hundreds of people were held after the presidential elections because they took part in the post-election demonstrations and made critical comments .
The trials against those involved in these activities are continuing .
Indeed , last week , four people were condemned to death because they were involved in post-election incidents .
I finally wish to emphasise that we share the concerns expressed by honourable Members about the state of human rights in Iran .
The Commission is monitoring closely how the situation evolves and will continue to use every opportunity to call on the Iranian authorities to observe their international human rights commitments , including compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Improving the human rights situation in Iran is a key element in the European Commission 's approach to strengthening political dialogue and cooperation with Tehran in the future .
In answer to the question I was asked , we believe that at the moment , given the current conditions in Iran , it is not the right time to establish a European Commission Delegation in Tehran .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place after the debates .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Ladies and gentlemen , I call upon the European Union not to stand by passively while human rights are being violated in Iran .
The European Union has to take a much more resolute stance against the death sentences passed in the country and the executions , and especially those imposed on young and under-age criminals .
Reacting to what is happening in Iran today is one of the greatest tests of the effectiveness of our western world .
For this reason , the European Commission must set up a delegation of the European Union in Tehran as soon as possible to support and reinforce dialogue with Iranian leaders and civil society , especially to give support to young people , political prisoners and journalists .
The European Commission must become much more involved in the sending of a special envoy by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to monitor the situation as regards political prisoners and to ensure that the Iranian authorities observe international procedural standards and legal obligations with regard to human rights .
The European Union will always be a standard-bearer for civil freedoms and our common European democratic values , even beyond our borders .
For that reason , we should make all efforts , through intensive dialogue with the political elites , so that Iran in the 21st century observes fundamental human rights and respects the right to life .
3 .
Sri Lanka
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Sri Lanka .
author . - Mr President , the people of Sri Lanka - Sinhalese and particularly the Tamils - have suffered enormously over these past 30 years from a ruthless terrorist campaign conducted by the LTTE .
Now that the LTTE have been defeated in the field , the Government and people of Sri Lanka need our sympathetic understanding and , above all , our assistance as they try to set their country once more on the path of recovery and prosperity and prevent any resurgence of terrorism .
There are those , including LTTE apologists , who want to deliver a further blow to the Sri Lankan people by undermining the GSP + preferential trade arrangements with the EU .
I hope the Commission understands that it is trade , not aid , that offers the best route to economic recovery .
For its part , the Sri Lankan authorities need to address the concerns expressed by friends in the international community so there is no excuse for GSP + status to be compromised .
The immediate priority , of course , is to resettle those thousands of Tamil civilians caught up in the conflict and now being held in poor conditions in camps .
Their processing needs to take place with all urgency , and the international community should be invited to help .
author . - Mr President , I support this resolution even though I think it is not critical enough of the Sri Lankan Government .
Earlier this year , we witnessed the appalling military assault on the area held by the Tamil Tigers , without any regard for the lives or well-being of citizens who , in my view , are used as pawns by all sides , resulting in 90 000 dead .
The world stood horrified and helpless , yet still today , there are more than a quarter of a million Sri Lankan citizens who are interned without adequate medical facilities , without clean water , sanitation or living space .
Today 's resolution is a relatively mild call on the Sri Lankan authorities to respect the rights of their citizens .
It is my own view that , if there is no measurable progress soon on the demands in this resolution , then the European Union must bring economic and political pressure to bear on the regime in Sri Lanka .
Sri Lanka depends for its economic recovery on foreign direct investment and on EU economic support .
We must use that leverage in the interests of the Sri Lankan peoples , including the Tamil people .
Mr President , I have two minutes .
The 25-year civil war in Sri Lanka appears to be over .
In May , government troops captured the areas in the north held by the LTTE .
Hopefully , a new beginning will bring peace and , with it , freedom .
The people are suffering not only from the effects of the civil war , but also from the consequences of the tsunami and other natural disasters .
The EU has stepped up foreign trade and is granting higher tariff preferences than to any other country in southeast Asia .
International aid brings with it the obligation for the political forces in Sri Lanka to implement human rights .
Two hundred and fifty thousand people are being held in overcrowded camps with poor drinking water and medical supplies .
The aid organisations are being refused access .
It should be in the government 's own interest to organise the return to home villages as quickly as possible .
The European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is lobbying for the International Red Cross to be given a key role .
Another sector in which change is needed is freedom of the press and freedom of expression .
The abduction and arrest of journalists must end .
Critical articles should stop being punished with prison sentences .
As a member of the SAARC delegation , I have been able to visit Sri Lanka many times .
I believe a new beginning for this country will be rich in opportunity if the Tamil leaders are included in a constructive manner .
However , this means rejecting all forms of terrorism and violence and it means cooperation on a strategy to implement human rights .
I wish , for the sake of the citizens of Sri Lanka , that an expression which I have heard time and again - ' war is an institution ' - will finally be consigned to the past .
( Applause )
author . - Mr President , the policy pursued towards the Tamil people by the Government of President Rajapaksa has resulted in a nightmare for both the Sinhala and Tamil peoples in Sri Lanka , with massive repression by the Sri Lankan state against individuals and groups who have stood up against its chauvinist policies .
After the defeat of the Tamil Tigers , the nightmare continues for the Tamil people , especially in the north of Sri Lanka , with 300 000 people - including 31 000 children - forcefully detained in camps where disease and malnutrition are rife .
Now a new horror threatens , with reports that the Rajapaksa Government plans to settle Sinhala people in the east and north of Sri Lanka - in other words , to colonise the areas where Tamil-speaking people are in the majority .
That would be a recipe for communal strife in the future .
The Rajapaksa Government is , in fact , a dictatorship with a very thin democratic veneer .
I welcome the opportunity through this resolution to condemn it .
I do have a reservation about paragraph 4 because the main terrorism , in fact , has come from the Rajapaksa Government against the people .
While , as a Socialist , I believe that guerrillaism under the conditions in Sri Lanka will not bring a solution , the Tamil people do have a right to defend themselves against military repression .
The best way to defend the Tamil people is through a united struggle of Tamil and Sinhala workers and poor against the current government and its new liberal policies , and through the socialist transformation of Sri Lankan society , under which the marvellous resources of that country could be used for the benefit of the entire population .
I am proud to be associated with the United Socialist Party in Sri Lanka , which is a sister party of the Socialist Party in Ireland , and which has heroically stood up against the chauvinism of the government for the rights of the Tamil and Sinhala people and the rights of the Tamil people to self-determination .
Mr President , everything that my colleagues here testified to concerning the current situation in Sri Lanka was confirmed when the Subcommittee on Human Rights recently organised a hearing on this nightmarish situation .
We can actually confirm that the movements of these 260 000 Tamils are still being restricted , contrary to all international laws , even though it has been months now since the war itself ended .
We can confirm that there are serious restrictions on the freedom of the press .
Yesterday , Reporters Without Frontiers ranked Sri Lanka number 162 on the Press Freedom Index out of 175 countries .
We must now demand that the representatives of all the delegated UN bodies be allowed into these camps .
The resolution mentions the organisation of local elections and we , as the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , are saying something rather less forceful , and I hope that people will support it .
We would just like to record that these elections are being organised .
As regards the question of policy on trade , I am very glad that the Commission is now examining how Sri Lanka is implementing the requirements of the various human rights agreements .
I expect the Commission to work very objectively and impartially and , in time , to draw conclusions as to whether Sri Lanka has actually deserved this preferential treatment under GSP + .
Mr President , victors should be generous and I think that , in Sri Lanka , a lot of people have still not understood this .
The point here is to resolve the cause of ethnic conflict , which has escalated terribly .
We simply have to realise that there is no plan in place which will guarantee the Tamils their legitimate rights .
Both sides must move towards each other in order to find a political solution .
Violence was rightly fought , the perpetrators of violence have been defeated and there is nothing about violence that can be glossed over .
To abolish the causes of violence , that is the real task .
It is easier to end a war than to create peace .
We see that at the moment in Bosnia where , well after the end of the war , a sustainable solution for peace has still not being found .
I worry about the stability of Sri Lanka , because this minority problem has existed for centuries , exacerbated during the period of colonialism , which is why we must do everything to mediate between both sides and get both sides to come round .
Mr President , in May this year , after the government 's victory over the Tamil Tigers , it appeared that the civil war in Sri Lanka had finally come to an end after many years .
In reality , however , there are , unfortunately , still many problems that need to be resolved in the country .
The government is keeping more than 250 000 people in camps on political grounds , not even giving access to humanitarian organisations .
It represses the media .
In September this year , the Supreme Court in Colombo sentenced a journalist to 20 years ' imprisonment , which the EU Presidency regarded as a threat to freedom of speech and which was roundly condemned .
One huge obstacle to the country 's development are the anti-personnel mines which are a threat to the life and health of people .
Sri Lanka has still not joined the Ottawa Convention banning anti-personnel mines .
Signing this document would certainly help to resolve this problem and would , at the same time , allow the country to apply for assistance for the victims of landmines and speed up the mine removal campaign , which has been operating since 2003 with little effect .
The citizens of Sri Lanka deserve true democracy and a decent life .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for months now , the Sri Lankan Government has maintained a wall of silence regarding the situation of the Tamil civilian population , preventing foreign media and humanitarian organisations from gaining access to them .
Since March 2009 , Colombo has been holding almost all of the civilians who fled the fighting between the army and the Tamil Tigers , in complete violation of international law and human rights .
In July , the Sri Lankan Government was holding more than 280 000 people in 30 camps guarded by the army in the north-east of the island .
The refugees can only leave the camps in order to receive emergency medical treatment , with a military escort accompanying them in most cases .
In some camps , more than 1 000 people are dying every week , mainly of dysentery .
The living conditions are appalling .
President Rajapaksa declared last week that only 100 000 Tamil refugees would be released .
In view of the scale of the tragedy , the European Union must step up the pressure on the Sri Lankan Government in order to obtain the immediate and unconditional release of all the civilians , access to the camps for journalists and the prompt delivery of humanitarian aid .
Mr President , as a representative of London , a city that has repeatedly been a target for terrorists in the past 40 years , I have a great deal of sympathy with Sri Lankans of all ethnicities .
The relentless terrorist campaign waged by the Tamil Tigers severely blighted the development of that beautiful country .
President Rajapaksa came to power democratically , determined to defeat the LTTE , and his success should be congratulated by all of us who despise terrorism .
The government now has the responsibility of building a post-conflict society with liberty , justice and equality for all Sri Lankans .
Returning the IDPs home and trying the war criminals must now be the government 's priority .
While I concede that President Rajapaksa may have lost some international goodwill through some of his emergency actions in the immediate aftermath of the conflict , I am convinced that the best way forward is to guarantee the development of a secure and prosperous Sri Lanka and support its democratically-elected leader and government .
The EU must maintain the GSP + trade agreements which , if removed , will directly destroy one million jobs and indirectly economically impact on 2.5 million innocent Sri Lankan citizens .
Mr President , I am very pleased as an Irish MEP that my colleagues from Ireland , Joe Higgins and Proinsias De Rossa , have outlined various concerns in Sri Lanka and Iran , and I concur with them .
It is appropriate that Ireland should be concerned about these issues because it saw discrimination and loss of life in Northern Ireland for many years .
Nevertheless , at the end of the day , the only solution comes through diplomacy and discussion .
For that reason , I would hope that when the Lisbon Treaty is enacted , the new powers and the status which the President and the High Representative have will be utilised to bring , hopefully , common sense and good understanding to these places so that they will mend their ways and commit to the diplomatic and democratic way of life .
( FI ) Mr President , we have followed and commented on the situation in Sri Lanka on a number of occasions and sometimes almost abandoned hope of finding a solution .
Nevertheless , the conflict , which lasted 25 years , ended in the defeat of the Tamil Tigers this year .
The lengthy conflict typically claimed a lot of victims and gave rise to internal refugees in the country , as well as causing problems for the economy and developments in the rule of law .
Now the country has entered a hopeful , though critical , phase .
There has been mention here of the concern over the plight of those who have been living in the camps .
As we state in the resolution , we hope that the authorities will soon accept international assistance and open the camps to receive humanitarian aid and trained conflict personnel .
At the same time , we also need the commitment of the international community to get down to business and build a lasting peace for that lovely island .
Aid should also definitely extend to additional sums allocated by the Commission for mine clearance .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to take the floor , first of all , in order to highlight what my colleague , Mrs Hautala , has said .
We need to bear in mind the role which not only the Red Cross , but also the United Nations , plays - and ought to play - in this process .
However , I also wanted to respond to what Mr Van Orden has said , as it seems to me to be wholly inappropriate to label those of us who try to use a straightforward instrument , such as the GSP + trade agreements , as sympathisers or supporters of the LTTE .
This is simply not true .
We know that there is an ongoing investigation to determine whether the Sri Lankan authorities are doing their part to incorporate human rights legislation into national legislation .
If this is not being done properly , then it is quite normal and necessary for us to call for the GSP + system not to be extended .
Therefore , it seems to me that relating this extension , this petition or this request , to support for the LTTE is quite wrong
The debate is closed .
The next item is the vote .
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( debate )
1 .
Guinea ( vote )
2 .
Iran ( vote )
3 .
Sri Lanka ( vote )
Mr President , I suggest that we remove recital 3 from the resolution , because the situation of the journalist Ti Sei Nayagam is only mentioned at the beginning and not in the operative part of the resolution .
We removed this item from our agenda during our joint negotiations .
I therefore recommend that this issue should be deleted here .
We shall certainly have an opportunity to discuss this issue again another time .
Voting time
Thank you , Commissioner Orban .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place after the debate .
I should like to take this opportunity to say something about a point which arose during the explanations of vote this afternoon and now too during the catch-the-eye procedure .
Under the rules of procedure , no further requests are accepted once explanations of vote or the catch-the-eye procedure have begun .
I had asked the services to perhaps make this generally known once again .
We dealt with this casually today , but we need to take care in future , because otherwise we shall go well over the time announced to Members .
The next item is the vote on six motions for resolutions on Guinea .
We shall look first at the joint motion for a resolution from six groups , which is intended to replace all the motions for resolutions on this issue .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Composition of committees : see Minutes
( DE ) Mr President , my apologies but , throughout the course of the day , I have listened to a right-wing Hungarian extremist speak about Hungary under every item .
Please could you point out that we have an agenda with separate items .
Perhaps the Member is unaware of that .
( Applause )
Unfortunately , the Member is not present .
I assume that she will take note of your comment .
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
Written declarations included in the register ( Rule 123 ) : see Minutes
Forwarding of texts adopted during the sitting : see Minutes
Dates of forthcoming sittings : see Minutes
Adjournment of the session
I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned .
( The sitting was closed at 16.35 )
Formal sitting - 20th anniversary of the democratic change in Central and Eastern Europe
Before we begin , I should like to say that I have exchanged views with President Havel , and I can assure you that we could not have imagined something like this 25 years ago !
( Applause )
former President of the Czech Republic . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for the invitation and for the opportunity to address you during the days marking the twentieth anniversary of the dramatic breaching of the sealed borders , the cutting of the barbed wire and the tearing down of the walls between European nations and , in the case of Germany , the wall that divided one and the same nation .
It was the end of the bipolar division , not only of Europe but , to a considerable extent , of the whole world .
It was a moment of such historical importance that many people felt that from then onwards , the world could only prosper .
It did not happen .
History , of course , did not end .
It is all the more important to embrace this anniversary not only as an appeal to reflect on the present but , first and foremost , as an appeal to think about the future .
I would like to contribute to this appeal with five comments on the theme of European unification .
None of us were fully prepared for the surprisingly rapid fall of the Iron Curtain , nor could we have been .
It would have been unnatural .
A period of specific dilemmas , examinations of various alternatives and uncertainty therefore followed .
Finally , NATO took the courageous step of allowing in new members , thereby guaranteeing their security and enabling them to concentrate on preparing for accession to the European Union .
After that , the Union genuinely opened its doors to the new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe .
From time to time , there are various difficulties with these countries .
That is quite understandable .
A democratic political culture cannot be created or revived on a day to day basis .
It takes time and there are a host of unexpected problems that need resolving along the way .
It was in the modern historical period that Communism held sway for the first and hopefully last time , and we were therefore the first to encounter the phenomenon of post-communism .
We had to deal with the consequences of a protracted regime of fear and all the risks connected with a historically unprecedented redistribution of assets .
There have been , and there still are , many obstacles and our experience with this state of affairs is still in its infancy .
Nonetheless , I believe that the West did the right thing .
Every other alternative would have entailed many more problems and would have been even more costly , not only for the West but , in fact , for all of us .
Not only might we have seen the dangerous development of a new struggle over spheres of influence or the direct domination of one side by another , but also the states locked out by the West would , in all likelihood , have become a playground for various nationalists and populists and their armed militias and possibly even a region of dangerous local conflicts , all the more dangerous for the fact that , for reasons that are well-known , the Second World War was not followed by a genuine peace conference that might have established European post-war relations in a binding , exact and lasting manner .
In my opinion , many of those that waved flags bearing the hammer and sickle until recently would be very quick to take up a national flag .
We saw what that leads to in the former Yugoslavia .
It is a well known fact , of course , that demons always awaken further demons .
No one can say , therefore , whether the contagion would have jumped across to the western part of Europe .
We are living in an era when - thanks to globalisation - any local conflict can easily grow into a world conflict .
The chosen approach was therefore the most natural in historical terms and the most expedient in practical terms .
It was , moreover , an approach that could be interpreted as an expression of shared responsibility for historical developments , the beginnings of which lay partly in the short-sighted policy of appeasement pursued by the democratic world .
I would like to summarise by saying that the considerable difficulties the EU has with us today are worth shouldering because any of the alternative courses of action would clearly have been much worse and much more dangerous .
In these circumstances , all that we can ask from Europe is patience and understanding .
What we can offer to Europe is the question , of course .
I have long believed , after what we endured in the era of totalitarianism , that we should have - for we are directly guilty - explained the experience convincingly to others , transforming everything that emerged from it into concrete initiatives .
That is no easy matter and I am not sure we have achieved it yet .
Totalitarian or authoritarian forms of government often have very unobtrusive beginnings and very refined methods of social control .
Only now , with the passage of time , do many of us realise how cleverly we were sometimes drawn into the webs of totalitarianism .
All of this makes us particularly wary .
That should be our contribution towards a guarantee that what we experienced can never happen again .
What is required ?
First and foremost , clear and explicit solidarity with everyone who is confronting totalitarian or authoritarian regimes today , wherever they are in the world .
The solidarity in question should not be impeded by any economic or other special interests .
Even small , inconspicuous and well-intentioned compromises can - albeit indirectly and with some delay - lead to fateful consequences .
Evil cannot be appeased , as it is in the nature of evil to exploit every appeasement for its own ends .
Besides , Europe has its own unhappy experience of political appeasement .
Our support can be of more help than we might imagine to liberal-minded people or outspoken witnesses of the conditions in North Korea , Burma , Iran , Tibet , Belarus , Cuba or wherever else .
We will also be helping ourselves .
We will be helping ourselves to build a better world and to treat each other in a better way , in other words , to be truer to the actual content of the values we subscribe to at a communal level .
The European Parliament recently awarded the Sakharov Prize to Memorial , a Russian organisation monitoring respect for human rights in Russia .
I believe this was an important act .
I remember the significance it had in my own country when , against the wishes of the government , the French President once invited us - the opposition - for a working breakfast during a state visit .
These things are only seemingly superficial .
Under totalitarian rule , it is simply a fact that one breakfast or one suppressed student demonstration can , in the right circumstances , set history in motion .
The identity of every human being , except for what is innate to us as unique individuals , is created by the multiple levels of what might be described as our collective identity .
Every one of us , to a greater or lesser extent , creates his own sense of belonging to family , community , region , firm , church , society or political party , to the nation , to the civilised world and , ultimately , to the population of this planet .
All of this shows that we have certain types of home , whether geographical , ideological , linguistic , ethnic or otherwise , and we ourselves jointly create these homes .
Our various kinds of patriotism , our aims , affinities , inclinations , pride , characteristics , traditions , customs , habits , and peculiarities also play a part in this .
The world , in short , is a patchwork , humanity is a patchwork and each one of us is a patchwork .
Collective sovereignty naturally arises from this sense of collective belonging .
We have a certain measure of sovereignty on all of the levels of our identity , but on none of them do we have , or could we have , full sovereignty .
There is one requirement : for these sovereignties to complement each other and , if possible , not to contradict each other .
I am sure you have guessed that I am raising this matter now because the debates on the European Constitution and the Lisbon Treaty largely centre on the question of what sort of relationship there should be between national sovereignty and European sovereignty .
The answer is clear : they should complement each other .
If I feel myself to be a European , it does not mean that I cease to be a Czech .
In fact , the opposite is the case : as a Czech , I am also a European .
I like to say , somewhat poetically , that Europe is the homeland of our homelands .
At the same time , I am sure that European sovereignty will gradually strengthen in the future .
I do not know how quickly or how slowly and I do not know what twists and turns there will be on the way , but I do know that the integration process must continue .
It is , after all , in the essential and even the existential interest not only of Europeans but of everyone .
The reasons for this are clear : we are living in the space of a single global civilisation in which the owner of a Greenland fishing company may live in Taiwan and also own part of a bank in Brazil or the owner of a Czech mine may manage his company by computer from Iceland .
In such a space , various supra-national , supra-state or continental communities will play an ever more significant role .
It is not , nor will it be , the end of the nation state , but nation states are grouping together and they will continue to group together and act together in many areas .
Technical and economic developments alone make this an absolute necessity .
On the other hand , at a time when the world is tending towards an ominous form of unification , the constitutions of the various smaller communities of states and nations that are close to each other in one way or another can be instrumental in providing better protection to national or regional identity .
The gradual and peaceful grouping together of states will also strengthen peaceful coexistence of course .
Or have most of the wars of the last centuries not been wars of nation states ?
How better to tame the various nationalist demons than through practical cooperation between nations ?
Acceding to the principle of multi-layered sovereignty will , of course , only be possible against a background of civilian and political support .
I have noticed that in my own country - and possibly in many other countries - people often speak in terms of ' us ' - in my case the Czechs - and ' them ' , by which people mean that bunch of wicked foreigners in Brussels .
Are we not in Brussels too , however ?
This division into an a priori virtuous ' us ' and a somehow wicked ' them ' who seek to harm us at any price simply indicates what little understanding there is of the actual principle of integration .
This , too , has to be patiently confronted .
We are all in the same boat and the boat is heading in the right direction .
It will continue heading in the right direction provided that all of the passengers have a sense of shared responsibility and do not just play their own games for their own ends .
We do not establish importance or uniqueness in a newly-created community by shouting about our vaguely defined national interests , which simply masks a lack of inner confidence , but through purposeful ways of getting along together and participating in the common effort .
For centuries , Europe has been the main centre of civilisation on this planet and has definitely regarded itself as such , even if it was wrong to do so .
It therefore felt justified in exporting its culture , its religion and its inventions throughout the world , regardless of whether anyone cared to have them .
The exporting of these values was often accompanied by violence .
It might even be said that all of modern civilisation - not just the elements which the world considers outstanding , but also the short-sightedness of today - can be traced back to Europe .
Europe should learn from all of this and resume its role in a new way .
That is to say , it will no longer force anything on the world , but will seek only to inspire .
It will just offer an example , from which others may take something without having to do so .
It would be difficult to find a region of the Earth in which so many nationalities or ethnic groups were concentrated in various countries , so many minorities and minorities within minorities .
In recent decades , Europe has nonetheless managed to create what is perhaps the most consistent supra-national grouping to be found anywhere in the world today .
Most importantly , however , the grouping did not emerge as the product of violence perpetrated against the weak by the strong as was always the case in the past .
On the contrary , it emerged as the product of practical agreements .
Integration has therefore relocated from the battlefield to the conference hall .
If nothing else , this alone can now serve as a major challenge to the rest of the world .
I mentioned the increasing importance of supra-national structures in today 's world .
In my opinion , the best political arrangement for the forthcoming decades would be a form of creative partnership-based cooperation between these large supra-national or continental entities , based on specific minimum social standards , which should be moral rather than political .
If they are to make sense , of course , these relationships must be based on two fundamental principles : complete mutual equality and as much openness as possible .
A relationship is not a partnership when , for practical reasons such as fear of oil or gas supplies being cut , someone fits blinkers to their eyes and forgets all about murders of liberal-minded journalists or similar evils that he would be glad to speak about under other circumstances .
A relationship such as that is based on falsehood .
Genuine partners must be able to talk to each other about everything they are thinking , in other words , the whole truth , and they must also be able to listen to the whole truth .
European integration , thanks to which the greater part of our continent has lived in peace for so long , is , in effect , a unique attempt at a democratic confederation of states .
It is not , nor will it immediately become , a fully-fledged federation or even a traditional confederation .
It is simply something new .
If only this attempt could be an example to others !
However , that is not the main point .
It is my belief that the European Union has an opportunity to inspire the rest of the world with something still more profound than its model of cooperation between nations .
By this I mean an opportunity to try and make amends for all of the questionable ways in which Europe has determined or influenced the entire character of contemporary civilisation .
It is a movement that is perhaps slowly getting under way already .
I have in mind here the rejection of the cult of profit at any price , regardless of the long-term and irreversible consequences , the rejection of the cult of quantitative growth and ever-increasing growth , the rejection of the crude ideal of catching up with and overtaking America or China or whoever else , and the rejection of a dangerous and unplanned colonisation of the Earth and the mindless looting of the planet with no regard for the environment or the interests of future generations .
I also have in mind smart energy saving whereby the success of a state is measured not by the growth of consumption but , on the contrary , by the reduction of consumption .
Of course , all of this is possible only on the assumption that a change will begin to take place in the soul of the contemporary European .
He should be - confronted with the latest discoveries of cosmology - just a little more humble , he should think about what will happen when he dies and he should bow down in solitude before the mystery of the universe ; in brief , he should once again relate more to eternity and the infinite , just as he did in the early stages of European development .
We should reflect seriously on the fact that nothing that has been done cannot be undone , that everything is somewhere remembered - even if only in the form of flying light - and that nothing is therefore forgiven forever .
To return , however , to Europe as a partner to others , it is the case that most of the wars in the history of the human family have been about borders , in other words , territory .
From this comes the important lesson that not only nation states but also supra-national communities should always know exactly where they begin and where they end .
Indistinct or disputed boundaries are a frequent source of disaster .
The European Union should remember this too and be clear as to its external boundaries .
If it wants to tear down a boundary , it must first know where the boundary lies .
It would thus endorse the idea of geographical self-identification on a broader , which is to say planetary , scale .
In this way , too , it could make a significant and concrete contribution to what we all long for , which is peace between the peoples and nations of this planet .
The theme of shared sovereignty arises in European debates mostly in relation to the institutional arrangements of the Union .
I applaud the Union for devoting so much energy to this theme in recent years and for the successes it has achieved .
It is precisely for this reason that I venture to gaze further into the future over this matter .
The parliament in which you are sitting is directly elected and an effort is made for the numbers of representatives from the various states to correspond to their size .
In my opinion , the European Parliament , as the only body directly elected by all Europeans , should have rather more power than is actually the case today .
The job of legislating should accordingly shift more explicitly from the executive to the lawmaking authority .
The European Parliament must not appear to anyone to be merely an expensive adornment of the Union .
In my view , another smaller body might eventually come into being alongside the Parliament and the members of this body would be elected by the national parliaments from their own ranks , with all Member States having the same number of members .
In this way , or another similar way , it would be possible to resolve two issues at the same time .
Firstly , it would eliminate the feeling which arises in various national parliaments of being excluded from European decision making .
Secondly , it would ensure that there was at least one Union body here guaranteeing absolute equality to all member countries .
Such a body would meet only rarely , of course , when a certain number of members requested it , and only in relation to issues requiring consensus .
This solution would also mean that appointments to the Commission would not have to be made in such a complex way in accordance with the nationality key and the European Council would not have to have such complex vote-counting arrangements .
I admit that I personally think it is more important to have commissioners who are genuinely the leading professionals in their field rather than to have my own fellow nationals or even fellow party members at any price .
The European Council currently comprises an odd combination of executive and representative authority .
Even its position needs to be clarified .
I believe that it should be something akin to the position of a Head of State in a parliamentary democracy , comprising therefore a sort of partly obscure and partly visible collective head of the confederation of states , the visible representative of which , intelligible to all , would be an individual , of course , that is to say a president , whose existence is already envisaged in the Lisbon Treaty and who is a very important figure , bearing in mind that whe