Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session suspended on Thursday 2 April 2009 .
Statement by the President
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
The ' Say NO to Violence against Women ' campaign ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Corrigenda ( Rule 204a ) : see Minutes
Announcement by the President : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda , as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 16 April pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Tuesday :
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has asked for the report by Mr Hökmark on a Community framework for nuclear safety to be taken off the agenda .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we should postpone the Hökmark report on a Community framework for nuclear safety for two reasons : the first is that the Committee on Legal Affairs has endorsed the suggestion that there is an essential procedural problem in the Commission 's proposal because the Euratom rules stipulate that the Commission must obtain the opinion of a technical committee prior to working on the proposal , and that is something that it has failed to do on two occasions .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has held that this is an essential defect : in other words , it is a defect which requires withdrawal of the proposal and its resubmission by the Commission in line with the rules in force .
The second reason is that there are no grounds for rushing because these provisions will apply only to power stations that may be constructed after 2015 .
There is therefore no reason to rush , and we have no need to adopt a text affected by such a significant procedural defect as this .
( SV ) Mr President , I definitely think that we should take a decision on this matter during this part-session .
There are many reasons for this .
Firstly , this is a proposal that Parliament has debated before and that has now come up again , and the Council has been discussing it since 2003 .
It is finally time to take a decision .
As regards the legal situation , the group of experts to which Mrs Frassoni refers submitted its opinion on this proposal , whereupon adjustments were made .
What separates the very large majority in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and the representatives of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is the matter of whether this is a new proposal or a proposal that we have been working on since 2003 .
I think that everyone else agrees that this is a proposal that we have been working on for a long time .
At some point we must be able to take a decision , particularly as many countries are actually now planning to build nuclear power plants .
I therefore believe that it is extremely important for us to have strong and stable legislation in place for the European Union and so I suggest that , today , we vote in favour of having a vote on the Nuclear Safety Directive this week .
( Parliament rejected the motion )
Wednesday :
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has requested that the vote on the motion for a resolution on the opening of international negotiations in view of adopting an international Treaty for the protection of the Arctic be postponed .
Mr President , we did have a brief discussion about this when we voted during the last plenary session .
The problem is this : when we had the debate with the Commission and Council , it became clear to many of us in the House that it was not appropriate for us to vote on the resolution , and we therefore asked for it , at that stage , to be postponed .
I think our view now is that there is no need for a resolution .
Parliament expressed itself on this subject a couple of months ago ; that is absolutely sufficient ; there is no need to do it again at this stage .
The debate that we had with the other institutions was valuable , but there is no need for a resolution .
( FR ) Mr President , I admit that I am a little surprised , since no one thought that this resolution was pointless when we debated it .
Absolutely no one , and least of all Mrs Wallis .
Moving on , it is true that the Commission referred to the fact that the European Union wished to join the Arctic Council , and so on .
For my part , I believe that , in accordance with the wish expressed by the Commission , this new resolution , which states very clearly our desire for a moratorium on drilling and for a demilitarised zone in the Arctic , is indeed a particularly important one , coming as it does at a time when the border countries are flexing their muscles - including their military muscles - in this zone , in order to claim their property and their drilling opportunities .
Thus , from a political point of view , it is absolutely crucial that we vote for this text , and this about-turn by Mrs Wallis - and by part of the Chamber , too - is completely unjustifiable , given the debates that we have had .
( Parliament approved the motion )
Wednesday :
The Union for Europe of the Nations Group has requested that a Commission statement on the earthquake in the Italian region of Abruzzo be inserted into the agenda .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , having consulted the political groups and the heads of the Italian delegations , on behalf of my group , I am asking you to agree to add a debate on the earthquake in Abruzzo to tomorrow 's agenda .
I believe that the people who have been affected appreciate the solidarity shown by the European institutions and by you in person , with the condolences expressed and the minute of silence , and they will also appreciate any financial and legislative support for reconstruction .
For these reasons , a debate in the presence of the European Commission could provide national and local institutions with a lot of useful information about how much the European Union will be able to do .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament agrees with the proposal made by Mrs Angelilli .
I would like to thank Mr Pöttering for his words and the House as a whole for having shown the people affected its emotional solidarity .
I also believe that tomorrow afternoon 's debate could produce not only renewed declarations of solidarity , but also , and above all , specific proposals , because Europe can make a significant contribution to reconstruction , as well as to alleviating the situation of crisis that the citizens of Abruzzo are living through .
( FR ) Mr President , it was with sadness and bitterness that I discovered that the oral question with debate on rosé wines and permitted oenological practices that I and my fellow Members from a large number of political groups submitted within the deadline was not on this week 's agenda .
On behalf of all the signatories , I call for this situation to be remedied .
I have in fact spoken to some of the political group chairmen , and it seems to me that either they have been misinformed regarding this request , or it has been passed over in silence .
I would therefore kindly ask you to add the oral question , which was submitted within the deadline , to this week 's agenda .
Mrs Lulling , I have just been informed that rosé wine is scheduled to be discussed in May .
There will be sufficient speaking time then , something which would not be the case today .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like , if I may be so bold , to express my dissatisfaction and curiosity , because I tabled an oral question with debate which was supported by 48 MEPs , whose support - for your information - was mustered in zero time and even now there are members who have stated that they wish to support it , and yet , much to my surprise , no one has replied to me on this issue as to why , when and on the basis of what criteria it was decided not to accept the oral question with debate .
Have I now suddenly come up against another sort of earthquake ?
Is it a new earthquake , does it have a different cause ?
I repeat once again , taking as my starting point the last fatal earthquake and the victims you referred to and - I would add - the consequential cultural damage and destruction , that we should highlight the European dimension of this phenomenon .
Given that I was also the rapporteur for the only report by a European institution on the subject of earthquakes , I know full well that a great deal can and must be done at European level .
I thank you and I await a reply .
Mr Vakalis , that sort of request needs to be made an hour before the start of the sitting .
I have been told that this was not the case .
It relates to Rule 132 .
I would recommend that we deal with this in May , otherwise we will not be able to proceed on the basis of the Rules of Procedure .
( DE ) Mr President , I would request that you ask the House whether that should be placed on the agenda .
You cannot simply decide that yourself .
At least ask whether the Members agree with that decision .
You can surely find a couple of minutes to discuss this important topic , which greatly affects many regions in our Union , and to discuss it in good time , as in May it will be too late .
Mrs Lulling , the President does not make this decision alone , I follow the Rules of Procedure .
The decisive factor is Rule 132 , by which we are bound .
The request should have been made an hour before the sitting .
I will recommend to the Conference of Presidents that we consider this matter in May .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has requested that a Commission statement on genetically modified maize - MON 810 be inserted into the agenda .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation is really a surreal one , in the sense that we are truly among those who are left hanging : most of the Member States do not want to surrender the ability to declare moratoriums on GMOs , and the Commission , clearly , must take account of this negative outcome , although it may act , if it wishes .
This is the point that we have reached !
I believe that on an issue as important as this it would be useful to understand what the Commission wants to do : to continue , to stop , to withdraw or to present a legislative proposal .
The only thing we want is for the Commission to tell us what it wants to do , and to say so publicly , in a debate at Parliament .
( DE ) Mr President , MON 810 was approved in the European Union in 1998 .
This approval is not mandatory for Member States and each Member State is free to decide whether to accept this approval , to apply it or to issue a ban on the cultivation of this maize .
I assume that this is the basis for the latest ruling in the Federal Republic of Germany on this issue .
In this regard , may I say that MON 810 was approved in Germany in 2005 , then in 2007 sowing of the seeds was stopped and in December 2007 Monsanto submitted a plan for the general monitoring of its cultivation .
It was subsequently approved again in 2008 and then , a few days ago , it was prohibited .
Mrs Frassoni has stated that many Member States have rejected the cultivation of this maize .
There are precisely four States - France , Austria , Hungary and Luxembourg - and now Germany has joined them , so there are five out of the 27 Member States .
This is purely a national decision on the basis of subsidiarity and therefore we should not burden Parliament with it .
( DE ) Thank you Mr President .
We are not in favour of proceeding in the way in which Mrs Frassoni has requested , but for a different reason to that given by Mr Goepel , and therefore I am grateful to you for the opportunity to present it briefly .
We need to have a detailed debate , not only about this point , but also about the issue of how we want to deal with genetically modified food .
However , we cannot manage this in the short time we have until the day after tomorrow .
I therefore believe that we should ask the new Parliament after the elections to conduct a detailed debate on the use of genetically modified food . Thank you very much .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( EL ) Mr President , as you know , we are witnessing a worrying decline in international trade .
Consequently , an immediate reversal in this situation is a fundamental parameter in the economic recovery which we are seeking .
It is estimated that the increased cost of borrowing and the reduction in the flow of credit are responsible for approximately 10-15 % of the slowdown in trade .
The multilateral trade finance package adopted in London by G20 is without doubt a positive move .
In my opinion , the Union is also being called upon to continue to play a leading role in the practical application of the London package in three directions :
firstly , targeted intervention by multilateral and regional financial institutions ;
secondly , coordinated public intervention at national level ; and
thirdly , adjustment of the relevant multilateral rules .
This message is directed to the European Commission so that it can take the necessary initiatives .
( FR ) Mr President , we have whiffs of Islamophobia in the speeches of a populist extreme-right leader in the Netherlands ; we have an increase in attacks against the Roma in the Czech Republic ; and we have unspeakable , intolerable remarks by the Iranian President concerning the creation of a racist government in Palestine , alluding to the creation of the State of Israel in a UN conference on racism , intended primarily to promote tolerance and diversity .
How could our Parliament , aside from showing indignation , not send a strong and symbolic message to promote that diversity , and the tolerance required in a globalised world , by forcefully condemning such remarks ?
How could it not call on the European Council and the Commission to send a solemn warning to states that subscribe to this aggressive logic , and even voice it , since history has taught us all too often that actions are unfortunately never far behind such remarks ?
How , during this sitting , Mr President , could our Parliament remain silent in the face of such racist , xenophobic attitudes , in a context of economic crisis in which the withdrawal of nations into themselves , protectionism , is sadly sprouting like seeds in spring ?
( RO ) I am extremely concerned by the events which have occurred recently in the Republic of Moldova .
The most serious of these include human rights violations , arrests , kidnappings , torture , intimidation and the expulsion of journalists .
The will of Moldovan citizens has been undermined by the authorities through the numerous irregularities which can provide arguments to support the assumption that the elections have been rigged .
This includes the supplementary lists , the extra vote papers printed , harassment of the opposition , the ban on access to public television stations and the campaign which the state institutions have run for the Communist Party .
Although there have been many voices during these weeks which have protested at a European and global level , unfortunately , the situation in the Republic of Moldova has not improved .
I hope that during the discussions this week and when the ad-hoc mission goes to the Republic of Moldova , but especially through the resolution which we are expecting at the final session in May , the European Parliament will send out a very clear message that the European Union does not tolerate human rights violations and will openly call for the elections in the Republic of Moldova to be rerun .
( PL ) Mr President , on the morning of Good Friday , 13 April , before dawn , a huge tragedy occurred in the Polish town of Kamień Pomorski near Szczecin .
Over 20 people , including children , were burned alive in a building .
This caused and is still causing great anguish throughout Poland .
Today , I would like to appeal from this Chamber to the governments of all the Member States and to local and regional authorities to take urgent steps to check fire safety provisions in all residential buildings , and especially in buildings used by welfare services .
I am thinking both about the use of suitable materials in the construction of these buildings and about a rigorous inspection of compliance with fire safety regulations .
The drama in Poland is one of many such incidents which , unfortunately , have occurred in Europe .
May this fire and its victims be a great cry of warning for the future .
( HU ) In the speech I made on 23 March , I asked the European Parliament and the European Commission to intervene to protect the Romanian town of Verespatak ( Roşia Montană ) whose vulnerable population , architectural heritage and natural environment are under threat as a result of plans by a Canadian-Romanian joint venture to develop a mine .
The fears we had then have been realised as , after a two-year reprieve , the new Romanian Government finally wants to clear the way for the investment , which will result in the use of production methods based on cyanide technology , in breach of European norms , thereby threatening not only the immediate environment , but also the entire area along the Romanian-Hungarian border with an ecological disaster .
I would like to use this opportunity to join other fellow Members in submitting a request to Commissioner Dimas for cyanide technology to be banned .
I call on the European Commission , in keeping with the spirit of Europe 's environmental protection policy , to send an inspection body to Romania to ensure in the long term that appropriate EU-level regulations are applied to mining operations .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to talk about what has happened at Fiat in Brussels .
With the sole aim of undermining the trade union , Fiat has falsely accused its workers of having taken its managers hostage - an event that in fact never took place .
There was no kidnapping , either on 9 April or ever .
The rumour has been deliberately spread by Fiat in an attempt to discredit the workers , who are trying to protect their future in the face of 24 lay-offs .
Fiat is refusing to have any meetings , discussions or negotiations with the trade unions representatives .
The sole aim is to lay off 24 workers , 12 of whom are trade unions representatives .
I think it would be a good idea for Parliament to discuss not only this fact , but also the anti-union conduct by Fiat and a very large number of major European multinationals , which is devoid of respect for workers ' rights .
While these multinationals benefit from national and European Union rules and , in several cases , also subsidies , they do not respect workers ' rights .
( EL ) Mr President , a few days ago , a large group of MEPs visited the southeast borders of Europe .
What we saw and experienced in the area we visited gave us no cause for pride whatsoever .
I have to tell you that there are European citizens there living on small islands with a population of between 120 and 130 , on each of which 150 , 200 or 250 illegal immigrants land every day and where they are all living together in miserable conditions because there is no infrastructure .
I keep hearing talk in this House of Darfur , of Southern Sudan , of Myanmar , and rightly so , but be that as it may , at some point we need to look at these European citizens living there , who are just as European as those living in Paris , Madrid or Berlin .
I felt it my duty to mention this to you , Mr President , and I trust that you will act .
( BG ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the moment there is a danger hanging over Bulgarian society .
Namely , the police force is changing from an organisation intended to protect the public into an agency involved in political racketeering and carrying out gangsters ' orders .
On the evening before Easter Sunday a councillor from Burgas municipal council , 64-year-old Petko Petkov , was knocked to the ground and beaten by two uniformed policemen before the very eyes of a large number of witnesses in front of a church .
In the official police report filed the next day there was no mention at all of the incident .
This is another example of police violence against members of the Attack party , in the wake of the beating suffered by the MEP , Dimitar Stoyanov , and a municipal councillor from Sofia .
Not one of these attacks has come under investigation .
Another example of the deliberate inaction of the police in cases where they are ' under orders ' is the fact that not a single case of abduction has been reported in Bulgaria , even though 15 cases have already occurred , the last two again this month .
Our society has become gripped by a sense of fear and helplessness .
As a result , policemen in Bulgaria have become synonymous with ' money-grabbing ' businessmen .
When the officers of law and order are criminals , who can we protect ourselves from and who will defend the people ?
This question remains unanswered .
Mr President , I draw the attention of this House to the impact of the unlawful blockade of the cross-Channel ports of Calais , Boulogne and Dunkirk by members of the French fishing industry last week .
This industrial action brought very serious disruptions to flows of freight through this vital trans-European route .
It adds enormous cost and delay to industry and severely disrupts and inconveniences the lives of people living in the South East of England .
This has been a frequently recurring problem , and I ask of the Commission that they use their powers to intervene to ensure that this interruption to the free movement of goods and people within the European Union is brought under control .
Furthermore , I ask of the Commission : is , in their view , the award of EUR 4 million to the fishermen by the French Government state aid , and would it therefore be anti-competitive and unlawful within the rules of the common fisheries policy ?
Mr President , the recent negative developments in Moldova illustrate a number of issues worth mentioning .
The first is our response to the violations of EU core values by the Moldovan authorities during the reprisals against young people and journalists , following the protests against the results of the elections .
Any lenience on our part would cast a shadow over EU credibility in this respect .
The second is the EU response to the procedural breach by the Moldovan authorities in implementing their agreements with us and by discriminating against European citizens on nationality grounds .
Again , EU credibility and authority are at stake .
The third is EU solidarity in the face of the false accusations against one of its members , a possible pretext for freezing the military situation in the area in breach of important undertakings in the field .
Fourthly , the EU reaction will emphasise once again the difference in status between countries sharing a similar destiny in 1940 and indicate the future direction of EU-Russia relations .
Mr President , if one of our constituents fraudulently claims welfare benefits , they will be prosecuted and could go to prison .
Sometimes things seem different here .
Newspapers reported publicly last November that one of our Members , Den Dover , had paid expenses worth GBP 750 000 intended for the employment of staff to a company owned by his wife and daughter and had used some of this money for the purchase of expensive cars and for other matters of personal gain .
Most people regard Dover as no better than a thief , a crook who should be in jail , and I invite you , Mr President , to tell us how much of that money has now been repaid .
This Parliament should be a shining example of openness , honesty and transparency , and instead there sometimes seems to be a code of secrecy here to keep hidden the true extent of abuse of allowances by some Members .
Our refusal to introduce the same sort of principles of financial transparency that we would expect of any other European institution brings shame upon us all .
Mr Davies , you can be sure that in this case , too , the matter will be dealt with in accordance with the law .
( PL ) Mr President , the month of April brings another opportunity for reflection on the effects of both totalitarian systems .
It recalls the Katyń Massacre , the murder of thousands of Polish officers - held as prisoners of war in camps at Ostaszków , Starobielsko and Kozielsko - sentenced to death in March 1940 on the orders of Lavrenty Beria .
It recalls , too , the beginning of the Warsaw Ghetto Rising in 1943 , in protest against the mass transportation of Jews to extermination camps by occupying German forces .
The tragedy in the ghetto is being overcome in today 's March of the Living , which guarantees to commemorate such events and to prevent their repetition .
Unfortunately , the Katyń Massacre and its perpetrators have still not been judged and sentenced .
Adoption by our Parliament of the written declaration on the proclamation of 23 August as European Day of Remembrance for Victims of Stalinism and Nazism nevertheless inspires hope .

Mr President , I understand that Mr Davies may have made a speech about a situation concerning myself , and , therefore , I would like the right of reply on that matter .
I only heard the last 10 words .
He at least sent me an email in the last 20 minutes saying that he intended to speak on it .
All I would like to say is that the big fuss and bother about my parliamentary assistance expenses , covered by the media over the last nine or twelve months , has been a harrowing experience .
I have lodged my papers with the Court of First Instance , so I intend to fight a very robust case .
I understand I have a very good case and , along with that , I have gone for interim measures , which means that no money will be payable until the Court has heard all the evidence and made the appropriate decision .
I beg leave to delay the House and thank you for this opportunity .
Mr President , after 36 years of membership , what has the European Union meant for Britain ?
It means that we no longer govern ourselves .
Between 75 % and 85 % of our laws now come from the EU and not from our own parliament .
The EU costs Britain at least GBP 56 billion per annum - or the equivalent of GBP 900 per annum for every man , woman and child .
We no longer control our own borders and suffer unlimited and uncontrolled immigration .
EU human rights legislation means that we can no longer effectively protect ourselves from foreign criminals , illegal immigrants and bogus asylum seekers .
The European arrest warrant and trials in absentia mean that we have lost our most basic protections from unjust arrest and imprisonment .
EU membership is a disaster for Britain .
It is a grievous and unnecessary self-inflicted wound .
The only solution to the problem is Britain 's unconditional withdrawal from the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , a few weeks ago , an unholy alliance of pro-European Czech Social Democrats , President Klaus , who opposes the EU , and the Communists brought about the fall of the Topolánek government .
Work is now under way to establish the interim government , which is to undertake the governmental work from May until after the new elections in October .
I hope that this new cabinet will lead the Czech Presidency , which has so far performed its role very well , to its conclusion and help to enable the necessary ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon in the Czech Republic .
This would be an important , positive sign for Europe .
( HU ) During recent months , a climate of fear has reigned again in Vojvodina in northern Serbia among the several nationalities which live there , mainly Hungarians .
Although our Parliament adopted in both 2004 and 2005 a resolution in response to the physical and psychological attacks carried out against non-Serb inhabitants of this area and also took the exemplary action of sending a fact-finding delegation to the area in 2005 , incidences of violence , intimidation and humiliation against the minorities living there , primarily Hungarians , are not only continuing , but seem to be getting worse .
Since the start of the year , a total of fifteen psychological and five physical attacks have been carried out , two of them serious .
Unfortunately , there is little confidence in the police .
This is supported by the fact that in the case of ethnic attacks , so far none of the sentences passed have actually been enforced , which indicates the inadequate operation , and , unfortunately , based on many years ' experience , the lenient attitude of the judiciary .
This is also supported by the fact that the Serbian majority cannot acknowledge even now that we must also remember many tens of thousands of people executed without any verdict and individual guilt .
For how much longer can the European Union put up with indigenous inhabitants speaking a European language being terrorised physically and psychologically by a prospective Member State at the start of the 21st century ?
Do we not even have the least concern for our reputation ?
( DE ) Mr President , yesterday the United Nations ' anti-racism conference opened in Geneva .
Twenty-two EU countries are participating and five countries have decided not to participate .
This shows the unity of the European Union in relation to such an important event in a poor light .
However , I now read that a few countries are still considering travelling to Geneva during the course of the week , and therefore I would ask you to bring your influence to bear on the Czech Presidency so that we , as the EU , can take a united stance on this anti-racism conference .
A dreadful speech by the Iranian President must not be allowed to divide the EU and weaken the UN .
That must not be the outcome of this speech , and therefore I believe that we must strive once again - as Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has also requested - to ensure that all 27 EU Member States and the EU as a unit actually support the final document arrived at there to help the millions of people in the world who are affected by racism and discrimination . Thank you very much .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the last part-session I asked you to respect Parliament 's obligations and to publish data on attendance by MEPs at parliamentary activities .
Mr President , you gave me your word that at the next meeting of the Bureau - which is the one to be held in exactly 40 minutes ' time - this point would be discussed .
However , I now find that this item is not on the agenda for the Bureau meeting to be held at 6.30 p.m.
Since there is now only a little more than a month until the elections and since Parliament has made an undertaking to publish data and information on attendance by MEPs at parliamentary activities , and now there will be very few opportunities , I do not know whether a meeting of the Bureau may be held to formally deal with this issue .
The Secretary-General had made a commitment to provide a report on the basis of which the Presidency would have been able to take a decision ; I therefore ask you , Mr President : will the citizens , the European electorate , be able to have this information , as requested , stipulated and decided by this Parliament , before the European elections in June , or will we have to break our own promise and go against our own decisions ?
( HU ) The new Hungarian socialist government was formed yesterday .
I do not actually want to talk about the political aspects of this event , but about the fact that the new government does not have a single female member .
It certainly is strange that in Europe in 2009 a new government can be formed which does not have a single woman among the 14 ministers making up the administration .
In the Scandinavian countries more than half the members of their governments are women .
France is also approaching this proportion .
More than a third of the members of the German Government are women .
This is the generally accepted practice in Europe .
In this House we have adopted 11 reports on the subject of gender equality over the last five years .
This is an important objective , based on Europe 's values , but is meaningless if it is not put into practice .
I therefore call on my fellow Members , in this case from the Socialist group , to exert their influence so that these important and noble aspirations are also put into practice in their countries where this has not yet happened .
Mr President , the other day I was in Birmingham .
I was knocking on doors - a particularly British way of campaigning - and , unsurprisingly , not a single person whose doorstep I was on had the slightest clue that there was to be a European election in less than six weeks ' time .
I am sure that you know that statistics in the UK show that only 16 % of the public know about the elections , but what should be of concern to you is that these statistics are no better across the other Member States .
In fact , 30 % have no intention of participating in the forthcoming elections .
This lack of interest and awareness is as much the responsibility of this Parliament as of anybody else .
The millions that have been spent on communications with the citizens have been to no avail .
What is particularly frustrating for me is that the promised election awareness advertisement has spectacularly backfired .
A work-life balance advertisement has upset working women and groups trying to encourage breastfeeding .
It is yet another own goal .
Mr President , you need to deal with this situation urgently , have the offending advertisement withdrawn and make sure that we have a simple message as to why people should participate in the forthcoming elections .
This needs to be visible and easily understood .
( EL ) Mr President , I too should like to speak on the same issue , namely the turnout for the forthcoming European elections , which does not promise to be particularly high .
The reasons include the pre-election campaign organised by Parliament , which is not spectacular enough , and , more importantly , the attacks on the achievements of the European Union , the social market economy , the model which we have fought so hard to develop and which is bearing fruit for workers in the European Union .
Citizens are looking with a negative eye on developments , which do not promise to be pleasing and satisfactory .
It is therefore a pity that we are in confrontation here on issues which should unite us in the interests of the citizens of Europe .

( FR ) Mr President , on 14 and 15 March I , as a member of the Committee on Budgets , travelled with Mr Botopoulos to the Peloponnese regions worst hit by the floods of summer 2007 .
We discovered , to our great surprise , that the EUR 89.7 million pledged and due to come from the European Union 's Solidarity Fund have still not arrived in those areas .
We therefore formally draw the Commission 's attention to this matter and we should like to know where the implementation of the decisions taken by the budgetary authority is being held up .
How is it that this aid , which was voted on several months ago , has still not had any significant impact on these regions , where the need for European solidarity is becoming more obvious by the day ?
Aside from the retrospective monitoring carried out by the Commission , we should like to receive some explanations from the Greek Government regarding the use of this European aid .
This really is a matter of urgency - human and economic urgency .
Two years is really far too long to wait .

( RO ) I would like to draw attention to the fact that the increasingly frequent undesirable events which started last year with Armenia and have continued this year with Georgia and Moldova give us food for thought , given that there are two things which they have in common : all three countries are members of the Eastern Partnership and the scenario is identical for each of them .
I think we should take this fact into consideration .
Last week President Voronin of Moldova even declared that he wants to withdraw from this Eastern Partnership so that he can push ahead with the unwelcome actions which he is taking against human rights in Moldova .
I believe that the European Union should work closely with the Council of Europe and the OSCE .
Mr President , glorification of terrorism takes many forms , but when a Member of this House eulogises vile murderers , whose killing careers came to an end when they met their just desserts at the hands of lawful security forces , then that Member has put herself at variance with everything that this House has ever said in condemning terrorism and those who sanitise and justify it .
Yet this is exactly what Sinn Fein Member de Brún did on Easter Sunday , when she described IRA terrorists as decent , selfless and honourable .
There is nothing decent or honourable about terrorism , past or present .
Shame on any Member who proclaims such obscene adulation of men of blood !
( SL ) With his populist and hard-line nationalist rhetoric , President Ahmadinejad is causing great damage to Iran 's image and reputation .
He is also threatening moderate Islam in the West and spreading negative stereotypes about it .
We have to take decisive action against such provocation .
In sentencing Roxana Saberi , the Iranian regime has demonstrated that it is essentially weak and cowardly .
In its verbal confrontation with the United States , it chooses to take hostages , in this case a woman and a journalist , in order to mobilise its people ideologically .
It is making a mockery of all democratic standards .
Fundamental human rights form the bedrock of the European Union , as does the fight for the right to information .
The fourth estate , that is the media and the press , are an important tool in restoring democratic standards .
Any power which is afraid of the press will first strike against them .
Non-democratic regimes remain in perpetual fear , which is why they persecute journalists , imprison and torture them , and even kill them .
( HU ) On 1 May it will be five years since we became members of the European Union , together with numerous other Central and Eastern European countries .
It seemed then that each of the new Member States would observe the EU 's basic principles and the ban on discrimination , as well as protect and value linguistic diversity and the rights of national minorities .
Even after five years of EU membership , there may still be instances where the majority language is protected in an open , discriminatory manner to the detriment of the use of the indigenous national minorities ' languages .
This is currently the case in Slovakia , where the language law passed in 1995 and subjected at the time to harsh international criticism has now been revived .
This draft language law jeopardises the use of minority languages in every aspect of life , which also affects , for instance , the half a million-strong indigenous Hungarian minority who live there .
Instead of promoting linguistic diversity and protecting the minority 's identity , it allows language monitors and inspectors to go into minority communities and impose heavy fines if they fail to comply with these regulations , which can only be described as madness from a Brussels perspective .
This is why I call on the EU 's commissioner for linguistic diversity to intervene and put linguistic diversity into practice in Slovakia too .
( HU ) The 10 new Member States have been in the European Union for five years .
It is time for us to take stock of the situation .
Our term is also coming to an end .
To begin with , there was distrust among the old Member States , but this gradually disappeared .
In fact , after a while it transpired that on many issues , such as the Services Directive or freedom of employment , the new Member States championed EU reform .
This is why I believe that we can say that these five years have been a very sharp learning curve .
At the same time , we must highlight that new Member States still face discriminatory measures .
I only need to mention the fact that farmers from new Member States are receiving yet again this year only 60 % of what farmers in the old Member States receive .
I should also add that joining the EU was a win-win situation and I would therefore like to thank the European Parliament for welcoming us new Member States .
We feel that we have been treated here as full equals during the last five years .
This item is closed .
Common rules for the internal market in electricity - Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators - Access to the network : cross-border exchanges in electricity - Internal market in natural gas - Conditions for access to the natural gas transmission networks - Fuel efficiency : labelling of tyres - The energy performance of buildings ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following items :
the recommendation for second reading by Mrs Morgan , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity and repealing Directive 2003 / 54 / EC ( 14539 / 2 / 2008 - C6-0024 / 2009 - ;
the recommendation for second reading by Mr Chichester , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing an Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators ( 14541 / 1 / 2008 - C6-0020 / 2009 - ;

the recommendation for second reading by Mr Vidal-Quadras , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the Council common position for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on conditions for access to the network for cross-border exchanges in electricity and repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 1228 / 2003 ( 14546 / 2 / 2008 - C6-0022 / 2009 - ;
the recommendation for second reading by Mr Mussa , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas and repealing Directive 2003 / 55 / EC ( 14540 / 2 / 2008 - C6-0021 / 2009 - ;

the recommendation for second reading by Mr Paparizov , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on conditions for access to the natural gas transmission networks and repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 1775 / 2005 ( 14548 / 2 / 2008 - C6-0023 / 2009 - ;
the report by Mr Belet , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on labelling of tyres with respect to fuel efficiency and other essential parameters - C6-0411 / 2008 - ;
the report by Mrs Ţicău , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the energy performance of buildings ( recast ) - C6-0413 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - Madam President , this energy package is the culmination of years of hard work in which Parliament can be very proud of the changes that will now be put in place .
We should , in particular , be proud of the fact that the EU 's energy consumers have now been put right at the centre of the energy debate for the first time and the issue of energy poverty has now been recognised at European level .
The inherit conflict of interests that arises when a company owns both transmission and generation of electricity has been addressed , and the regulatory regime governing the energy markets has been strengthened .
The Electricity Directive , for which I was rapporteur , is part of a package of five measures which seeks improvements in the way the electricity and gas markets work across the continent , to ensure that the markets are better integrated and operate in a fairer and less discriminatory way .
Let me say how grateful I have been for the enormous cooperation from the other rapporteurs on this package , as well as from the shadows , the Commission and the Czech Presidency , for helping us to come to a conclusion on what was sometimes a very challenging debate .
The legislation has seen a raft of new consumer protection measures set out , including ensuring that customers are able to switch suppliers within three weeks , the provision in each Member State of an independent and robust complaints system , and the right to compensation if service levels are not met .
This legislation will also ensure that every household in the EU will be fitted with so-called ' smart meters ' by 2022 .
These smart meters will enable customers to better control their energy use and increase energy efficiency , helping to cut energy costs and reduce carbon emissions .
On the European Parliament 's initiative , the new legislation also includes special protection measures for vulnerable energy consumers , and the issue of energy poverty will now have to be taken seriously for the first time .
I would like to ask Commissioner Piebalgs if he will now make a commitment that , in future , the energy framework of the EU , in addition to addressing security of supply , sustainability and competitiveness , will also now add a fourth leg - that of affordability - to all future energy policy proposals .
An EU-backed report has recently concluded that up to 125 million citizens are affected by energy poverty .
Member States now must take appropriate measures which could lead to the prevention of hundreds - if not thousands - of deaths in the poorest households across the continent .
We will also see the end to discriminatory pricing on prepayment meters .
The most controversial part of the package centred on whether there was a need for full ownership unbundling in the energy markets - in other words , a total separation of transmission systems from generation .
The market structure in some Member States means that the monopoly enjoyed by transmission system operators , who also own the means of generating electricity , offers no incentive to encourage other players onto the market , thereby undermining competition .
Parliament has now accepted a compromise that will allow ownership of both transmission and generation on condition that we see increased checks and balances to ensure the removal of the inherent conflict of interest that arises .
Many of us reluctantly accepted the compromise because we believe that the wind is blowing in the direction of wholesale separations , and these integrated companies are likely to separate regardless of this directive .
The Commission 's efforts in exposing the abuses of some companies is starting to pay off , with examples of companies like E.ON and RWE agreeing to sell their transmission networks following anti-trust investigations .
We are also going to see a strengthening of national regulatory authorities .
I would like to thank everybody for their cooperation , and I think we should be proud of what we have done for the consumers of the EU .
rapporteur . - Madam President , this package is , I hope , more a case of ' third time lucky ' than ' work in progress ' .
I view the future role of the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators as crucial in achieving the long-desired internal market in gas and electricity .
During the trialogue negotiations , it became clear to me that the improvements put forward by me on behalf of Parliament are essential for fair and effective energy markets .
My objective has been to create an agency with greater independence and decision-making powers .
In particular , if it is to contribute effectively to the development of a single , competitive , energy market , the Agency needs more powers to tackle cross-border issues and encourage effective cooperation between transmission system operators ( TSOs ) and national regulatory authorities ( NRAs ) .
However , with greater power there should be greater accountability and transparency .
I have in mind the general principle that we should reinforce the independence of the Agency so as to make it both more effective and more credible by increasing the ways in which the Agency is accountable , in particular to this Parliament .
I believe this will happen .
I should say that a number of the roles we have given to the Agency sound more consultative than concrete , but we have tried to create opportunities for innovative regulation by drawing attention to areas where action is needed but the Agency does not have the appropriate powers to act .
Let me first emphasise the increased forms of accountability that we have negotiated .
The director will appear before the relevant committee of this House , both prior to appointment and during his or her term of office , to make a statement and answer questions .
Likewise , the chairman of the board of regulators can attend the relevant committee and give an account of their work .
Parliament has gained the right to nominate two of the members of the administrative board .
All of this gives the Agency a forum in the public domain to make its voice heard on issues of its choice .
Turning to the roles I mentioned , I believe that monitoring internal markets in gas and electricity , participating in the development of network codes , contributing to the implementation of the guidelines on trans-European energy networks , monitoring progress on implementation of projects to create new interconnector capacity , having the power to decide on exemptions from requirements for investments in infrastructure , monitoring implementation of the 10-year network investment plans and having powers to issue opinions and recommendations to TSOs - along with other aspects that I do not have the time to enumerate - will all give the Agency ample opportunities to bring about change .
Finally , we have introduced requirements for streamlined decision-taking .
I hope that the Agency will rise to the challenges we have posed .
We have also created the opportunity for the Commission to come forward with its report on the working of the Agency and to make suggestions as to further tasks and roles that the Agency might fulfil , in the light of experience .
I would like to thank our fellow rapporteurs , the other two institutions and the Commissioner in particular for their hard and constructive work in achieving the final compromise package .
I hope the fact that I have been invited to speak second , not fifth , is clear recognition of the true significance and importance of this proposal .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I would like to start by sincerely thanking the rapporteurs , the shadow rapporteurs , Commissioner Piebalgs and Ambassador Reinišová for the excellent cooperation during the first three months of this year .
That cooperation has been the main engine of the successful outcome we will be voting on this week .
Negotiations have been long , complex and sometimes tough , but I think we have managed to get an agreement that is satisfactory to all parties .
Regarding the overall package , as it has been negotiated , Parliament can be proud of the final text .
Indeed , our very strong first-reading agreement on ownership unbundling gave the negotiating team a lot of leverage during the talks .
This has allowed us to obtain a much tighter regulatory framework , in particular in countries with the ITO model in place , where the competencies of national regulators will be increased , with independence from both governments and industry .
This new role will reduce the risk of uncompetitive behaviour , especially in circumstances where vertically integrated companies abuse their position to stop investments in new capacity .
Furthermore , agreement has been reached on the review clause that will allow us to check , in a few years , whether all models satisfy our goals of achieving a fully competitive and legalised market .
Moreover , we have substantially increased the provisions on consumer protection with regard to , among other things , billing information and improved conditions for switching suppliers .
Finally , another big success has been the introduction of a new provision in the third-country clause , whereby the certification of a transmission system operator ( TSO ) from a third country could now also be denied if the security of supply of the Union as a whole , or that of an individual Member State , other than the one where the certification is requested , is threatened .
Concerning the electricity regulation , I would like to make clear that this regulation plays a crucial role , since it gives Member States the tools needed to significantly increase interconnection capacity within the Union by the development and establishment of binding network codes to be applied by all transmission system operators to exchanges , thus removing one of the main physical barriers to the completion of the internal electricity market .
The agreed text also enhances the role of the Agency for the Cooperation of European Regulators in this process , in line with the first reading in the European Parliament .
I must admit that Parliament hoped for a much more ambitious agency .
However , we understand that this is only the first step in a long process of integration of regulatory frameworks .
We have managed to include a new provision whereby the Agency will be able to propose the basic criteria to be included in the granting of exemptions for new interconnections .
This is particularly relevant since it is one of the main obstacles investors in new capacity face when dealing with different Member States .
Having to follow several different regulatory procedures can sometimes lead to confusing results and put off investors - take , for example , Nabucco .
This regulation also establishes , and gives a defined role to , the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity ( ENTSO ) , which will be in charge of drafting the network codes to be submitted to the Agency , as well as developing coordinated mechanisms for emergency situations such as the European Union-wide blackouts we have suffered in the recent past .
I would like to finish by thanking all the technical staff , whose work has enabled us to obtain an agreement which , at the very beginning of the negotiations , we at times lost faith in reaching .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Czech Presidency , the Commission , Mrs Niebler , as the Chairman of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , my fellow rapporteurs on this energy package , the shadow rapporteurs and the committee 's secretariat , including all its officials , for their cooperation and for the skill they have displayed in working on this issue .
We all can and should be proud of the result we have achieved ; I certainly am , thinking about the work I did when I inherited the directive on the internal market in gas , with problems that had no easy solutions .
I am happy that this , my second term of office as an MEP , has coincided with the concluding stage of this package , which I believe to be one of the most important matters dealt with in this term of office , and one which will benefit our electorate , the citizens of Europe .
The Gas Directive that will enter into force from 2011 brings in significant innovations in the sector : one important result that should be emphasised is that the ITO option has been achieved .
This will open up the markets and ensure that real progress is made towards a system that will genuinely allow the European Union to speak with one voice on energy issues .
The ITO system is the true innovation in this package and it is the area where the European Parliament can be said to have achieved the best outcome .
The new Gas Directive attributes much importance to the gas authorities and to the agency .
The directive gives legitimacy to the authorities in their role , particularly in those countries where they are to start their activities from scratch .
It is therefore a matter of fundamental importance that we have designated the role and responsibilities of these bodies , and have given them broad powers , since the authorities have the difficult task of controlling the common energy market .
Another detail , which was added in at the trialogue stage , is the exemption from the common rules for so-called ' closed ' systems , such as airports , hospitals , stations , industrial sites , and so on , which because of their specific individual features are subject to a more favourable system .
This is an example of the attention paid by the new directive to the needs of European citizens .
In my view , it is , in fact , European citizens that will really benefit from this directive , since with the use of smart meters they will have access to all the information relating to their bills and will be able to assess the best offer on the market and to choose their supplier on the basis of the best price , because while it is true that it will take some years to see the effects of this liberalisation , nonetheless it cannot be denied that the entry of new operators onto the market will lead to a fall in prices and to more favourable market conditions for EU citizens .
Another important element is the recognition of European transmission network systems that will provide gas supply security to European citizens .
All this also hinges on the strengthening and creation of new infrastructure such as regasification facilities and storage facilities , which will be the driving force behind the third package .
What is required , therefore , is the opening up of a competitive market , ensuring long-term investment and contracts from firms in the sector , particularly in the new Member States , where the creation of new infrastructure would also make it possible to resolve long-standing problems relating to energy dependence .
The protection of more vulnerable consumers has been taken into account , by giving the national and regional authorities the option to guarantee their gas supplies at the most critical times .
The successful outcome on this Gas Directive and the energy package as a whole once more highlights the role of Europe and its institutions in acting for European citizens .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would first of all like to express how pleased I am that agreement was reached between the European Parliament and the Council on the Third Energy Package , including the regulation on conditions for access to the gas transmission networks , for which I am the rapporteur .
I would like to mention the contribution made by the Czech Presidency and the active support from the European Commission in finding common solutions .
In terms of access to the gas transmission networks , the Third Energy Package 's objectives have been achieved .
The foundation has been laid for creating a common European energy market , based on rules set out in detail in the binding network codes .
The opportunities have been increased for developing regional cooperation where , alongside the European Network of Transmission System Operators and the national regulators , the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators will also play a considerable motivating role .
This will significantly boost the security of deliveries and encourage a new infrastructure to be set up through the European operators ' network drawing up a 10-year network investment plan whose implementation is controlled by the national regulators and monitored by the Agency .
This offers all market participants the opportunity to get involved , on the basis of clearly defined procedures , in drawing up the network codes and proposing changes to them if their practical application shows that this is necessary .
The conditions governing competition between suppliers are being tightened through the use of more stringent rules on information and the transparency of transmission operators ' actions .
I would especially like to thank those who participated in the negotiations for supporting the proposals which I drew up on the 10-year investment plan and the development of regional cooperation initiatives .
In addition , I am pleased that , as a result of the negotiations conducted , a better balance was achieved between the powers of the European Network of Transmission System Operators , the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators and the European Commission , with a view to creating a smooth-operating , efficient , competitive market .
I would particularly like to emphasise that there was close cooperation while working on the five pieces of legislation from the Third Energy Package .
A general framework was also created where individual elements can complement and reinforce each other .
I would like to mention the significant result of the active cooperation with my fellow rapporteurs : Mrs Morgan , Mr Mussa , Mr Vidal-Quadras and Mr Chichester .

I also extend my thanks to the shadow rapporteurs who contributed to every stage of the negotiations with constructive and very useful suggestions .
I must give a special thanks as well to the chairman of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and his secretariat .
Madam President , 2009 started with disruption to gas supplies for Bulgaria and Slovenia , along with a sharp reduction in volumes for other countries in Central and Eastern Europe .
I believe that , based on the Third Energy Package , the unexpected proposals from the European Commission on providing new content for the gas supply security directive and the projects for connecting gas transmission networks supported by the Economic Recovery Plan , by the end of 2009 , the European Union will be ready to counter any possible disruptions to supplies , thanks to more material resources and greater solidarity .
I feel justified , based on the results achieved , in calling on all my fellow Members to support at second reading the common text reached with the Council , which has been presented to you .
Even though the labelling of tyres with respect to fuel efficiency has today been awkwardly scheduled between electricity and gas , we are discussing important and very tangible measures that are of direct importance to every consumer , every driver , in fact to most of us in Europe .
It is a concrete measure that will cost little or nothing and that will make a considerable contribution to attaining our ambitious climate objectives .
The tyre of a car - I am not sure if you are aware of this - accounts for 20 % to 30 % of a car 's total fuel consumption .
It is therefore logical that that is where enormous potential for energy efficiency and for savings lies .
What are the specific steps we intend to take ?
We will try to encourage all car drivers , which is just about everybody , therefore , to monitor the energy efficiency and noise emission of tyres from now on .
We will not obligate anyone ; we will only inform people , as we are doing today with refrigerators , for example , by means of a clear label or a sticker .
Who wants to drive around with B- or C-class tyres if they can also use an environmentally friendly A-class version ?
Moreover , an A-class tyre is more cost-effective in the long run .
This is what is known as pure profit , profit for the consumer and , above all , profit for the environment .
I should like to quote to you one figure : an impact assessment has shown a potential saving of up to one and a half million tonnes of CO2 .
This corresponds to removing the CO2 emission from near enough one million passenger cars on European roads .
Once this measure has reached cruising speed , the CO2 emission of one million passenger cars will have been eliminated , which is quite impressive !
Tyre manufacturers also stand to benefit , of course .
Needless to say - and this is only logical - we consulted the sector when we came up with this measure .
Surely , it makes no sense to impose new legislation on a sector that is particularly badly affected by the crisis in the car sector if this would involve extra outlay and red tape .
These are arguments that hold water and that cannot simply be ignored .
This Labelling Directive also benefits the manufacturers of quality car tyres , which is why we attach so much importance to monitoring its implementation , which is essential for creating an equal playing field , except that it is at a high level .
It goes without saying that environmental friendliness should never be at the expense of safety , and this is why we have tabled amendments to this effect .
Safety remains our top priority , of course , where car tyres are concerned .
I should like to add a brief comment about the noise emission criterion .
This is also included because , as you know , noise pollution is one of the banes of our time .
As such , I very much welcome in this connection the fact that we have built in a cautious and viable criterion in order to further reduce noise pollution but , as I already mentioned , never at the expense of the safety of the car and the tyre .
I should like to conclude with a word about the time frame .
In my view , we have reached an ambitious , yet reasonable , compromise .
We are , of course , counting on car tyre manufacturers , as was the case with the CO2 emissions of the cars themselves , to introduce products onto the market that will meet the most environmentally friendly standards a lot sooner .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , buildings are responsible for consuming 40 % of primary energy and for creating 40 % of greenhouse gas emissions .
This is why the urgent implementation of measures to improve the energy performance of buildings is the most reliable , quickest and least costly way to cut greenhouse gas emissions .
However , boosting the energy performance of buildings also offers huge potential for the EU 's economic recovery through the creation of more than 250 000 new jobs , through the investments required to promote renewable energy resources and energy-efficient buildings and , last but not least , through improving the quality of life of Europe 's citizens by reducing the cost of their utility bills .
The new Commission proposal for amending the existing directive stipulates removing the 1 000 m2 limit , setting certain minimum energy performance requirements for buildings and introducing a process for converging the minimum requirements established at national level , promoting buildings which produce locally a quantity of renewable energy equivalent to the primary energy consumed , and only financing from public funds the construction of buildings which comply with the minimum energy performance requirements .
Parliament has introduced the following important amendments : extending the directive 's scope to include centralised heating and cooling systems , increasing the role of and standardising the format for energy performance certificates for buildings , devising a common methodology for defining minimum energy performance requirements , implementing in the case of public institutions recommendations contained in the energy performance certificate during its period of validity , new provisions on providing information to consumers and training to auditors and experts , as well as granting from 2019 construction permits for buildings which produce renewable energy locally in a quantity at least equivalent to the energy produced from conventional sources , along with introducing new provisions for inspecting heating or cooling systems .
I invite my fellow Members to visit the exhibition devoted to buildings of this sort - net zero buildings - which is being held in the European Parliament , organised jointly with the WWF .
Although the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive has been in force since 2002 , its implementation in the various Member States has not been satisfactory .
Member States have identified the lack of funding as being the main barrier to preventing the proper implementation of this directive .
This is why the European Parliament proposed the funding of measures for the energy performance of buildings from the European Regional Development Fund , the creation of a European Fund for Energy Performance of buildings and the promotion of renewable energy sources through the contribution of the EIB , the European Commission and Member States , the possibility of using a low VAT rate for services and products relating to the energy performance of buildings , the development of national programmes which help boost the energy efficiency of buildings by adopting financial instruments and certain specific fiscal measures .
Last but not least , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , the technical staff from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and the CFSP staff from the latter committee with whom I have worked outstandingly well .
I await my fellow Members ' comments with interest .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it is not easy in five minutes to give the Commission response to seven excellent reports , but I should not miss this opportunity to thank all the rapporteurs - Mrs Morgan , Mrs Ţicău , Mr Chichester , Mr Vidal-Quadras , Mr Mussa , Mr Paparizov and Mr Belet - and all the shadows .




I also would like to thank Mrs Niebler who worked really hard to let us come to this report in a very limited amount of time .
I will start with the internal energy market because two years ago we started with an ambitious goal : to create a truly competitive and truly European energy market for the benefit of the citizens of the European Union .
The tool to achieve this goal is the third internal energy market package for gas and electricity .
Today we are close to the adoption of this package and thus to achieving this goal .
The trialogue has now succeeded in agreeing to the compromise .
The Commission fully supports this compromise .
If adopted tomorrow by plenary , it will give the European Union the clear regulatory framework needed to ensure a properly functioning internal market and to promote much-needed investment .
First , it will facilitate cross-border energy trade with the establishment of an agency for the cooperation of national energy regulators , with binding decision powers , to complement national regulators .
This ensures the proper handling of cross-border cases and enables the European Union to develop a real European network .
Secondly , the new legislation will promote cross-border and regional collaboration and investment with a new European network for transmission system operators .
EU grid operators will cooperate and develop network codes and security standards , as well as plan and coordinate the investments needed at EU level .
Thirdly , it will provide for more effective regulatory oversight from national regulators that will be much more independent and have all the necessary means .
Fourthly , it will ensure effective unbundling of the generation and transmission of energy so as to eliminate any conflict of interests , promote network investment and prevent discriminatory behaviour .
This legislation will also ensure greater transparency , thereby guaranteeing equal access to information , making pricing more transparent , increasing trust in the market , and helping to avoid any possible manipulation or any sort of manipulation of the market .
This is not just about a properly functioning internal market but more generally about ensuring that the EU can rise to the challenges we are facing in the field of energy : climate change , increased import dependency , security of supply , global competitiveness .
In particular , a functioning internal market is a key element of the EU 's effort to tackle climate change .
Without a competitive electricity market , an emissions trading scheme will never work properly , and our aims regarding renewable energy will not succeed .
The compromise reached also strikes a good balance between the positions of Parliament and the Council .
The rapporteurs have already presented to you the key elements on which the political compromise reached strengthens the common position adopted by the Council in January 2009 .
I would like to highlight a few key issues .
Parliament 's call for stronger consumer protection and the fight against energy poverty is now enshrined in the legislative texts .
Smart meters , allowing for consumers to be precisely informed of their consumption and promoting energy efficiency , are provided with a target of 80 % of consumers to be reached by 2020 .
The powers and independence of national regulators have been strengthened , as well as the powers of the agency , and the rules on effective unbundling have been made more efficient .
Most importantly , we have also seen developments on the ground .
A lot of companies have restructured their business and how they deal with networks and consumers .
Today at the Hannover Messe , I saw that smart metering is making good progress and companies are taking these decisions on board .
Energy efficiency is definitely one of the key policies of the European energy policy .
The building sector still has considerable potential to further improve its energy efficiency , at the same time creating new jobs and stimulating growth .
I warmly thank Parliament for its support for the Commission 's proposal on the recast of the Energy Efficiency of Buildings Directive .
The discussions and proposals demonstrate that Parliament shares the policy objectives and wishes to vigorously improve current performance .
It is not an easy area , as there is a lot of subsidiarity , so we need to strike a good balance .
The Directive provides a framework to upgrade the energy performance of the EU 's buildings .
There is a lot of clarification , and this reinforces the effect of the directive , like the principles on the ' cost-optimal ' method , requirements on control mechanisms and many definitions .
There is the issue of financing instruments that are very important for stimulating energy efficiency measures , but these need to be tackled in the appropriate legislation and initiatives .
Consequently , the Buildings Directive is constrained in what it can do with respect to financial and fiscal issues .
Very efficient buildings , whether they are called low- or zero-energy buildings , or next-generation buildings , are a new feature introduced into the Directive by the Commission .
It is essential to make this provision ambitious but realistic , and with some flexibility given the EU 's varied climate and economic conditions .
Unified requirements like net zero-energy buildings would not exactly fulfil this requirement and would therefore be excessive .
Harmonisation is crucial for the internal market .
I fully support Parliament 's wish to have a single methodology for calculating cost-optimal levels of requirements .
However , prescribing a common methodology for the energy performance calculation itself could be counter-productive , causing delays in the implementation of the Directive by several years due to the complexity of Member States ' building codes .
This is therefore very complex and difficult legislation , but I very much rely on Parliament strengthening this legal instrument .
The rapporteur also spoke about tyres that can play a significant part in reducing road transport energy intensity and emissions .
The combined impact of this proposal together with the type-approval legislation on tyres should bring around 5 % fuel savings on the total EU fleet by 2020 .
This proposal will provide consumers with standardised information on fuel efficiency .
It will also give information on wet grip , which is another essential parameter for tyres , and external rolling noise .
By doing so , the label will pull the market towards better-performing tyres while avoiding improvements on one aspect being achieved at the costs of others .
The report which will be put to the vote this week will add some significant improvements to the initial proposal , such as the change from a Directive into a Regulation , which will reduce transposal costs and ensure that the same application date for the label applies to all .
The inclusion of snow tyres within the scope of the label , with the adoption of a specific grading as soon as possible , will also benefit those driving in ice or snow conditions .
It is important that we find the best way of displaying the label .
There is some discussion on this .
We would very much like you to support our proposal to integrate the label on the stickers which are currently delivered with each tyre to indicate their dimension , load index etc .
I believe we have really made remarkable progress on the energy dossier during this legislation and , most importantly , it is supported by our citizens and by industry .
Having been at the Hannover Messe , we have seen a huge drive from industry for energy efficiency , not only in the areas we have now legislated on , but also in other branches of industry such as different appliances used for end consumption and to produce tools for different types of industry .
Energy efficiency , energy and Europe : these are the key words for what we have achieved during this legislation .
I would like to thank all those involved and particularly all Members of the European Parliament that supported this .
As a final word of apology , I could have another five minutes but I will use only one minute when I am given the floor for the second time . Thank you for letting me finish this speech .
Madam President , thank you Mr Piebalgs for your focussed speech .
I believe that we can best measure the progress we have made by what we set as the goal at the beginning of the debate .
I remember the situation at the start as being one in which Mrs Kroes presented an analysis showing that , despite several liberalisation packages at European level , the market power is held by fewer and fewer players - large energy companies - in ever more EU Member States , in other words the concentration is increasing in the energy sector in relation to electricity just as it is in relation to gas .
I was therefore pleased at the start of the debate that both the Commission and then later the European Parliament said that the most effective instrument to combat this concentration - particularly in the electricity sector - is the separation of generation and grid .
I would make a bet with you today that without this separation - as you initially advocated - we will not manage to provide any real protection for consumers from arbitrary prices on the energy market .
I am also willing to bet that this Parliament will discuss this instrument again in the foreseeable future , because what we are deciding on now will not be enough to break down this power and the dominant position of some large energy companies .
It will not be enough to prevent electricity and gas prices rising ever higher , despite ever increasing profits in the energy sector .
It will not be enough actually to provide the transparency and consumer protection promised here by many well-meaning Members of this House .
I have to acknowledge that these Members have fought very hard in this respect .
However , I also have to say that it is the large companies and some of the Member States that have succeeded here , and not the far-sighted European politicians .
I hope that you will accept the bet and then in four years ' time we will discuss the next liberalisation step and we will actually talk about unbundling .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank Mrs Morgan for her report on the electricity markets .
As a shadow rapporteur it has been a pleasure to work together with her , and I think it is fair to say that we have been able to achieve a liberalisation of the energy markets .
At least , we have made some important steps , and thereby we have opened up the market .
I think it is fair to say that the report on electricity also played the lead in the process that we are discussing here today .
I think it is important to state that this is also in contrast to those in different countries who would like to have more protected borders regarding energy markets .
We have a debate in Sweden in which there are those who would like to have some sort of protectionism regarding the export of electricity .
But that would hinder and damage all the things that we can achieve by an open electricity market .
It is by opening up the markets that we can do something about climate change and can make the best use of renewables and nuclear power .
We can also ensure that we have a good supply of energy all over the Union , binding countries and markets together .
I think the steps we are taking with this energy market package should be seen as important ones .
Although there are more steps to be taken , we have contributed to the energy security of Europe and to the fight against climate change .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , the third energy package is about harnessing the sector with the aim of providing more security and transparency , as well as sustainable and affordable energy for all European citizens and enterprises .
It is about facing the energy challenges in front of us .
It is about reducing Member States ' dependency on single outsource countries .
It is about more customer and consumer satisfaction .
It is about avoiding market distortions , especially between those countries which produce cheaply and those countries which wish to buy cheaply , which are not necessarily the same .
It is about attracting investors in the field of energy .
The European Agency will have a key role to play and , as my colleague the rapporteur , Mr Chichester , has said , we have achieved a strong and independent agency and we have been able to increase the role of the European Parliament to satisfy those targets which I mentioned above .
I think it was wonderful working together .
Somehow it is a pity that we are ending this energy package .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in September 2007 the European Commission presented its third energy package in relation to the operation of the internal market .
Very quickly , the debates began to focus on the important , though not exclusive , issue of separating the activities of producing and transporting energy .
The issue of network ownership , which in my view was insufficiently dealt with at first reading , seems to have been taken more seriously .
The coexistence of different options , including the infamous third way , now enhanced and clarified , strikes me as being a good thing - which is an obvious statement given that I was co-author of this amendment .
Fortunately , however , summing this third package up as ownership unbundling would be a mistake .
The progress made is real : more rights for consumers , more powers for regulators , more cooperation among regulators , 10-year investment plans , more transparency to facilitate the development of renewables , more technical cooperation among network operators , and also tools for better consumption , such as smart meters .
This is a further step towards European solidarity .
The ' third-country ' clause , despite appearing less sensational than that initially drafted by the Commission , does explicitly state that a Member State has the right to refuse to certify an operator if certifying it would jeopardise the security of its energy supply or that of another Member State .
I do perhaps have one regret concerning the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators : our wish would have been to create a strong , independent agency that is capable of taking decisions without the support of our body .
We came up against the infamous Meroni judgment .
Let us not delude ourselves : the construction of a true European energy policy will require yet more advances , and institutional ones in particular .
The security of supply , the fight against climate change , the regulation of markets : all of these objectives should be pursued with a pragmatic , not dogmatic , approach .
What European citizens expect is not the application of economic theories , but concrete evidence that the opening up of markets will benefit them , by giving them the freedom to choose their suppliers , and reasonable , stable and predictable prices .
I am grateful to my fellow Members , to our commissioner and to the Council for this constructive effort .
Madam President , Commissioner , speaking in this debate on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I would like to draw attention to four points .
Firstly , we should assess positively the solutions which aim to separate production and sale of electricity and gas from their transmission .
This should allow competition between producers of energy sources and so a reduction in the price of services .
Secondly , it is important that particular Member States which are obliged to introduce separation of energy production from its transmission can adopt one of three models for this : the greatest possible division of ownership , handing over network management to an independent operator , and the option of retaining integration of production and transmission of energy , but only if conditions are met which ensure that these two parts of the business will in practice operate independently .
Thirdly , the solutions regarding strengthening the position of the consumer in the electricity and gas market deserve emphasis , and especially the option to change energy supplier within a maximum of three weeks without incurring any additional charges .
Fourthly and finally , also worthy of special notice are the solutions which have a social dimension , requiring Member States to give assistance to electricity and gas consumers who cannot afford to pay their bills .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , first , on the Ţicău report , the Greens will vote for it : it has a green mark , and I thank all the team who negotiated .
I want to spend the few seconds I have here on internal markets .
It is already clear this evening that we need a fourth package on liberalisation , with five items : firstly , ownership unbundling for pipelines and grids ; secondly , access to storage of electricity and of gas ; thirdly , more power for the EU Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators ; fourthly , public ownership of the power exchanges , because otherwise it will never function ; and fifthly , we need a specific cartel law for infrastructure-based economies .
Although Eluned Morgan has fought hard for the consumers , consumers can only gain when the wholesale market is functioning .
Enel is taking over Endesa , RWE is taking over Nuon and Vattenfall is taking over Essent .
We will end up with 10 mega-players who do not have any interest in either an environmental agenda or a consumer agenda .
This will be a cartel , and to face this cartel we need stricter laws .
In this sense we have a defeat this evening , orchestrated by Mr Reul , Ms Niebler and others of their like .
It is a big victory for the energy oligopolies and it is a defeat for consumers in Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is not possible to cover the entire energy package in a short space of time .
Despite that I would like firstly to thank everyone involved in producing the documents we have on the table .
However , let us be realistic .
The result is still far from perfect .
Nevertheless , I believe it was impossible to achieve more at this point in time .
The fact that the current Parliament is approaching the end of its mandate has undoubtedly played a part .
Personally , I would like to speak mainly about the document presented by Mr Chichester on establishing an Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators .
As the shadow rapporteur I have been advocating , among other things , that the agency should contribute to the setting up of regional markets .
In the meantime it has not been possible to fulfil more beneficial plans such as the creation of a supra-national pan-European regulator .
I have also been urging confirmation of the original Commission proposal to retain the principle of ' one member , one vote ' for decision-making in the Council of European Energy Regulators .
This is very important for small EU Member States .
The attempt mainly of the big States such as France and Germany to push through a so-called weighted ratio of votes would disadvantage small countries .
For example , the principle of ' one member , one vote ' makes the Czech Republic and other countries better able to oppose efforts made by some large grid operators to dominate the market .
In this context I am pleased that my efforts have not been in vain and I consider this a success for the Czech Presidency .
Not everything concerning the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators was brought to a conclusion .
For example , the issue of its headquarters remains open .
Personally , I would be delighted if the agency could be located in Slovakia , which is interested in it .
However , the least acceptable solution would be the so-called provisional option under which the agency would remain in Brussels , which already has plenty of agencies - including some that were originally supposed to be there only on a temporary basis .
Madam President , from time to time I have heard the single electricity market on the island of Ireland held up as an example of such concepts in action .
Judged by what matters most to consumers - namely price - I have to say it is not a success .
When Minister Dodds launched it , he promised efficiency savings and enhanced competition to help minimise the wholesale costs of electricity , with the vast bulk of the benefits going to the consumer .
This rings rather hollow now , not least to the consumers from Northern Ireland who are in the public gallery listening to this debate .
In my view , part of the problem is an ineffective regulatory process that is too aligned to the industry and too excusing of continuing high prices , even when the price of oil has radically fallen .
Forward buying at the top of the market , giving sky-high prices today , barely raises a whimper from the regulator , leaving hard-pressed consumers without the relief that he should be providing .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we agreed that we wanted to ensure that citizens got greater security of supply with regard to energy , that they had sufficient energy and that they were able to buy energy at reasonable prices .
We did not agree as to the instruments with which we can best achieve this .
However , today we have a result that we can be proud of and that is constructive and discriminating , because the matter is complicated and there is no simple answer to it .
The solution is that we must ensure that more money is invested in the energy sector , in grids , in interconnectors and in new power stations .
This is a very important consideration and the necessary capital must be made available for it .
On the other hand , we must ensure that those companies providing the energy are monitored and that true competition is created .
I believe that it was the right solution to approve different models for the organisation of the enterprises , while at the same time ensuring that we have effective monitoring , a strong agency and solid cooperation between regulatory authorities and making sure that companies cannot simply do whatever they want to .
The fact that completely different provisions can be made - including tailored to particular national circumstances -is a clever solution .
If used correctly , it may also be a future-proof solution and one that will take us a significant step forward .
Moreover - and this is true - during our process and the discussions we had in the Member States , we could already see changes taking place .
The situation is no longer the same as it was at the start of the survey carried out by the Commission .
The data and facts are now already much more diverse and we have already made significant progress , but what we are about to adopt now will take us another step further .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have already said in a smaller round that this debate on the energy package is not necessarily an issue of black or red , left or right .
It is , however , full of ideology .
We have seen this again today .
I would like to bet my fellow Member from Germany , Mrs Harms , that in four years ' time we will not be tabling a fourth package , but will be managing with the instruments that we have : regulating the market , making the grids more accessible - things that have already been successful in the Federal Republic of Germany .
It is possible to see positive examples .
I am in favour of us simply keeping things as they are and using the instruments that have been given to us , ensuring that they are implemented .
Secondly , I would like to argue in favour of the newly founded Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators receiving and utilising definitive powers and applying best practice from the Member States .
If that happens then I have no doubt that we will achieve a good result .
( PL ) Madam President , a debate on the energy package for the internal electricity and gas market is very much needed .
In order to function well , the regulations should provide answers to several questions , including the following .
In the future will there be one common energy market in the EU , or will we have to coordinate national markets ?
What form of energy will provide , over the next 30 years , stable and sufficient supplies of energy at relatively low prices , because this is important for the EU economy and its citizens ?
Which sources of energy will best limit the greenhouse effect and reduce the costs of its control ?
Unfortunately , action taken to date in this area has not been transparent and convincing , which may produce unfavourable results for citizens and the economy over the next 15 years .
( PL ) Madam President , the third energy package was intended first and foremost to serve customers in our continent , and this has been achieved - the customer is the most important .
However , it was also necessary to take account of the fundamental interests of energy producers .
We were faced with two important problems .
Firstly , security of supply - and this has been achieved .
In my opinion , compared with the first and second packages a significant advance has been made .
Creation of a common market for energy is becoming a fact , and the principle of solidarity is today in evidence .
We can also , when this is required by our security needs , invest outside the borders of the EU .
Secondly , the principle of open competition in the European energy market .
This has not been fully achieved , and it may be necessary to think of further , more specific solutions .
However , from now on we must ensure that conditions in the European market for investors from third countries are the same , and not better , as for investors from Member States , and that our energy concerns can compete on a mutual basis and invest freely outside the European Union .
I would like to stress that the third package is a major political event , not only a technical and economic one , and we really should recognise it as a great success of the European Union .
( DE ) Madam President , I believe that in this case - I was shadow rapporteur for my Group for the gas sector - a compromise has been found that we can agree to for the other sectors too , because we did not look to the market in an ideological way , but thought in practical terms .
A common European market means , above all , that we give the national regulators more opportunity , more power , and that we establish common European criteria , so that no one regulator makes completely different decisions to the others and we do not have a situation where one is dependent on the government and the others are not and we have a European agency , which , in cooperation with the Commission , can really work towards forming a European market .
The second very important aspect is the fact that the role of the consumer is strengthened , something that in principle is reflected in several provisions , although I would have liked to have seen it in more .
It is about consumers having opportunities and rights and finding transparency in this important supply sector .
Both of these conditions are met and I am therefore voting in favour of this package .
( LV ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , last winter strikingly demonstrated the extent to which we are dependent on gas imports and how this dependency is used as a foreign policy instrument .
I would therefore like to emphasise , in particular , the need to develop , as quickly as possible , a united , open and effective internal market in natural gas in the European Union , producing a code of regulations for the network in order to ensure transparent cross-border access to supply networks , to enable long-term planning and development .
The long-term plan should include both gas supply networks and regional interconnections .
Improvements need to be made to the regulations in order to guarantee non-discriminatory access to infrastructure .
At the same time , I would like to lay particular stress on the need for the diversification of energy sources , through the development of genuine incentives for the more widespread introduction of renewable energy .
Since buildings account for 40 % of the European Union 's total energy consumption , an emphasis on the use of renewable energy in buildings is of prime importance for their energy efficiency , economy and insulation .
European Union , national and local government measures , as well as financial incentives , must be linked together in a single system . Thank you .
( SK ) Before proceeding to a number of aspects of this report I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Ţicău , and the other shadow rapporteurs for their cooperation in compiling the report .
My interest and the interest of my political group was for this report to provide good preconditions for a speedy final agreement between the Commission , the Council and Parliament on practical measures for improving the energy performance of buildings in the various Member States .
In this connection , I must say that I was critical of some of the proposals , which amount to pointless bureaucratic measures and excessively ambitious binding targets for individual Member States and which in the final analysis would seriously hinder the practical implementation of much-needed projects .
One significant aspect of this report is the agreement on a single harmonised methodology for calculating the most cost effective energy performance , which forms the basis for Member States to specify their minimum standards and which also respects regional variations in climate .
Finally I would also like to mention the aspect of financial support , which is essential for implementing measures to improve energy performance in the various Member States .
I agree with the proposal to establish a European fund in cooperation with the European Investment Bank which would create conditions for generating financial resources to create national or regional funds through the so-called leverage effect .
I also applaud the proposal to encourage better use of the Structural Funds for the purpose of improving energy performance in the various Member States .
In conclusion I would like to emphasise a very important fact , which relates to the speedy and careful examination of energy performance improvement measures in the various Member States .
The revival of the energy performance of buildings sector , except for a striking reduction ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FI ) Madam President , I would particularly like to thank the rapporteurs , who are talking over there .
This is an important stage that we have reached .
We are on the right path , although , as has been said , today nothing is enough .
We have a lot of work ahead of us .
Smart meters , the need to have a viable and open energy system , the need for genuine competition : these are the words and phrases we think are important , and that is also true of the rights of the consumer .
Energy poverty has become a serious issue .
The price of energy is rising ; it is an expensive commodity , and that is why people 's rights have to be guaranteed .
For that reason we are making energy a public service with this legislative package .
As far as my group , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , is concerned , it shows that we are defending the interests of consumers and therefore making the market as transparent as possible .
Let us make further headway along this route . Thank you .
( Applause )
Madam President , from the beginning of our negotiations on the Belet report we found that all the stakeholders - from the tyre manufacturers to the environmental lobbyists - were broadly in agreement on the need for this legislation .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the way he has dealt with this particular report and the way he has worked with the shadows .
I believe this legislation is needed right now .
It will give a boost to the car industry at what is a very difficult time .
I recently visited Michelin in Stoke and Jaguar Land Rover factories in my constituency , where I saw how research and development into green technology is already very much in place .
Any support the industry receives during the downturn must focus on the requirements to adapt to the environmental challenge .
Legislation such as this will ensure our manufacturers become world leaders in the technology we so urgently need .
It is a win-win proposal , because it will also help the consumer by providing much-needed clarity .
Tyres are not cheap , yet most individual buyers are forced into uniform purchases .
This information will help make the move towards goods that reduce emissions as well as noise pollution .
Through this proposal we can promote a truly competitive market in greener goods .
( RO ) Commissioner , the first benefit which citizens will enjoy in the new free market set-up is rooted in the very essence of the concept of democracy .
I am talking about freedom .
Efficiently operating markets which offer newcomers the opportunity to provide energy services to citizens will be a beneficial alternative for consumers .
In fact , their role will change from being passive beneficiaries of a service to becoming active players in the market .
For instance , they will be able to change supplier if the services are of poor quality , if the electricity supply is disrupted or if prices are too high .
The freedom of choice will enable consumers to become actively involved in the battle against climate change , as they will be able to choose suppliers which offer renewable energy with low carbon emissions .
The new package of measures will entail lower prices , innovative products and an increase in the quality of services .
Another way in which citizens will benefit after deregulation of the energy sector is through energy supply security .
I welcome the inclusion in the new legislation of special measures for protecting vulnerable consumers .
( SL ) The European Parliament has rightly put the consumer at the heart of its negotiations , because what the internal market needs is a consumer with more rights and one with access to clear information .
The consumer must have the option of choosing his or her service provider , which is why he or she also needs a smart meter .
I am pleased that we have reached agreement on this extensive and professionally demanding dossier .
However , I think that the negotiated compromise on ownership unbundling still permits major organisational differences between electricity and gas markets in the various Member States .
I also hope that , with the mechanisms and provisions contained in this package , such as greater independence for national regulators , we will manage to overcome these differences and re-establish a single market for electricity and gas .
( PL ) Madam President , for the success of an undertaking like the creation of a uniform energy space , common and coordinated investments in the energy infrastructure are essential .
A key task is to increase the generating capacity of European power stations and develop the cross-border network .
At the same time the good of the environment and the guidelines of the climate and energy package should be kept in mind .
Another challenge which appears when harmonising the EU energy market is the matter of ensuring security of supplies of energy sources from outside the EU .
For economic reasons as well as for reasons of security it is necessary to strive for diversification of supplies and increase efforts to develop the European energy system .
Finally , there is a fear that opening the energy market fully to competition may be a danger to the poorest people of the EU , who often are not able to pay their bills regularly .
It is worth considering at this point possible instruments which would guarantee that such people will not have their electricity cut off .
( BG ) Madam President , I was the shadow rapporteur for the gas market on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
I believe you will all agree that the biggest achievement of the Third Energy Package is the protection afforded to Europe 's consumers and citizens .
This is the first time that such texts have been drafted clearly .
I would like to focus particular attention on the definition of fuel poverty and on making it impossible to cut off supplies , as well as on the possibility of switching suppliers free of charge and on easy-to-understand , transparent agreements .
However , the future of this legislation lies in providing even stronger guarantees to consumers , protection measures for vulnerable people , as well as in greater transparency and comparability in terms of contractual relations .
The next basic question facing us MEPs will be about prices and measures for regulating them at a time when they are steadily rising .
I believe that this legislation will continue in this direction in the future .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate you on this package in particular .
It represents a major step forward for our citizens in Europe .
You will all feel the effects in your own purses and your own accounts .
It is also a major step forward for small and medium-sized enterprises , because they need to become more competitive , particularly now during the economic and financial crisis , and this type of energy package is the right approach to dealing with this .
The fact that we will have a European regulator to help each Member State 's enterprises to be treated on an equal basis in the other 26 Member States and that the energy suppliers on the other 26 markets will have new opportunities is an important aspect of this regulation , resulting in the creation of completely new opportunities .
With regard to the legislation on passive and active houses I would also like to say that our careful attention to the efficiency of buildings will hopefully result in the creation of new jobs in this area in the future .
Mr Stolojan , since you have been such a presence in this debate , even though I told you that the number has been exceeded , I think that your responsible approach and your presence should be rewarded , and so , as an exception , I am giving you the floor for one minute .
( RO ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate all the rapporteurs for the excellent job they have done .
I am sure that we are all wondering why we still do not have a single market for electricity or a single market for natural gas .
This is where I think that every Member State which has not yet fulfilled the provisions of the European directive should do so .
Secondly , I welcome the decision to set up the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators and I would like to advise the European Parliament that Romania has applied to provide a venue for hosting this agency .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I promise that this will be very short .
I am satisfied with the package that is to be adopted .
There is no ideal legislation .
This is legislation that is being adopted by debate and through compromises .
We started very much divided , but at the end of the day the Council adopted the proposal practically with unanimity .
In Parliament 's Committee on Industry , Energy and Research there was a huge majority in favour of this compromise .
That means that we have got it right .
I know that now there is a lot of work to do in terms of implementation , follow-up and the Agency 's needs , but we really have provided the basic instruments for our citizens .
Thank you very much for the work done .
We can be really proud of it .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I would like to thank colleagues once again for their cooperation .
I would also like to thank Bethan Roberts and René Tammist who have been a great help in preparing this report .
This is my swan song after 15 years in the European Parliament , and I am delighted that we have made such a significant improvement in the energy markets on behalf of the European public .
It is far from perfect but it is definitely a step forward .
I think that the energy crisis will become more acute in future years , so getting the right market framework in place , and creating the right kind of incentives for the right kind of investment , is crucial .
We need an estimated EUR 1 trillion worth of investment in the markets to stop the lights from going out in future .
But there is a huge amount more to do .
You know that there are 12 countries in the European Union where one company dominates 70 % of the electricity market .
What we have at the moment is the worst of both worlds .
We think we have competition , but what we have is the massive power of very large companies dominating certain markets .
It will require action on the part of national regulatory authorities and competition authorities to make sure that we do not continue in this way .
The real challenge in future will be implementation .
Let us not forget that there are many EU laws that already exist in the energy markets , and it is precisely because these laws were not being respected that the revision of this law needed to take place .
Whether we need a fourth package or not will depend on the Commission ensuring implementation and good policing of these new laws by national regulatory authorities and competition authorities .
So let us see a bit of action from the Commission , and also from the national regulatory authorities .
rapporteur . - Madam President , can I first of all say that my colleague Mr Vidal-Quadras sends his apologies ?
He is not able to take up his slot .
He has urgent business elsewhere , but he asked me to say - which was very nice of him - that the two of us agree that I will speak on behalf of our group .
I would like to pick up one or two points that have come up in the debate .
The first is the colleague who expressed concern that we will end up with a concentration of power in very few utilities .
Should that happen , the Commission possesses powers under the competition rules to address that , and we have precedent in other parts of the world , including the United States , where they have tackled entrenched monopoly or dominant market power .
So that is the ultimate resort , should this legislation fail .
Should we come back for a fourth package ?
I have to remind the Commissioner that I urged upon him caution in embarking upon the third package : that it would be better to wait and see what the second package achieved once it was implemented .
I think now we must allow time for this package to be transposed : to implement it and see how it works before deciding whether anything is needed .
I have to say that my disappointment about our lack of success in tackling ownership unbundling is offset by my optimism about the possibility of the Agency imaginatively using the powers that we have given it to deal with the situation , and I would like to thank my other colleague who demands more power for the energy regulators .
Market forces are already moving in this direction .
Two German utilities are divesting themselves of their transmission systems because they have realised there is better value in doing that .
Finally , could I restate the case for competition ?
It means better value and service for consumers , and it means a more efficient use of resources .
That is why it is a good thing to do .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a very strong feeling has emerged from this joint debate : great satisfaction at having created , in the shape of this third package from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , a package that is important for European citizens .
It will naturally not be the last package , because - as you know - there is a huge impetus towards the use of alternative sources of energy , such as renewables and nuclear energy .
Over the next 10 , 15 or 20 years , however , it will certainly provide for the demand and need for energy and will provide for , and of course protect , consumers , particularly the most vulnerable ones .
I believe that Mrs Morgan , myself and all the other Members involved have played a significant role in the protection of vulnerable consumers , giving considerable powers to both the national and regional authorities , which can , at times of crisis , make changes - I am not saying that they can give energy for free - but they will certainly be able to make changes and permit a continuous supply of energy .
The other fundamental point is this : that Europe 's population is unaware of all that we have done at the Commission , the Council and in Parliament on this package , which is of crucial importance for energy consumers - you saw what happened last winter .
I think there is nothing worse than not letting those who benefit from a major project know about it .
I think that the task that should fall to the Commission , the Council and Parliament , even before we concern ourselves with the application of this package , is to let consumers know that the package exists , let them know what has been done for them , on their behalf and , once again , for them .
rapporteur . - Madam President , like my colleagues I would like to say that , although it is not perfect , the third energy package is a very good basis for developing our common market , especially in gas , and for enhancing gas security .
For countries like mine , which is a small country in the European Union , to reach a compromise on ownership unbundling is very important , because it gives us an assurance that we can still ensure our energy security within the context of the whole package of the enhanced rules , transparency , the third-country clause , and all the other components of the package that will give us the opportunity to put the issue of energy security at the forefront .
The package also gives an assurance to consumers that they can pursue their rights , and it creates a better competitive framework for the development of the energy markets and for their efficient functioning .
This package depends on implementation , as my colleague Eluned Morgan has just said , and I do not believe that the fourth package is the solution .
Rather , the solution is exact implementation and solidarity among Member States in creating the market , especially by developing new initiatives for regional cooperation , especially for countries most vulnerable to energy supplies and to countries that , for the moment , are part of energy islands .
With regard to the labelling of energy-efficient car tyres , a measure that ended up in this package , I should like to add a word about the costs .
This is a measure that is of hardly any cost to the tyre industry , and therefore also to the consumer .
The cost to the manufacturer has been estimated at less than EUR 0.01 per tyre , which is negligible , in case anyone were to feel inclined to voice any criticism .
Any added cost resulting from the purchase of energy-efficient car tyres will , according to calculations , be recovered within eight months .
This is when both the car driver and the environment will start feeling the true benefits .
Having said that , I should like to stress the fact that it is essential that this measure be applied equally across all Member States and also to all manufacturers in the EU and beyond .
That is why we would prefer to see a regulation instead of a directive .
In conclusion , we realise that , whilst there are still differences of opinion among some groups in this Parliament on a number of aspects , we hope that this measure will be endorsed by a large majority tomorrow .
At cruising speed , we will , with this simple measure , be able to save a volume of CO2 emissions equivalent to removing one million passenger cars .
It goes without saying , therefore , that we should introduce this measure sooner rather than later .
I should like to finish off with a word of thanks to the shadow rapporteurs , Mrs Chambris from the European Commission and Mr Sousa de Jesus from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for our excellent working relationship .
Ladies and gentlemen , the proposal amending the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive is one of the most important measures which Parliament has adopted , in terms of both increasing European citizens ' quality of life and promoting the EU 's economic recovery .
Europe 's citizens are expecting action and concrete solutions to the problems and very specific needs which they have .
I personally believe that an increase of up to 15 % in the European Regional Development Fund rate , which can be used by Member States to fund energy performance in residential buildings , is a necessity .
This would offer Member States greater flexibility and the opportunity to use the mid-term review next year on the way the Structural Funds are used so that they can redefine the operational programmes accordingly , with the aim of achieving better absorption of the Structural Funds .
I would like to emphasise that this directive has very great potential for creating new jobs : roughly 500 000 jobs could be created at European level , with major implications for the regional or national labour market .
Commissioner , I hope that you will continue to support this , including the introduction of a minimum rate from the European Regional Development Fund for energy efficiency in buildings , in the future at least .
I would like to thank once again the shadow rapporteurs and staff from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and also fellow rapporteurs who have supported us and with whom I have enjoyed excellent cooperation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 22 April 2009 .
The vote on the report by Mrs Ţicău will take place on Thursday 23 April 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Not very long ago , moving into a home made of prefabricated concrete was seen by many millions of people as a move up the social ladder and an improvement in standard of living .
Cheap energy meant that no one worried about heating costs .
Today nearly 100 million people live in prefabricated buildings .
I would like to ask the European Commission to give extensive aid from European Union funds to the modernisation of these buildings and entire housing estates , especially in Central and Eastern Europe .
Money should be found for this purpose as part of the mid-term review of the 2007-2013 Financial Framework .
The existing limit on housing expenditure of 3 % of the European Regional Development Fund allocation is decidedly too low .
The large-scale modernisation and revitalisation of prefabricated buildings and housing estates in the EU will reduce expenditure on heating , raise the standard of living , create tens of thousands of jobs and reduce energy consumption .
This will translate directly into the kind of reduction in greenhouse gas emissions which will bring us closer to one of the 3x20 objectives .
Support for the modernisation of existing prefabricated buildings should be an assignment for the European Parliament in the new term .
Demand for this type of service can play a large part in overcoming the current economic crisis and unemployment , as well as in the fight against poverty .
in writing . - Energy costs are growing at an alarming rate , contributing to a substantial increase in energy-related poverty across the EU .
However , the market price of energy is only one side of the problem .
There is a significant , additional financial burden on consumers due to energy market inefficiencies and distortions .
For example , in Malta consumers and businesses saw an exorbitant increase in their energy bills when the price of oil was at its high , but there was no decrease even when the price of oil dropped more than half .
What we need is an EU-wide policy to protect consumers and SMEs from pricing malpractices carried out by public utility companies .
One solution may be a national independent regulator which would create the necessary checks and balances against any abusive or non transparent conduct by private traders and / or government owned entities in respect of any price increases on public utilities like gas , electricity , water , airport charges and others .
This should be implemented through improving the existing E.U. legislation and directives involving consumer protection especially to ensure :
Better standard of transparency and rationality governing price increases as well as better access and information regarding consumer rights .
Less costs and less bureaucracy for the consumer who has a genuine case in order to seek redress .
In our view , it is of major significance that the European Parliament can already approve the Third Energy Package at second reading .
The new regulation may boost competition in the EU electricity and gas market .
However , we cannot proceed with adopting the proposal without mentioning that the final regulation has lost a great deal in terms of its ambition , compared to the Commission 's original proposal .
During the package 's negotiation , the subject of separating production and system operations generated the most heated debates .
The final outcome of this will have a fundamental impact on the EU 's energy market structure .
In my view , the compromise agreed by the Member States will not result in transparent regulation in this area , given that Member States can also apply three different separation models .
This will also result in major differences breaking up the EU energy market .
At the same time , I welcome that the Council 's compromise reflects Parliament 's numerous consumer protection proposals .
Measures such as the option to switch supplier within three weeks , more detailed billing information and the simplification of compensation procedures will make the benefits of market deregulation feel tangible to a larger number of citizens .
Another important development is that the new regulation will make it more difficult for third countries to attempt to purchase energy .
Thanks to this fact too , the pending adoption of the energy package will mark an important step along the path towards creating a common EU energy policy .
The cost and reliability of energy supplies are key factors not only for the competitiveness of the EU but particularly for the well-being of its citizens .
For this reason the European Parliament has placed the consumer at the centre of its third energy package .
In order for consumers to benefit from this important legislation , Parliament has revised and improved the directive on the energy performance of buildings , which accounts for around 40 % of EU energy consumption .
Planners and building inspectors will receive appropriate guidance from this directive .
I attach great importance to the method for calculating optimal cost and specifying minimum economic efficiency requirements for the structural components of a building 's thermal insulation and services , as well as the application of these calculations both to new and existing buildings .
The targets for buildings with zero net energy consumption constitute a significant part of the reworked directive .
I welcome the creation of a European fund for energy efficiency and renewable energy to support the implementation of this directive .
Up until now , limited use of the Structural Funds has been authorised for the energy performance of buildings only in the new EU-12 .
That option is now extended to all Member States .
At the same time the maximum share of ERDF resources in these projects is increased from 3 % to 15 % .
In order to ensure successful implementation of the directive it is essential for Member States to consult with representatives of local and regional authorities on all aspects arising from the directive and also with consumer protection groups .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs who worked on the drafts of the energy package , especially Mrs Morgan , who did a great deal of important work in the area of consumer protection .
I am particularly glad that the new package also devotes attention to the question of energy poverty .
Member States that have not yet done so , including my home country , Estonia , should prepare a state action plan to fight energy poverty , in order to reduce the number of people suffering from energy poverty .
This is especially important in the present economic conditions .
There is a serious need to deal with this question in Estonia , because heating bills have increased considerably in recent years .
Direct support to less well-off consumers , as is provided in the United Kingdom , is one important measure , although the energy efficiency of buildings could also be improved , and that would be particularly effective in Estonia .
There are many challenges facing Europe connected with short- , medium- and long-term supply and demand for energy .
We , the European Community , have set ourselves a very ambitious task .
By the year 2020 we are going to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 20 % and energy consumption by 20 % .
In connection with this I think we should pay particular attention to the matter of the energy performance of buildings , since they account for as much as 40 % of our total energy consumption .
In saying this , I would like to express my support for the rapporteur .
I think that we should organise an information campaign with the objective of making citizens aware of the possibility of saving money by insulating buildings , and we should also appeal to the governments of all the countries of the Community to make subsidies available for this initiative .
We should draw up a list of uniform minimum building insulation standards for the whole EU .
I also support extending use of the Structural Funds to include work connected with the energy efficiency of buildings in all countries of the Community , and increasing the amount which can be allocated from the European Regional Development Fund for projects in this area from 3 % to 15 % .
Amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 717 / 2007 ( mobile telephone networks ) and Directive 2002 / 21 / EC ( electronic communications ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Vălean , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 717 / 2007 on roaming on public mobile telephone networks within the Community and Directive 2002 / 21 / EC on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services - C6-0333 / 2008 - .
Madam President , Commissioner Reding , ladies and gentlemen , it is rare for a liberal to promote intervention in the market through regulating prices , even if it only involves setting a maximum limit .
However , in the case of mobile phone roaming tariffs , this action is necessary , and can only be carried out collectively , at European Union level .
It is necessary because excessively high tariffs are raising obstacles preventing the freedom of movement and communication between Europe 's citizens .
Removing these obstacles is one of the European Union 's fundamental objectives and one of my personal objectives as an MEP .
This is why I have assumed the responsibility of being the rapporteur for this regulation , as well as for the European Parliament report adopted at the beginning of the month concerning the administrative and legal barriers raised by Member States preventing the freedom of movement of European citizens .
The current regulation is necessary , for instance , for small businessmen on a business trip who need to speak to colleagues at home to resolve a problem .
It is important for journalists sending a news report via email directly from the scene of the event .
It is also important for young people sending text messages to their boyfriends and girlfriends .
Finally , it is important for workers abroad wanting to hear their children 's voice on the phone .
All these European citizens have paid and are still frequently paying three or four times more to use a mobile phone , simply because they are a couple of miles away from their own country , even though they are within the Community 's borders .
Thanks to the regulation which we are going to adopt tomorrow , excessive prices will be eliminated .
The maximum limits set by the regulation still allow operators to achieve a considerable profit margin and to compete while offering lower prices .
We are faced with a complex problem linked to the fragmentation and operation of the mobile phone market in Europe .
When consumers come to choose a mobile phone operator , they look first and foremost at national charges or the price offered for a new mobile phone make , but scrutinise less the roaming charges .
When they cross the border into another EU Member State , they are subject to these roaming charges , even when they are only receiving calls .
The only option for consumers is to choose not to communicate by mobile phone .
Competition among operators does not work from this perspective .
The actual operator from the country of origin must pay the operator from the network being visited for carrying the signal .
Some countries , such as tourist destinations , receive large numbers of visitors during a short period of time , while others have more citizens travelling abroad .
This means that there is an imbalance between supply and demand , hence the reason for the high gross tariffs even among operators .
Furthermore , in some countries the cost of installing and operating mobile phone networks is higher .
In addition , smaller operators or new operators who have joined the market have shown that they are often subject to discriminatory prices from large pan-European operators .
Ultimately , it is always the consumer who pays .
The regulation which we are going to adopt tomorrow is a short-term solution .
We cannot regulate prices indefinitely , as this affects innovation and may even affect competitiveness .
This is why the regulation stipulates that the European Commission must analyse different means of regulating the market .
Some of these means are even suggested by the regulation .
In two or three years we will be able to debate more options when we have more information available to us .
I hope that we will then be able to implement a legislative framework for having competitive roaming tariffs in the long term .
Apart from this aspect , Parliament has improved the regulation , in my view , from many perspectives .
We have reduced the maximum gross roaming tariffs for transferring data to 50 cents per megabyte in order to encourage the use of this service and proper competition in the sector .
We have made guidelines more transparent on advising customers about roaming mobile Internet access .
We have also made the provisions intended to limit monthly bills for roaming data transfer to EUR 50 significantly more flexible for anyone wanting this feature .
Text messages charged on a roaming tariff , which are sent once the consumer enters a foreign network , will also include a reference to the unique emergency number 112 .
We have reduced the maximum tariffs for calls received and made , while maintaining a profit margin for operators .
We have also banned operators who continue the practice of charging customers abroad for someone simply leaving a voice mail for them .
I would like to end by thanking for all their efforts during such a short period of time my fellow Members from the other political groups , Commissioner Reding and her staff , Ambassador Reinišová and representatives of the Czech and French presidencies , the Council , and not forgetting our own staff in the European Parliament , all working together so that millions of citizens can enjoy acceptable roaming tariffs this summer .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I could not agree more with the rapporteur , whom I would like to congratulate on the swift and efficient work done .
We are facing here an obstacle to freedom of movement because , if you punish citizens on their phone bill when they cross a border , that is frankly not the internal market we strive for and that we wish to construct .
So in order to give this freedom of movement to our citizens we have to get rid of those obstacles .
Those obstacles concern a lot of people .
There are roughly 150 million citizens in the European Union who use their mobile phone at least once per year for roaming while they are abroad , and they have to pay the price .
It is the students , the travellers and the holidaymakers , but it is also the cross-border workers , the journalists and the businesspeople who are handicapped because of very high charges for communication .
That is why I thank the European Parliament for having so swiftly responded to the Commission 's proposal .
I think we have managed to get a proposal put into practice in the shortest ever time in the European Union - only seven months from proposal to implementation .
That is a first of its kind , and it is a first of its kind in the interests of the European consumers .
I would just like to say a few words about what the first roaming package has achieved .
On voice roaming it has achieved a 60 % lower price for the citizen and 30 % more traffic for the industry .
The industry has also - and this is interesting - seen a steady rise in the penetration rate of the mobile phones used by citizens .
We now have an average penetration rate in Europe of 119 % .
That is an absolute world record and , with the prices for roaming going down , that allows freedom to those citizens who utilise their mobile phone .
It also gives good money to the industry because their traffic is rising continuously .
At the same time , national prices are going down .
Since the Barroso Commission took things in hand , domestic prices for mobile communication have decreased by roughly 35 % .
That is as an answer to those who say that , if we bring down the cost of roaming , national prices go up .
That is not the case .
The statistics show just the contrary .
Now we are going a step further : firstly , of course , on voice roaming .
I think it is very good that we are continuing to bring down the caps so that the competition of the offers can take place under the caps .
It is very important that we add to this SMS roaming , because every year in the European Union 2.5 billion text messages are sent .
The value of the revenue from this for the industry is roughly EUR 800 million .
Now , who is sending the SMSs ?
Mainly our young people : 77 % of young people up to the age of 24 use text messages when they are abroad because it is easier and cheaper for them .
So they are punished when they have to pay an extraordinarily high price with regard to the cost to the operator when they are roaming .
Good : we are bringing those prices down so that text messaging will become a normal thing if you are at home or if you are in a neighbouring country .
So consumers will greatly benefit from this .
The reduction - which will be voted by Parliament tomorrow - means 60 % for text messaging .
Concerning the per-second billing for roaming calls : simply said , do not make the people pay for what they have not utilised , only make them pay for what they have really utilised .
We will also bring today 's hidden charge of 24 % down , so that you pay only for what you have really consumed .
And for data roaming , where we believe that this is a future development .
But , whilst we want to have a future development so that you can download , wherever you are , a film , a newspaper article or a photograph to send to your friends , today you have shocking bills .
I have received copies of bills where people have been in another country for three or four days and have to pay several thousands of euros just because they have downloaded their favourite television show or newspaper articles , which they are used to utilising .
This will stop now , also because in the new regulation there will be a cut-off limit facility which , on 1 July 2010 , will become a default limit to apply automatically in order to protect our consumers .
So it is a great day for Europe and a great day for European consumers .
Thank you to Parliament , which has acted very swiftly .
I think the people outside will understand that this Parliament works for the citizen .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - Mr President , can I start off by first of all thanking the Committee on the Internal Market 's shadow rapporteurs from all the groups , their staff and advisers ?
I think that in the Internal Market Committee we can all be proud that we have reached a consensus on increased transparency and ways to finally eliminate the problem of bill shock .
Bill shock was not good for the reputation of the mobile operators but more importantly , bill shock was not good for consumers .
However , when it comes to price capping , I still have some concerns .
We need to ask which consumers will benefit from the Soviet economics of price caps .
Given that at most only 35 % of consumers actually roam and that the figure for regular roamers is much lower and , as the Commissioner herself admitted , given that this legislation will mostly benefit a narrow group of privileged consumers such as Commission officials , MEPs , lobbyists and businessmen , let us hope that we are not robbing the poor to pay for cheaper phone calls for the rich .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by congratulating both the rapporteur , Mrs Vălean , and the rapporteur for the first regulation on roaming , Mr Rübig , on the excellent cooperation which we had in the Committee on Culture and Education , for which I acted as draftsman , on a matter which is naturally of interest to 150 million consumers and to the telecommunications industry .
Following the successful application of the first regulation two years ago , the European Parliament is being called upon to adopt a revised regulation covering the prices of text messages and data .
I personally should like to comment on the benefits of the new regulation , especially for business travellers .
Media professionals , for example , make a great deal of use of the function for downloading files to their mobile telephone .
The revised regulation will act as a safety valve against the excessive and uncontrolled charges imposed to date by mobile telephone companies , as the commissioner said .
That is why I consider that a vote in favour of the report will be yet another victory for Parliament in the fight to protect consumers and yet another big step which will breathe new life into the internal market .
Finally , with consent between the institutions , I trust and hope that this regulation will enter into force in the summer , so that travellers will be protected from any obscure charges and overcharging by mobile telephone companies .
Thank you , Mr President .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Vălean , in particular , but also Commissioner Reding , who showed great commitment in the negotiations for the Roaming II Regulation .
I believe that these negotiations and , of course , also the objective of bringing the national prices and the prices that we pay in the other European countries onto the same level , are an important step forward .
It is also good that the national regulatory authorities are now also responsible for roaming and will therefore take over the control and monitoring roles , which will quite simply provide us with more transparency .
Transparency is vital to the functioning of a market .
Up to now there has been a lack of transparency in several areas , but there has also been blatant market abuse .
It is not right for up to a thousand times the amount to be demanded for data roaming , as is often the case .
The per second-based billing for inbound calls will in future also bring definite progress and result in cost benefits for European citizens .
Mr President , it is necessary to intervene when the market is not functioning .
We have broken a taboo once again : the free market is not sacred and is even less so in times of crisis , when the pockets of European consumers are emptier than ever .
This agreement , intended to set limits on the excessive costs of calls and text messages when roaming , benefits the consumer , benefits communication between European countries and benefits a useful and positive Europe .
Millions of European citizens ' telephone bills could go down , or , on the other hand , just the opposite may happen : given that a text message would only cost 11 cents , people could be texting all day long and end up spending the same amount .
The transfer measures that achieve a charge per second after the first thirty seconds are particularly positive .
The maximum costs for text messages and for sending data could have been somewhat lower but we have made this compromise for the sake of reaching an agreement .
I would like to say thank you to Commissioner Reding , to Mrs Vălean , and to the rapporteurs of all the groups , because we have provided a fine example of European Union action in times of crisis .
So we can end on a happy note , which is very important , especially before the elections .
Now I call Mrs Ţicău to speak under the catch-the-eye procedure .
( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate my fellow Members on the work they have done and the report they have compiled .
The European Parliament is definitely working in the interest of Europe 's citizens .
I also recall that during the previous debate two years ago on reducing mobile phone roaming tariffs we had a very wide-ranging discussion .
I am pleased that we did not have any differing points of view on this occasion .
In fact , we have all quickly adopted this tariff reduction .
I would like to say that I feel it is very important to continue reducing existing mobile phone charges and by larger amounts , for both outgoing and incoming calls .
However , reducing text message charges is especially important .
In fact , we are not doing this only for the younger generation , but for anyone who travels in the European Union .
This measure is actually , on the one hand , a means of protection for consumers , but at the same time , it is a good example of the way in which the market can be regulated for the benefit of Europe 's citizens .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the mobile telephone and the Internet have become symbols of mobility and innovation .
Citizens should , therefore , have extensive and easy access to telecommunications services .
Despite the many appeals from the commissioner , prices of SMS roaming services are still on average significantly higher and significantly exceed domestic prices for those services .
We must strive to change this situation .
In this regard I value highly the work of the Commission and the commissioner .
The situation with the Internet is similar .
Why does using the Internet from a mobile phone have to be a luxury ?
We are all in favour of ensuring the widest possible access to the Internet .
A reduction in the price of data roaming services would certainly help in this regard .
This is important , because this matter in large measure concerns the youngest group in our society .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am pleased with the direction in which we are moving .
I am referring to the radical price reductions in voice roaming calls and Internet access .
This is the first step , and I think that others will follow .
These are factors which may accelerate realisation of the Lisbon Strategy .
This is important for the education process and for the young generation .
It is important that Internet facilities be accessible to people who are relatively poor and those with low incomes .
We are moving in the right direction .
This news will certainly be received gladly .
I would like to thank the Commission .
( SL ) I should like to extend my sincere congratulations to the rapporteur and the commissioner .
Commissioner , a few years ago I told you that I did not like being punished for making calls abroad .
I did not expect to see improvements to my status as a consumer so soon and from this directive , in particular .
This directive is evidence that the European Union is able to use its common policies to forge a closer relationship with its citizens by benefiting them in the place where they feel it the most - in their pockets .
This directive means more Europe , greater competitiveness and a single economy and , for me , it is one of the key achievements of the Commission 's and Parliament 's current mandates .
The only thing I want now is for us to act in the same spirit and pay as much attention to the consumer in the next mandate , too .
My congratulations once again and thank you very much .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like principally to thank the Members who have done a wonderful job .
First , of course , the rapporteur , Mrs Vălean , but also the rapporteurs of the other committees , the shadow rapporteurs and the spokespersons of the groups .
They have made it possible , in just seven months , for a very important proposal for the free movement of citizens and the bringing down of excessive charges to become a reality .
I think it is a great moment for the internal market .
It is a great moment which shows to citizens that MEPs are taking them seriously .
If you would just permit , I would like nevertheless to say - with all due respect to Mr Kamall , for example - that when the market does not function , it is for the political leadership to intervene .
I would like somebody here in this House to explain to me how the market can be said to be functioning when the cost to operators for transferring a text message from one country to another is less than 11 cents , while the average consumer has to pay more than 28 cents .
Then something is not going well .
So if we now fix a cap of 11 cents I think there is ample room for manoeuvre ; there is ample room for competition to develop .
Like most of you in this Chamber I would have wished the market to have functioned , so that we did not need to do this .
Well let us hope that we will not need to do so again in the future , and let us hope that after this decision the market really will function in the interests of the industry , in the interests of the citizen , in the interests of free movement , and in the interests of the internal market where every citizen can travel without being punished by a telephone bill .
Reducing roaming charges is an absolute necessity .
We would all agree that the market is not working .
How we should regulate it is a matter which we can still discuss .
The Commission 's proposal to set some maximum tariffs is the matter we are discussing now .
Is this the best instrument available ?
We do not know , but it is the only option available to us at the moment .
I hope that we can find alternative methods in the future .
I would like to say a final word to this industry as a whole .
We must not allow the perception to be conveyed that the mobile phone sector ruthlessly exploits consumers .
This kind of idea could be dangerous because this industry is successful , which is reflected in the creation of jobs , significant contributions to budgets and technological innovation .
This is why I believe it is important for those of us regulating the market not to feel completely satisfied with the job we have done and to aim at making further improvements in order to achieve a long-term beneficial impact .
I would like to thank all those involved in this report and I hope that we will discuss the same topic on another occasion .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 22 April 2009 .
Budget discharges 2007 , ( Vote will be held on Thursday ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mr Audy , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2007 ( SEC ( 2008 ) 2359 - C6-0415 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Liberadzki , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Seventh , Eighth and Ninth European Development Funds for the financial year 2007 - C6-0296 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Casaca , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2007 , Section I : European Parliament ( C6-0416 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Søndergaard , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2007 , Section IV : Court of Justice ( C6-0418 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Søndergaard , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2007 , Section V : Court of Auditors ( C6-0419 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Søndergaard , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2007 , Section VI : European Economic and Social Committee ( C6-0420 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Søndergaard , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2007 , Section VII : Committee of the Regions ( C6-0421 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Søndergaard , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2007 , Section VIII : European Ombudsman ( C6-0423 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Søndergaard , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2007 , Section IX : European Data Protection Supervisor ( C6-0424 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Training Foundation for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0437 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Network and Information Security Agency for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0442 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Police College for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0444 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of Eurojust for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0436 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Medicines Agency for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0435 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Aviation Safety Agency for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0439 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European GNSS Supervisory Authority for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0446 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Railway Agency for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0443 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0445 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Maritime Safety Agency for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0438 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Agency for Reconstruction for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0429 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0441 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Environment Agency for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0432 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Food Safety Authority for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0440 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0428 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0433 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0431 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0430 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0427 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0434 / 2008 - ,
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Community Fisheries Control Agency for the financial year 2007 ( C6-0447 / 2008 - , and
by Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on financial management and control of EU agencies .


Mr President , Mr Kallas , ladies and gentlemen , my first words will be to thank you , Mr Kallas , and your colleagues at the Commission , for the attention you have paid to the parliamentary work linked to the discharge procedure for implementation of the budget of the European Commission and of the executive agencies for 2007 .
I extend these thanks to the administrative services .
I should also like to pay tribute to the huge effort made by the European Court of Auditors under the leadership of its president , Vítor Caldeira .
It had limited resources with which to tackle the scale of the task to be accomplished .
I would like to say a few words about the context of this discharge .
2007 was the first year of the new 2007-2013 multiannual financial framework in which a number of new rules were implemented .
2007 was also the year of the last discharge procedure of the current Commission , which , at the start of its mandate , had promised - you will recall , Commissioner , it was through your president - to obtain a positive statement of assurance from the European Court of Auditors .
However , for 14 years the Court has issued a negative statement on the legality and regularity of underlying transactions for the vast majority of spending areas , regarding them , to varying degrees , as being significantly affected by errors , even though - and we should be pleased about this - administrative expenditure and the consolidated accounts are the subject of a positive statement of assurance .
Lastly , 2007 was the year of the last discharge vote before the European Parliament elections .
In this particular context , and aside from the numerous reservations that appear in the draft resolution concerning the management of Community funds , my aim , in my report , was to try to analyse the discharge procedure and to make a contribution on this difficult path that must lead us to a positive statement of assurance , whilst being fully aware of the limits of the exercise .
That is why I am eager to find out what stance the Commission , the political groups and my fellow Members who are due to speak take on this issue .
With the work on this matter now completed , I have mixed feelings : on the one hand , I firmly believe that things are improving , but not enough and too slowly , and , on the other , there is the fact that , at the same time , it is untenable to remain in a situation where the European Court of Auditors has not issued a positive statement of assurance for 14 years and where the European Parliament votes on discharge regardless .
Europeans are going to end up thinking that Parliament is not performing its monitoring role correctly .
That is why I propose that , given the seriousness of the situation , an interinstitutional conference be organised without delay .
The latter would involve all those who play a part in the management and monitoring of Community funds , and would be used to start off a comprehensive discussion enabling us to envisage the reforms needed to obtain a positive statement of assurance as soon as possible .
I am keen to hear the reasons that are prompting certain political groups to oppose this discussion .
Special attention must also be paid to the role of Member States that manage approximately 80 % of the Union 's budget .
The fact is , it is in this context of shared management that we have the largest number of problems .
While I am on this subject , I regret that the Council 's bench is empty ; the Czech Republic 's current political difficulties are not enough to explain the Council 's inconsistent political presence , unless we are to interpret this absence and this silence as indifference or , worse still , disinterest .
In relation to the report on shared management by the Member States , I would emphasise the role not only of national management declarations , but also of annual summaries , which are so many elements enabling us to progress towards a positive DAS .
Furthermore , and pursuant to Article 248 of the Treaty , I propose that cooperation between national audit bodies and the European Court of Auditors be stepped up as regards shared-management controls .
I suggest that we examine the possibility of national audit bodies , in their capacity as independent external auditors , and with due regard for international audit standards , issuing national audit certificates for the management of Community funds .
These certificates would be submitted to Member States ' governments with a view to being produced during the discharge process in accordance with an appropriate interinstitutional procedure to be introduced .
Lastly , Mr President , I should like to point out my astonishment that the consolidated annual accounts were presented with net assets in the region of EUR 58 billion , and I propose that consideration be given to establishing a pension fund in order to externalise the EUR 33.5 billion in commitments to staff .

To conclude , I feel that it is time to reform our system , and I sincerely believe that this reform should hinge on an in-depth and sincere dialogue among all those involved with the budget .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are talking about the European Development Fund , which concerns African , Caribbean and Pacific States .
From our point of view these countries are not standard regions , they are not conventional states and they do not present typical problems .
In terms of implementation of the fund , in 2007 we saw an increase in payments and in commitments , which also means an increase in efficiency .
This is undoubtedly a positive point , and I would like to start with this .
The fund consisted of two parts : the part managed by the European Commission and the part which was under the control of the European Investment Bank .
The part managed by the European Commission is the part which is the subject of this debate on discharge , whereas the part managed by the EIB is for the time being excluded from the discharge , and I would like to come back to this matter later .
Our debate is based on the position of the European Court of Auditors .
The Tribunal stated clearly that the transactions underlying the revenue and commitments for the year 2007 are , taken as a whole , legal and regular , but drew attention to the high fiduciary risk with regard to budget support resulting from the Commission 's ' dynamic interpretation ' of the eligibility criteria .
The audit revealed , however , a material level of errors and found - and here we are in agreement - that a rapid improvement in the area of supervision and control is essential .
Such possibilities exist , and we share this point of view .
The sample taken for the audit included six states and 250 transactions .
A very important finding was made , namely that the Commission is still not able to give full accounting information .
We welcome the declaration that a new system will be functioning as of February 2009 .
I hope that the commissioner will confirm this fact .
Another very important matter is the difference between words and deeds when preparing agreements .
Drawing up and signing cause a great deal of ambiguity .
The Commission must clarify this , especially because the ACP countries also have different approaches to this .
A very important matter from our point of view as the European Parliament is that the assessment of regularity should not only be carried out after the fact , but that it should take the form of supervision and control to prevent irregularities .
Preventing irregularities also helps in assessing the benefits we achieve from allocating funds .
This is not only a matter of showing regularity in the accounts , but is also about showing the degree to which the objective is achieved , and in this respect we would like to draw attention to the need for cooperation from national parliaments , because they should to a large extent understand this matter .
This is a matter of cooperation with authorities and governments , and also with civil society .
One aspect which would appear to be of particular importance is the question of supervision of funds managed by the EIB .
The EIB continues to be , from our perspective , an institution which it is not possible to supervise .
We confirm very clearly in the report that the EIB had a sum of EUR 2.2 billion at its disposal .
This was public money - it did not come from the financial markets .
The EIB would , therefore , appear to be a most undemocratic institution which nevertheless has public money at its disposal .
Finally , I would like to thank the commissioner for his cooperation during this term of office .
I would like Mr Łuckiewicz to accept our thanks on behalf of the Court of Auditors .
I would also like to thank my colleagues from the Committee on Development , and also from the Committee on Budgetary Control , which was efficiently led by Mr Bösch .


Mr President , Mr Kallas , Mr Bösch , ladies and gentlemen , we are about to complete the most in-depth reform ever of the European Parliament .
This reform includes the creation of statutes for both MEPs and assistants , an end to the unacceptable salary discrimination between MEPs , an end to the opaque system for paying our travel allowances and an end to the discriminatory pension system .
As rapporteur for the discharge of Parliament 's accounts , as a member for 10 years of the Committee on Budgetary Control and as spokesman for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I am very proud of what we have achieved and I feel that it would not be asking too much for the public to register these changes , which they themselves have insistently demanded .
Having said this , I am today , as always , absolutely in favour of total transparency in the use of public funds .
I fully agree with the opinions of the European Ombudsman in this respect .
I am today , as always , opposed to using public funds to deal with the results of private risk-taking .
I am today , as always , against voluntary pension funds that ignore salary differences , leading to unfair treatment .
I find it unacceptable when generalisations are made that are completely wrong , such as maintaining that all MEPs are entitled to two pensions .
As the author of this report , I should like to emphasise that , after 10 years as an MEP , and having spent shorter periods in the Portuguese parliament and the regional parliament of the Azores , I am now leaving parliamentary office without strictly being entitled to any pension , whether national , regional or European .
In this respect , I must say that those who believe that denying the rights of their representatives , which are the same throughout our societies , helps to improve Europe are absolutely mistaken .
On the contrary , I am convinced that the only way to overcome anyone 's lack of trust in their representatives is to minimise the laying down of specific rules for parliamentarians , seeing as they are responsible for the adoption of these rules .
I even believe that the only issue on which Parliament should have decided was the relative position of MEPs in the European administration framework .
While regretting the lack of clarity that existed in the past between public duty and private interest in the pension system , I should appreciate some recognition of the work done by all those who , particularly on our Committee on Budgetary Control , have fought tirelessly for rigour and transparency in the European accounts .
Here in this House I want to pay a heartfelt tribute to everyone and express my wish that the work carried out by our committee to date should be continued in the next parliamentary term , with the same vigour and commitment that has been shown so far in order to bring about a stricter and fairer Europe that offers greater solidarity .
The Parliament to be elected in June will operate under much more transparent and fairer rules , and that is something that everyone here today has cause to celebrate .
The next speaker will be Mr Fjellner .
The rapporteur , Mr Søndergaard , will be with us later due to a flight delay , so I will call on him to speak later .
Mr President , I am impressed that you at least attempted to list all of these decentralised agencies .
There are , of course , a very large number of them .
I would maintain that discharge has become even more important for the EU agencies precisely because they have increased in number .
The budget and the number of staff have also increased .
The number of agencies has increased from 11 in 1995 to a total of 27 today .
In 2007 , the budget for all the agencies was EUR 1 243 500 000 .
In 1995 , the average budget for one agency was EUR 7 million , whereas now it is over EUR 22 million .
Staff numbers have increased just as dramatically .
In 1995 , 38 people , on average , worked in each agency .
Today , that figure is 155 .
In my opinion , this increase is remarkable in itself and something we need to reflect on , namely the question of whether this is an appropriate instrument and whether this type of increase is reasonable .
It also places higher demands on us when discussing discharge , requiring us to spend more time and energy on it .
We have therefore chosen to deal with 21 of these agencies that we are responsible for in separate reports and also to draw up a horizontal report dealing with the problems that are common to most of the agencies .
I am pleased to be able to say that the majority of the agencies have received clear statements of assurance from the Court of Auditors .
They have therefore been properly managed .
At the same time , many of them - almost all of them , in fact - still have major surplus problems and problems complying with the Financial Regulation and the Staff Regulations year after year .
This is something we need to think about , namely the fact that we repeat the same criticism of certain points year after year and yet nothing ever changes .
This means that we must think more about how we enforce responsibility on the part of these agencies and how we actually govern them .
In the horizontal report , I therefore propose , among other things , that we make fixed reductions when the agencies do not use a sufficient proportion of a budget or when they are unable to fill all positions .
It is also proposed that we should have a common support service to help the small agencies with burdensome administrative tasks .
I believe this to be extremely important .
This year , we chose to look specifically at four agencies which received poor statements of assurance from the Court of Auditors and which have particularly major issues .
These were the European Police College , the European GNSS Supervisory Authority - GNSS being what we usually refer to as Galileo - the European Railway Agency and Frontex .
I am pleased to be able to state that it has been possible to grant discharge to three of these , Galileo , the European Railway Agency and Frontex , after examining all of the information they provided us with .
Unfortunately , Cepol , that is , the European Police Academy , has submitted a lot of information , but nowhere near all of it .
Therefore we are not yet able to grant it discharge .
The remaining problem is the issue of the private use of EU taxpayers ' money , such as private use to pay for furniture , private mobile telephone calls and private travel .
We have requested information on this , but have not received all of it .
The committee and I therefore propose that we postpone the granting of discharge until Cepol has provided a full declaration in this regard .
There is , of course , also an ongoing fraud investigation in Olaf regarding this agency .
This is serious and we need to demonstrate that we take it seriously and we must get to the bottom of it .
This is why we are postponing the granting of discharge .
This is not something I do gladly , but I would maintain that it is the only responsible thing to do .
We need to have all the information on the table before we can grant discharge .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , this is the fifth time I have stood before you as you prepare to vote on a Commission discharge resolution .
And , for the fifth time , I must admit that - despite unquestionable progress in budget execution - we still do not have a positive DAS .
In the draft resolution before you ( paragraph 58 ) , the rapporteur ...
( FR ) ' calls on the Commission without delay [ sans délai ] to submit its proposals for achieving the objective of a positive DAS ' .
So I will do this , ' sans délai ' .
I will give the three main reasons why , in my view , we did not achieve a positive DAS , although this was the objective set at the beginning of the current Commission mandate .
We probably relied too much at the beginning on Member States sharing our concern about the negative public and political impact of the negative DAS when , in fact , our call for action only really became effective when backed up by the policy of ' warn , solve or suspend payments ' .
So there was too much carrot and too little stick initially .
We have also pursued evolution rather than revolution .
We put aside more radical solutions , for instance on simplification , in our pioneering attempt to fix the DAS .
Obviously , five years for our Action Plan was not enough .
Some results of our Action Plan are only now starting to show their impact .
The next Commission will reap the benefits , which without the Action Plan could not be expected .
But your question is , ' how and when can you guarantee a positive DAS ? '
First , I should remind honourable Members what the so-called ' negative DAS ' is .
Article 248 of the Treaty gives the Court of Auditors the task of providing a Statement of Assurance ' as to the reliability of the accounts and the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions ' .
It was inserted into the Maastricht Treaty at the last moment without any real discussion about the implications .
This has proven highly problematic since .
The so-called negative DAS is part of the Court of Auditors ' opinion .
It says that certain areas of expenditure are still materially affected by errors , although to different levels .
The Court also states that our annual accounts are reliable and gives many positive and adequate comments about our financial management .
As such , the DAS does not sound at all special , compared to how audit opinions are generally phrased .
But we face a highly politicised and often deliberate misinterpretation of this sentence .
So I must confess that it has surprised me how difficult it is to convince elected politicians and public opinion that budget management in the European Union is much better than what is reflected in this sentence .
So we must do something to end this damaging political assessment of the use of European funds .
For urgent , more guaranteed results , one could imagine three options :
Option one : change the Treaty .
The way the current Treaty is phrased , the reasonable public expectation for sound financial management has been undermined - automatically and almost inevitably - every year since the Maastricht Treaty entered into force .
During the Intergovernmental Conference on the Lisbon Treaty , I looked at whether one could fix Article 248 of the Treaty .
Together with the Court , we looked at what could be a more realistic task for the Court , perhaps covering the budget over a three-year cycle , rather than annually , and asking the Court to take into account that most Commission control systems are multi-annual , ensuring that errors are corrected over time .
We contacted several national delegations : they all agreed ; nobody acted .
Option two : I now come to the second option and the most radical short cut to the positive DAS .
Under the current Treaty we should perhaps stop allocating funds to management schemes so complex that we cannot meet the current low thresholds for error .
If we cannot collectively handle the current sophistication , then we must simplify .
' Simplify ' is a nice word which everybody likes .
There are millions of transactions to check .
How could 480 auditors , based in Luxembourg , however competent , working with a very complex legislative environment , in 27 Member States with 23 official languages , possibly have the basis for issuing a statement each year on the legality and regularity of all underlying transactions in all spending areas ?
If you wish simplification to have a quick and effective impact on the error rate , my view is that it means abandoning shared management in some areas .
It means reducing the number of transactions from millions to a few thousand .
Taking the example of the Structural Funds , it would mean clearly defining the responsibilities that are currently shared .
To achieve that , the Structural Funds could be turned into budget support to the poorer regions .
An eligible region or Member State would see EU funds channelled into the state budget , to be spent via national systems , under the exclusive accountability of the minister of finance , and audited by the supreme audit institutions of Member States .
A Member State would get one annual tranche from the EU budget , and would be accountable to its own citizens and other Member States based on results .
Eligibility rules , procurement procedures and absorption rates would no longer be a European problem .
In this radical scenario , we would drop the millions of projects too small and sophisticated to be under arms-length oversight from Brussels .
No more small , creative projects ending up being ridiculed in the Euro-sceptic press !
Option three : If you cannot change the Treaty or its interpretation , we could perhaps discuss what it means for a given type of transaction to be ' OK ' .
We could set realistic and cost-effective thresholds for what ' legal and regular ' is .
This is the discussion about tolerable risk .
For the moment , the Court applies a uniform 2 % materiality threshold across the board .
The Court itself has asked for better risk analysis and political agreement on the tolerable risk in various budget areas .
To move this discussion forward , you now have a communication from the Commission on the table .
Your rapporteur is suggesting welcoming this communication as a ' solid methodological basis ' and calls for further analysis , data collection , dialogue and concrete proposals .
I would be grateful for this support and suggest we move ahead as quickly as possible .
The Council also now seems ready to engage .
Based on your overall political support , the Commission would like to proceed with proposals to set specific tolerable risk levels , budget heading by budget heading .
For each future spending proposal , you would be asked to ' tolerate ' a carefully calculated level of risk , so that the Court - hopefully - would adjust its materiality threshold on that basis .
We must start now .
If we wait for a revised Financial Regulation , or indeed the next Financial Perspectives after 2013 , this would not be reflected in the discharge procedure for the next five years .
Ladies and gentlemen , today you are preparing to vote on whether to grant discharge for 2007 , a year for which the auditors now say that for all budget areas except that the Structural Funds , as much as 95 % or more of the payments are free from serious financial error .
This is the best DAS ever , an improvement over last year , for a year with higher payment levels , in an increased number of Member States , the EU-27 .
Our financial management is steadily improving and it is certainly good enough to deserve discharge .
But it cannot stand the test of perfection .
The EU was created to bring peace and prosperity .
It has delivered so far .
Obviously , looking at the EU 's institutional set-up , it is possible that no auditor was present at its creation and so it is not perfect .
But audit perfection is a rare phenomenon anywhere in the world .
Thank you for your attention and please vote in favour of discharge .
You will see no complacency from the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Transport and Tourism welcomes the fact that utilisation rates for commitment and payment appropriations for TEN-T projects continue to be high , reaching nearly 100 % , and calls on the Member States to ensure that adequate funding is made available from national budgets to match this EU commitment .
It is concerned by the low utilisation rate of commitment appropriations for transport safety and for the Galileo Supervisory Authority , and of payment appropriations for the internal market and optimisation of transport systems , and for passenger rights .
It notes with satisfaction that the maximum rate of financial aid for cross-border projects has increased to 30 % and the minimum funding threshold to EUR 1.5 billion .
I would also like to remind you that the evaluation procedure for the selection of projects has been improved together with the relevant monitoring , but at the same time , the committee regrets the fact that the structure for the description of works has not been harmonised and technical and financial monitoring has not been standardised .
Mr President , employment policy is included within cohesion policy .
There are still a number of flaws and shortcomings in this area and a number of things about which we have reservations .
Around 27 % of cohesion policy falls within the remit of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
As regards the payments , most of them originate from the period between 2000 and 2006 .
It is gratifying to see that 100 % of the payment appropriations were used during this period .
What is sometimes problematic is the lack of evidence for the indirect costs and personnel costs , and the overestimation of such costs .
We have therefore also expressed our support for a more standard way of indicating this , combined with better checks at Member State level , which we will have during the next period and which may result in improvements in this area in the future .
After 2006 I was given the honour of drafting the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety regarding the implementation of the budget of the five European agencies coming under our jurisdiction for the 2007 financial year .
I feel that the general level of budget line implementation in this area , which is 94.6 % , is satisfactory overall .
The implementation rate of the commitment appropriations for the LIFE + programme was excellent at 98.87 % .
Other outstanding agencies included the European Environment Agency , which achieved 100 % in terms of both commitments and payments , as well as the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control .
However , there is still some room for improvement in terms of budget management for the European Medicines Agency , the European Food Safety Authority and the European Chemicals Agency .
In the case of the latter , 2007 was actually its first year of operation .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I propose that the Commission 's agencies be given discharge for 2007 in the areas of environmental policy , public health and food safety with regard to the budget 's implementation .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Regional Development has thoroughly analysed the results of the Court of Auditors ' work , but has also actively participated in the exceptionally penetrating work conducted by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Comparison of these results with those which were the subject of the previous discharge reveals a fundamental advance in the work of the Commission in terms of the level of supervision .
However , we are aware that the first visible effects of introducing the plan of action will appear only in the next few years .
For our committee it is important that the results which appear in the Court of Auditors ' report should not interfere with understanding of the importance of cohesion policy in EU policies and that they should not undermine the objectives of that policy .
We also would like to draw attention to the fact that errors highlighted in the report should not be mistakenly understood as irregularities or possibly even abuses .
In general we think that there is visible progress and we are going to support granting the Commission discharge .
The report on the European Commission 's discharge for 2007 shows some progress , even though we still need to properly harmonise actions and control mechanisms in order to achieve a more efficient use of resources , reduce the number and severity of the infringements and offer greater transparency and determination , especially on gender budgeting .
The Commission 's responsibility to cooperate with Member States and institutions must not be ignored .
Cooperation and communication are important tools and we often witness the results of omissions in this respect .
Without making light of some of the infringements in the newest Member States , Bulgaria and Romania , I think that it is necessary to guarantee equal treatment for all Member States .
A special cooperation mechanism is being applied to both these countries , which must not be made complicated .
Some of the texts in the report are unacceptable , in particular , suggestions for a mechanism for drafting quarterly reports for Bulgaria and Romania , as well as special reports on the use of Structural Funds .
I urge these texts to be dropped .
This will offer the countries the chance to focus on overcoming the problems which have arisen .
I would like to say that we have not heard the opinions of the Committee on Development , the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , the Committee on Transport and Tourism or the Committee on Culture and Education , because the rapporteurs did not come to the debate on time , and so there has been a change in the order of speakers .
We will continue the discussion .
Mr Ferber will now speak on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats - one and a half minutes .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that , during this parliamentary term , we have together made some progress with regard to the discharge procedure for the European institutions .
However , I regret that it has taken so long , because in principle we have only now finished what was outlined at the time of the resignation of the Commission in 1999 - in other words 10 years ago .
This shows that we quite definitely need to make improvements to our procedures and methods of working and to ensure that the necessary transparency appears quicker when it comes to citizens discovering what their taxes are used for .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Casaca , with whom I had the honour of working on the discharge of Parliament for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
I very much regret that a fellow Member who has made very many comments in the press on various matters relating to the European Parliament is not participating either in the debates or the votes in committee nor in the debate here in plenary .
This is something I want to say very clearly at this point , so that it is retained and remains for posterity !
We know very well that there have been and still are a number of problems here , and it is the MEPs who are here now who over the last five years have ensured that the necessary reforms are made in numerous places in the interests of the MEPs .
For this , I offer my very sincere thanks to everyone .
We have done what we needed to do and we have not released all of the information widely via the media and then not participated .
Thank you for your positive cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall start by saying what I always say when we debate budgetary issues and budget control , namely that we are dealing here not with a technical , but with a deeply political procedure .
The image conveyed to citizens by our Parliament and by the European Union in general is very important .
In other words , how much of European taxpayers ' money we are using and how and what image we are conveying about the transparency of this management to European citizens .
It is therefore a political process and it is very important that we examine the outlines , the impression we give as the European Union , and not just certain details relating to specific countries , not that this means that we should not talk about every country .
This observation compels me to say that our reports are also very important .
One example raised is the example of the improvement which we have finally made in the area of the status of parliamentarians and parliamentary assistants , after many years of endeavour , and at this point I too should like to take my turn in welcoming the efforts made by my colleague Mr Casaca .
We have a very good result today and that shows that our reports are important and have results and we must take care with them .
I should like to add a couple of words about the results of our efforts this year .
I shall say the same as the rapporteur , Mr Audy , that of course we have made progress , but that it is not yet enough .
The major issue is the problem of the scope of cohesion , but here I want to say that we socialists are calling for improvement , credibility , efficacy and simplification , as the commissioner also said .
I believe here , Commissioner , that we need to pass from evolution to revolution in the field of simplification ; all this is not so that we can abolish cohesion , which is a basic policy of the European Union , but so that we can improve it and make it more effective .
Finally , one important issue which is also raised in the report is the issue of the ability of the European Union to manage crises .
We need to manage crises on our own and not to transfer this ability to other bodies .

I should first of all like to thank the rapporteurs , and also Mr Audy , who , in my opinion , delivered an excellent speech .
I am also indebted to the commissioner and to the services of the Commission .
They have always been amenable to Parliament , which is something that I greatly appreciate .
There was the odd bit of discord here and there , but where does that not happen ?
The Commission should , in my view , be assessed on what it said at the beginning of the period and on the current outcome .
Well , as the commissioner has already said , the Commission has not - not by a long shot - achieved what it had set out to achieve , namely a positive statement of assurance ( DAS ) .
It did not even come anywhere near to the hoped-for result , which is a problem , although the commissioner did make a number of very interesting suggestions .
It is unfortunate that these came at the end of the period .
It may have been possible - I do not know - if we had been able to discuss these three years into his term of office , because many interesting suggestions were made .
As far as I can see - and the commissioner also made reference to this - what is still of the essence is joint management .
Can we leave this to the Member States or not , and how can we better monitor the Member States ?
We stated in the interinstitutional agreement that we want declarations at a certain political level , which has been translated into the Financial Rules and Regulations .
The big question has always been , for me , whether or not this is sufficient .
I do not have enough insight into this at the moment .
I thank the commissioner for the extensive report he sent , although , for me , it lacks clarity in places .
Where are the carrots for those Member States that do well and the sticks for those Member States that do not ?
It is not entirely clear to me , and this should be explained in the policy .
I think that the discussion about a positive DAS should be continued without let-up .
It is very harmful to public opinion if the situation of a negative DAS is sustained year after year .
Mr President , our review of the accounts for 2007 shows that this year , yet again , we quite simply are not sufficiently able to manage the large resources provided to the EU by the Member States .
The committee 's excellent reports clearly reveal the serious shortcomings that exist . Allow me to quote from one of these reports .
With regard to cohesion , the committee states that it notes with great concern the ECA 's estimate that at least 11 % of the total amount reimbursed in connection with structural policy projects should not have been reimbursed .
I acknowledge that all of the EU 's enormous network of legislation and administrative bodies , combined with poor administration and blatant corruption in some Member States , make responsible financial management difficult , but this is , and will remain , unacceptable .
There is only one solution and that is to stop paying the large sums of money to the EU , thereby putting a stop to the whole EU redistribution circus .
My little country , Denmark , will be paying almost DKK 20 billion to the EU this year .
We would never contemplate using this money for the purposes to which the EU is putting it .
Even sending the Member States ' money for redistribution via Brussels involves a reduction in the net value of this money and contributes to an increase in the unlawful use of citizens ' money .
The EU Member States must finance themselves and not tax their neighbours .
Finally , I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mr Bösch , for his outstanding management of its work , and I would also like to thank the rapporteur , my fellow Members , the committee 's secretariat and everyone involved for their exceptional commitment and very constructive cooperation .
This time , I shall confine myself to Parliament 's budget and should like to express my delight at Mr Casaca 's report , particularly the chapter about the voluntary pension fund , in which we approved 10 paragraphs or so .
A number of these were originally amendments which I had tabled and which , I believed , were necessary at this point .
What is now happening to this voluntary pension fund has been thrown out by the eurosceptics .
Rightly so , because it is a disgrace !
What is happening is unethical and we have to take action against it .
We cannot accept that , in times like these , MEPs would sooner consider their own income than that of the citizens .
Together with Mr Ferber , I should like to say to the eurosceptics sitting there that they have not , in any way , made an attempt to make any constructive contribution towards rectifying the shortcomings during this part-session .
I should specifically like to ask my fellow MEPs to endorse paragraph 105 , which relates to the voluntary pension fund .
This will ensure that this Parliament 's Bureau is prevented from using taxpayers ' money to plug the enormous gaps , because that is not justifiable .
I therefore call on all my fellow Members to give a large measure of backing and approve the Casaca report .
I have applied for a roll-call vote , as everyone should nail their colours to the mast on this issue !
( FR ) Mr President , in this period of economic recession , it was important for the European Union to continue to show solidarity towards developing countries .
Let us recall that , in 2007 , the European Community and the Member States together contributed 60 % of all development aid , making the European Union the world 's leading donor .
The European Development Fund enables us to combat poverty , while promoting economic development and democracy .
I am therefore delighted that a budget of EUR 23 billion has been allocated to the ACP countries for the period 2008-2013 under the 10th EDF .
This figure is almost double the amount allocated under the 9th EDF .

In its report the Court of Auditors concludes that the accounts for the 7th , 8th and 9th EDFs are , in general , reliable , legal and regular .
We can only be delighted at the record levels of implementation of contracts and payments under the EDFs .
However , I also note that there is still progress to be made in terms of strengthening the monitoring and control system , since there is still a significant level of errors affecting certain transactions .
Equally , an all too often high risk exists in the area of budgetary support , and I believe that such risks should be assessed better .
In this connection , I share the view that budgetary support should be granted only if the beneficiary country has the capacity to manage the funds transparently , responsibly and effectively .
Of the priorities that we shall have to work on in the future , I should like to mention the integration of the EDF into the Community 's general budget , since this would increase the effectiveness and the transparency of development aid .
To conclude , Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent report , the representatives of the Court , and also all of the Commission staff who have done an excellent job on the ground .
Needless to say , I regret the absence of the Council , and of the Czech Presidency in particular .
( HU ) During this cycle the European Parliament has had the task of exercising control over the administration of an ever-increasing number of agencies , a fact also mentioned by my fellow Member , Mr Fjellner .
The constructive dialogue which evolved during the monitoring process between Parliament , the agencies and the European Court of Auditors has resulted in increasing transparency and tighter management discipline .
In the current difficult economic and financial climate , the significance of monitoring has become more important than ever before .
Looking back on the past period , what is gratifying is that during budget monitoring we have not only established conformity or lack of it , but we have also been able to make forward-looking recommendations to the institutions that have been audited , which have attempted to successfully implement them .
I believe that it is important , and I support this , that agencies are not only subject to totally objective scrutiny , but also that we should examine their own individual development .
I am particularly in favour of agencies also being set up in new Member States so as to bring the European Union 's work closer to the people living there .
We almost entirely agree with Mr Fjellner and the final verdict will be delivered tomorrow .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Audy report - my sincere thanks to the rapporteur - really takes us a step further forward , because it contains innovative elements such as naming and shaming - a milestone in budgetary control .
This means targeted criticism instead of general complaints .
The fact that the Socialist Group is now backing down and would rather sweep the truth under the carpet is scandalous and does a disservice to our control activities .
The credibility of Parliament is on the line and I appeal to my fellow Members not to allow that to happen .
I would like to say something about our biggest problems , Romania and Bulgaria .
The failure of the Commission in connection with the preparation for the accessions of these countries is most evident here .
We have lost a lot of money .
The Commission sat back and watched for a long time and did not freeze the funds until 2008 .
In the meantime , however , over EUR 1 billion was lost in connection with Bulgaria and around EUR 142 million in connection with Romania .
Freezing funds is no solution to the problems , however .
The cooperation and verification mechanism , for which the President of the Commission himself is responsible , is a paper tiger , and the progress reports are not worthy of the name .
The Audy report makes suggestions as to how this could be improved .
The European Commission deceived Parliament about the readiness of these countries for accession and the Commissioner for Enlargement should in fact learn a lesson from this .
We are interested in the management of future accessions , however , and therefore this topic remains on the agenda .
Our Group will grant discharge to the Commission , but , personally , I will refuse to grant it discharge .
Unfortunately , the Commission 's zeal for reform , a tiny spark of which we were once again able to detect over the last year , has already been extinguished again .
There is a standstill in connection with combating fraud , nothing is happening with regard to prevention and there is no desire for more ethical behaviour , among other things .
One thing the Commission , and Commissioner Kallas in particular , should be clear about is that whoever wishes to be in the new Commission is dependent on the support of Parliament .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I thank honourable Members for their remarks .
I can only say that during these five discharge procedures I have enjoyed and been very happy with our cooperation .
The process has always been complicated , but always constructive and very professional .
So thank you all for this contribution to the complicated discharge machinery .
Just two remarks .
To Mr Liberadzki I would say that the EDF accounts were successfully transferred to ABAC in February 2009 .
We raised the issue , but these are now merged .
Jan Mulder 's question as to why these radical proposals come so late was very good .
Four years to see this kind of proposal maturing is not too long .
In Europe things take time , and in this case we are trying to use all possibilities in the framework of our Action Plan since we see that something really serious must be done to get rid of this problem .
So I do not think this is too late , but I regret of course that this has taken so much time .
( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , my speech will be brief .
Among the main conclusions on the European Commission 's discharge , paragraph 4 in Mr Audy 's report states that he is of the opinion that the accession of Romania and Bulgaria was not treated by the Commission with the necessary seriousness , that at the time of the two candidates ' accession , reports for both candidate countries were misleading and that it is regrettable that this misinformation has led to the current situation where Cohesion Funds were released for Member States with non-functioning administrative and legal systems , and that this action misled public opinion and Parliament to the detriment of the EU 's reputation .

I would sincerely like my fellow Members Mr Jørgensen and Mr Casaca , who tabled this amendment , and the other fellow Members who approved it in the Committee on Budgets to explain these arguments because I think that both Romania and Bulgaria do have functioning administrative and legal systems , perhaps not based on the parameters they should have , but they function all the same .
I also do not think that anyone has taken the liberty to mislead public opinion and , least of all , Parliament and the Commission .
Mr President , I believe that the case of Romania and of Bulgaria is worthy of debate , but we really are in an extremely serious situation here .
As regards the conclusions , I should like to thank the rapporteurs from the political groups and all of the speakers , especially the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I should like to conclude on several issues .
Firstly , there is no fraud where the budget is concerned .
Secondly , we have many errors , and this is for two reasons .
The first is that our regulations are too complex , and so final beneficiaries find it difficult to apply them and commit errors , which are not too serious .
The second reason is that the European Court of Auditors applies too low a materiality threshold : 2 % to all sectors ; as audit methods go , these ones must be re-examined .
Thus , it is said that things are going badly , but because we are all responsible .
The Commission is responsible because it has not kept its promise , and thank you , Commissioner , for examining the proposals for the next mandate .
The Council is responsible because it is losing interest : it is not here .
The Member States are responsible because they are not applying the regulations with enough rigour .
The European Court of Auditors is responsible because it must reflect on its audit methods , and in particular on the materiality levels ; it is the responsibility of the Court , not of the Commission or Parliament , to lay down the materiality thresholds .
Parliament is responsible because it must be clear about the current imperfections and must accept the reforms .
In short , I believe that we have a series of joint responsibilities .
The summary is done at the end of this mandate .
Well , we hope and pray that this reform will take place so that we will at last have a positive statement of assurance , in forthcoming financial perspectives .
We hope too that if we have a negative statement of assurance , we will have a negative vote from Parliament , so that there is political consistency between the bodies that have to take budgetary control decisions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have the honourable task of offering my thanks , firstly to the rapporteurs , who have done a great job and have tabled constructive reports , one of which we still have to debate tomorrow .
Secondly , I would like to thank the excellent secretariat that has supported us in recent years .
With regard to those who succeed us , I can only hope that they have such an excellent staff working for them .
However , there is something , Mr President , that I do not understand .
Looking at the press preview - the preview of the plenary sitting of 21 to 24 April - I can read about the important reports on the immunity of MEPs , but there is nothing about the discharges for the 2007 financial year .
If we do not recognise the rights of Parliament , who then in the general public will recognise us , take us seriously and vote on 7 June if this is what we do with the most powerful right that Parliament has ?
This right is to control how over EUR 100 billion was spent during 2007 .
If we do not discuss facts then we will have to discuss rumours .
Mr Ferber has already mentioned this point .
We have to build this Europe on facts .
We need the cooperation and constructive ideas that we have developed over recent years .
It is not surprising that , at the end of this period , we have actually created the greatest productive power and the greatest degree of clarity in this period .
This is partly due to the people involved , whom I would like to congratulate , but it is also due to the fact that we have ourselves become clear about various things , one of which being what control ultimately means to European taxpayers .
We ought to know that we also go beyond this single year of 2007 .
Of course , we know that some wrong turns were taken and we have rectified these to some extent .
I am very grateful to Mr Costas for what he said .
During this period , we have established a Statute for Assistants .
This is something that we were criticised for a few years ago .
We established a Statute for Assistants and we were also criticised for this .
Some people may not be one hundred percent convinced about this , but let us not forget , as members of the Committee on Budgetary Control , that things cannot always be done according to the German , Portuguese , Austrian or Spanish model .
We need a European model .
That is sometimes rather difficult and , particularly during election time , occasionally hard to represent .
I am very grateful to everyone who has resisted the temptations of the forthcoming election campaign and said : we will stick to the facts , and we are also prepared to explain these facts to our fellow Members and also to the voters .
Mr Kallas , I would like to add one more point , as we will also talk about this in connection with the Audy discharge , which I very much welcome .
It relates to an alleged bank fee .
For many years the Commission has been tardy in its calculation of the gross domestic product of the European Union in order to get the GNI , which is actually stipulated , onto a proper footing .
That costs various Member States several million euros , which we have talked about .
I hope that you or your successor will clear this up accordingly .
Mr President , I am very thankful for this excellent piece of work produced by my committee and , as you know , tomorrow we will recommend that the discharge not be granted .
I am very pleased to be chairman of this committee . Thank you very much .
Mr President , there are a lot of ' thank yous ' being said , but I would nevertheless like to take the opportunity to thank our eminent Chairman , Mr Bösch .
I think that he has done a splendid job in chairing the committee over the last two and half years .
Although there was not very much debate on my reports on discharge for the agencies , I hope that all of my fellow Members will choose to support them , irrespective of how they voted in the committee or of what they have previously indicated .
It is important for Parliament to be united on these issues .
As this is a joint debate for all of the reports , I would like to comment on a report that is not one of mine .
I feel very strongly about Mr Casaca 's report , which I think is an extremely good one , particularly paragraph 105 , in which we note the fact that Parliament will not provide extra money from the budget to cover the voluntary pension fund 's deficit for us MEPs .
I know that many of you think that these points are very controversial , but in my opinion at least they are a given .
A lot of people have been criticising this fund for many years .
I would like to say that I think that the fund itself is something of a scandal .
We are all being affected by the global financial crisis at the moment .
At a time when ordinary people are seeing their pensions reduced , politicians must not save their own skins by using more of taxpayers ' money for their own pensions .
I hope that this is a message that those running this Parliament will really take on board and that they will refrain from topping up the fund using yet more taxpayers ' money .
On the contrary , we must put a stop to this and we must do so as soon as possible .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 23 April 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has asked that discharge be granted to the Commission , as well as to the five Community agencies that lie within its competencies .
Even so , our committee is concerned by the low implementation rate of payment appropriations in the area of freedom , security and justice compared with 2006 ( 60.41 % in 2007 and 86.26 % in 2006 ) .
Nevertheless , we are aware that responsibility does not so much lie with the Commission as with Member States , and that the low implementation is particularly due to the approval , in May and June 2007 , of funds included in the solidarity framework and management of migration flows , and to delays in the implementation of other specific programmes ( such as those relating to civil justice and information , and drugs prevention ) .
As I was saying , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has recommended that discharge be granted to :
the Agency for Fundamental Rights ,
the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction in Lisbon ,
Frontex ,
Eurojust , and
CEPOL .
I would like to make the following points on the latter two agencies :
we hope that Eurojust will reduce the excessively high carryovers and that it will standardise the way in which it awards contracts , as stated by the Agency ;
bearing in mind the criticism addressed to CEPOL by our committee , it is our view that discharge for the Agency should not be postponed .
As far as we are aware , the Director of CEPOL has worked closely with the Committee on Budgetary Control and is doing what is needed to correct the management errors that were detected .
in writing . - ( DE ) Around 80 % of EU funds are still being managed and spent by the Member States and there are still open questions and irregularities in connection with the handling of European Union money .
The European Court of Auditors has now failed to confirm the legality and regularity of the EU 's financial transactions in its annual audit reports 14 times in succession .
Complete disclosure and inspection of EU expenditure is essential .
It is necessary for the Member States ' finance ministers to submit a national statement of assurance for all of the EU funds used .
Community framework for nuclear safety ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Hökmark , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council directive ( Euratom ) setting up a Community framework for nuclear safety - C6-0026 / 2009 - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I think it is fair to say that we are now in a new era of energy policy , where there is a need for energy policy to be consistent with a policy for stopping climate change , and at the same time to be combined with a policy for energy security .
Those three legs - energy policy , climate policy and energy security - must function together .
From my perspective this highlights the importance of nuclear power .
It is important that the existing nuclear power plants are managed in as safe and secure a way as possible , but it is also important that we have clear rules to ensure that the future power plants of the European Union are as secure and safe as possible .
This is not only a matter of preparing the ground for more nuclear power .
I think that there is rather large support for such a policy in the European Union , that it is growing and that we need to live up to the responsibilities that this gives us all .
I respect those who are hesitant about or are against the use of nuclear power , but whatever opinion and whatever view we have on nuclear power , there can be no disagreement on the need for the rules to be as safe and secure as possible for the nuclear power we have .
It is from this perspective that I would like to present this report on the Community framework for nuclear safety .
There is a legal basis for this and there has been a debate in committee on whether all the procedures have been fulfilled .
A letter has been sent from the Committee on Legal Affairs to the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy saying that if it is a new proposal then there is a need for a new opinion from the group of experts .
My view , and the view of the majority of the committee , is that this is a revised proposal which we have been working on in the European Union for nearly seven years .
It has been changed because of an opinion from the group of experts and because of the opinion given by Parliament and I must say that now is the time to reach a decision .
I hope that Council will be able to take this decision this spring .
If we do not and if we delay this process , we will see in reality that new nuclear power plants will be planned and constructed without this Community framework .
So this is the time for action .
Those who are trying to hinder this because of their attitude to nuclear power are in reality preventing the European Union from having a Community framework establishing as safe and secure rules as possible .
I have tried to position my report in three ways .
First of all to give a clear structure on the responsibilities of Member States and governments , licence holders and national regulators .
Secondly , I have been very clear about the independence that the national regulators will have and I am strengthening the requirements on national regulators , meaning that they must be able to act when they see any risk of a nuclear power plant not fulfilling the security rules .
Thirdly , we are including in an annex the rules of the IAEA as binding rules , thereby making this Community framework clear , strict and firm , and that is the note on which I end .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , nuclear safety is an absolute priority for the European Union , as the rapporteur said , and I would like to thank the rapporteur for a very strong , clear and comprehensive report .
As the use of nuclear energy in the European Union is a reality and will be a reality , and nuclear safety is not constrained by national borders , we need a Community-wide framework aiming at achieving , maintaining and continuously improving nuclear safety in the European Union .
This is the objective of the revised proposal for a directive that sets up a Community framework for nuclear safety .
The fundamental goal of the proposal is to establish binding legislation , the only solution that offers guarantees that political and industrial commitments to continuously improve nuclear safety are followed by concrete measures .
These International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) Safety Fundamentals and the obligations of the Convention of Nuclear Safety constitute the core of the directive .
De facto , their transposition into binding Community legislation would bring legal certainty .
The proposal also aims at ensuring that national regulatory authorities in charge of nuclear safety are independent from any governmental decision-making body and any other organisation that would have an interest in nuclear matters .
They can , therefore , preoccupy themselves solely with the safety of installations .
The proposal aims to enhance the role of regulatory authorities by ensuring that the Member States provide them with adequate authority , competence and human and financial resources to fulfil their responsibilities .
The revised proposal takes into account the outcome of a consultation process that started in 2004 with the Council 's Working Party on Nuclear Safety .
It was discussed , before adoption , with the European Nuclear Safety Regulators Group , as well as in other fora .
It also reflects the substance of the opinion given by the Scientific Group of Experts , referred to in Article 31 of the Euratom Treaty , and the current nuclear safety proposal is a second revision of the regional proposal in the area of nuclear safety .
Article 31 of the Euratom Treaty does not require a resubmission of the revised proposal to the Scientific Group of Experts .
Moreover , close cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency has ensured consistency with international practices .
The Commission agrees with most of the proposed amendments that reinforce the line taken .
The report clearly recognises the obligation of the Member States to respect the Safety Fundamentals stemming from the IAEA and the provisions of the Convention on Nuclear Safety , as well as seeking to reinforce the role of nuclear regulatory authorities and ensure their independent decision-making role .
I am , therefore , confident that the Council will take into consideration Parliament 's position whenever it contributes to improving and clarifying the objectives of the directive .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament does not really have anything to say on this matter .
It has been consulted and it is being used for the preparation of a directive which will serve to maintain uncertainty rather than help to increase safety in the nuclear sector .
The directive is irrelevant to all existing nuclear power stations in the European Union .
It is also irrelevant to high risk projects , such as those currently planned in Bulgaria , Slovakia and Romania .
It has absolutely nothing to deliver in this regard .
Moreover , if it survives , namely in connection with future planning that has not even begun yet , it will not lay down the current highest available scientific and technological standards , but will recommend compliance with principles .
I ask myself why we as Parliament are allowing ourselves to be used in this way with this token gesture , which will not serve to ensure the safety of citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the decision we have taken is a smart one and it has been cleverly presented .
It is also a smart decision for Parliament to contribute to harmonisation in Europe and to establishing more security rules .
We have a duty to do that .
Mrs Harms , I think you are quite wrong on the one hand to demand more and more safety in the nuclear sector and to complain that nuclear technologies do not have sufficient guarantees of safety while at the same time using every opportunity to obstruct such decisions here in this House .
You cannot complain about the European Parliament concerning itself with this matter and then be dissatisfied that nuclear technology is not safe enough .
We have fulfilled our duty today .
We are attempting to contribute to providing a minimum level of safety for nuclear technology throughout Europe while , of course , also - as we have jointly established with a large majority in other decisions in this House - stabilising and supporting nuclear technology as one of several options in the energy mix .
In this connection it is also relevant to ask how things stand with regard to safety .
The answer must be given , we cannot simply keep asking for it .
This proposal is on the table today and I hope that it will receive a majority vote tomorrow .
We will close a very important debate tomorrow with a vote on this proposal , which will undoubtedly increase the security of Europe 's citizens and their sense of security .
The aim of this is not for us to find a solution , but for us to make progress in relation to the current situation .
I feel , at any rate , that drafting a Community regulation marks a serious step forward for national regulation .
This is why we give our absolutely unreserved support to the directive put forward by the Commission and to Mr Hökmark 's report .
We have tried to make further improvements through our proposed amendments .
I believe that Europe 's citizens deserve for us to make progress on nuclear energy , which actually accounts for 32 % of our electricity supply .
Let us do it together then !
Mr President , my group fully supports the aim of this directive , which is to establish a Community framework to ensure and maintain the continuous improvement of safety in nuclear installations within the European Union .
Our Parliament has always stressed the urgent need to implement clear and rigorous legislation and to adopt practical measures at Community level in areas relating to nuclear safety , radioactive waste management and the decommissioning of nuclear installations .
Our debates have raised the issue , among others , of training and knowledge .
It is vital for Europe , which has nuclear expertise , to preserve this knowledge , not least by ensuring that safety inspectors within nuclear installations are trained and qualified .
Finally , I am satisfied that the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy has accepted an amendment to the legislative resolution calling on the European Commission to consult the group of experts , in accordance with Article 31 of the Treaty .
I repeat : we demand transparency , and we want clear and rigorous legislation .
I am grateful to our rapporteur , Mr Hökmark .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal currently on the table is to be welcomed .
I would like to thank Commissioner Piebalgs , and your predecessor , Commissioner Palacio , who had already realised that it is important to think about safety .
I also believe that it is important to improve the independence of national regulatory bodies .
If regulatory bodies in all of the other countries were as independent as the regulatory body in France we would already have made a great deal of progress .
It would , of course , be even better if we had an EU-wide regulatory body with the ability to remove dangerous nuclear power stations from the grid in the peer review process .
It is also important to have strict mandatory safety standards and to ensure , through the European regulator , that shutdown is carried out .
Safety and protection are extremely important for public health and receive our full support .
More must be done in relation to this in future .
( BG ) I too would like to take the opportunity to mention how important the Commission 's proposal is for a framework directive for nuclear safety .
I believe that this document provides a good basis for producing binding regulations in the European Union on this issue and for providing reassurance to all countries , including those which do not use nuclear energy , that the nuclear energy produced in the European Union is safe .
I want to emphasise that I am pleased with the amendments which have been adopted and which I tabled with regard to defining specifically the directive 's scope , ensuring a regular exchange of best practice between Member States and more clearly assigning liability between countries , licence holders and the regulatory body .
I would like to emphasise that this directive once again highlights the right of any country to choose its energy mix , even if it wants this to include nuclear energy , which saves on carbon dioxide and is beneficial to the environment .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as has been rightly said the aim of this proposal is to create a Community-wide framework .
It was not easy to achieve this .
We based our work on the Western European Nuclear Regulators ' Association ( WENRA ) and on experience in the High Level Group on Nuclear Safety and Waste Management .
We also worked together with the Council , which had discussed more or less the same proposals in 2003 .
I believe that it strikes the right balance at this stage ; I believe it gives European citizens a clear understanding that there is a Community-wide framework .
I am confident this framework will evolve with time , but I very much welcome Mr Hökmark 's report because it strengthens the proposal while keeping the balance we need .
It is the national regulators who are responsible for the safety of the installations running in their countries .
These issues are so sensitive that we cannot , and should not , sidestep them , but we do need constantly to improve nuclear safety standards .
I believe this directive gives us that opportunity .
rapporteur . - Mr President , first of all I think it is important to say that no one should be against increasing the level of safety and strengthening the safety rules .
There must be no tendency , just because one dislikes nuclear power and is against its use , to underplay the importance of the rules we need .
In that sense , I think it is a step forward that we have a common Community framework because it creates a consistency , a transparency and an opportunity to ensure our common development towards higher standards .
This directive really does apply to existing power plants because it increases the importance and the independence of national regulators - which is crucial - and it paves the way for us to secure higher and higher requirements in order to have , as it were , a ' race to the top ' regarding safety .
Let us be very frank about this .
We will have nuclear power in the future , whatever all of us here today agree about on this issue .
In my view , it is important that we can lay the ground for having more nuclear power plants .
They must be credible and there must exist a credibility in public opinion , but - even more importantly - there must be a substantial , real safety in managing nuclear power , as there should be in every other thing we do .
The existing rules are good and strong , but we are making them more consistent , and that is a step forward .
I would like to thank you for your cooperation and for the discussion .
I think that we have achieved a better result , and I hope that the Council will listen to this opinion .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 22 April 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I would like to draw my attention to the environmental situation of Marsaxloqq Bay .
The most picturesque bay in Malta was destroyed when a power station was built .
This has had a health impact on the residents in its region especially those of Marsaxloqq .
Now an incineration plant is being planned in this bay and once again the inhabitants of this region are going to be subject to environmental nightmare .
In addition , there is a health hazard which cannot be estimated .
When I was the lawyer in a case trying to prevent the construction of a power station in the bay I was able to prove that discharges were not all being absorbed by the atmosphere .
Some discharges were found too heavy to evaporate and would find themselves falling in the vicinity of the station .
Tiles in open places were visibly stained by a rust-coloured substance .
It resulted that those stains were a result of discharges .
What is the situation going to be when increased discharges from the incineration plant will be allowed into the atmosphere ?
Following a delay of almost six years , the EU is today close to adopting a nuclear safety directive , an important political document for nuclear energy in Europe , which is used to produce almost one third of the EU 's electricity .
Member States have the exclusive right to decide themselves whether to rely on nuclear energy .
For countries both accepting and rejecting this form of energy , it is just as important that the highest safety standards in nuclear energy apply .
I welcome the inclusion of the IAEA 's basic safety principles as an annex to the directive .
This will ensure that the best developments in nuclear safety standards become an integral part of European legislation , which Member States are accordingly bound to comply with .
The lack of generally approved nuclear safety requirements in the EU allowed , in the not too distant past , some of the countries joining the EU to have political solutions imposed on their nuclear energy , which are not in line nowadays with the EU 's objectives for limiting climate change and for energy supply security .
At a time when a number of new nuclear power plants are under construction in the EU or in the pipeline , the timely adoption of the nuclear safety directive is not only justified , but is mandatory because of the guarantees it offers for the population 's safety and peace of mind .
Addressing the challenges of deforestation and forest degradation to tackle climate change and biodiversity loss - Timber and timber products ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the Commission statement - Addressing the challenges of deforestation and forest degradation to tackle climate change and biodiversity loss , and
the report by Mrs Lucas , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the obligations of operators who place timber and timber products on the market - C6-0373 / 2008 - .
Mr President , deforestation is responsible for approximately 20 % of greenhouse gas emissions at global level .
Consequently , from the point of view of climate change , addressing deforestation is an important priority .
At the same time , addressing deforestation helps to achieve other important objectives , such as eradicating poverty and reversing the loss of biodiversity , which is another major environmental threat to our planet .
Deforestation has now become a major issue at international negotiations , on both climate change and biodiversity .
In order to promote a policy to address this issue , the European Commission issued a communication in October 2008 , which the Council accepted in full last December .
This communication refers to the question of deforestation and the deterioration in forests in developing countries and proposes , among other things , the development of a financing mechanism in the aim of providing incentives to maintain existing forests .
This proposal is already being discussed and processed at the international negotiations on climate change currently under way .
In its communication , the Commission also acknowledges that various European policies , at both internal level and internationally , may have an indirect impact on global forest resources .
As such , the Commission has made specific undertakings in the aim of strengthening the cohesion of European policies .
The proposed measures include the following :
an impact assessment on the consumption of imported goods in the European Union which may contribute towards deforestation ;
continuing the procedure to review the cohesion of our development policy , which is needed to support developing countries in their efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
These undertakings will also be implemented through the European Commission 's policy on sustainable consumption and production .
The aim of this policy is to stimulate growth and the demand for sustainable goods and services , including timber and timber-based products which come from forests to which sustainable management methods are applied .
Allow me now to refer to one of the main factors of deforestation : illegal logging .
Illegal logging is very often the first step towards the general exploitation of natural forests .
Consequently , addressing illegal logging and improving forest management in general are of fundamental importance if we want efforts to limit deforestation and the deterioration of forests to succeed .
In accordance with the European Union 's 2003 Action Plan on Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade , the Commission proposed a series of measures to address the problem of illegal logging and the trade associated with it .
The core element of the above action plan was the conclusion of voluntary partnership agreements with third-country timber producers .
We believe that the agreements in question may help to address the basic causes of illegal logging .
At the same time , however , the Commission has acknowledged that these agreements alone may not suffice to address the problem and other possibilities therefore need to be investigated .
Based on the results of the impact assessment , the Commission submitted a policy proposal last year based on the ' principle of due diligence ' .
According to the proposed regulation , operators must minimise the risk of placing illegally logged timber and related products on the market by demonstrating due diligence , when they place these products on the European Union market , in obtaining information on the provenance and legality of the products in question .
I should like to extend my especial thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Lucas , to the shadow rapporteurs and to the draftsman of the opinion , Mr Ford , on their exceptionally diligent work .
The Commission has examined the amendments to its draft regulation proposed by the European Parliament and I should like to comment briefly on them :
The amendment banning the trade in illegally logged timber and related products is very important .
This ban was included in the options examined by the Commission when it drafted its proposal .
However , while this approach is quite attractive at first sight , it presents important practical and political difficulties .
That is precisely why we adopted a proposal based on the principle of due diligence .
This proposal will achieve the best possible balance between an effective approach to illegal practices , the facility to apply these measures without encumbering operators unnecessarily and , finally , their compatibility with the rules of the World Trade Organization .
The amendments requiring all manner of operators to exercise due diligence at all stages of the supply chain do not appear to follow the principle of proportionality .
If the legality of the timber is checked when it is first placed on the market , it would not appear to be necessary for checks to continue at all subsequent stages of the supply chain .
I should also like to comment on Parliament 's amendment proposing a broader definition of ' legal timber ' .
This definition is the epicentre of the proposal and will doubtless be a matter for discussion with the Council .
The Commission will examine carefully the consequences of adopting any such broader definition .
As regards the amendments relating to the recognition of monitoring and control authorities , we believe that , by making the Member States responsible for recognising these authorities , our initial proposal is more in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity .
The reasons why it was proposed to set up an advisory group are absolutely understandable .
The Commission has always been prepared to consult the stakeholders involved , as it remarked , moreover , in its statement of reasons .
However , although the Commission has the right of initiative to set up such advisory groups , it is not necessary for any such provision to be included in the regulation .
Finally , we also understand why it has been proposed to standardise the application of the law in the Member States .
For our part , however , we consider that the amendments in question should , as a matter of principle , be in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity .
That brings me to the end of my statement and I shall follow the debate with interest .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to start by saying how relieved I am that , at long last , we finally have before us a proposal for legislation to tackle the problem of illegal logging .
Parliament has been waiting for this for an enormous amount of time and I warmly thank my colleagues for their persistent efforts to see it brought forward .
I would also like to thank my colleagues for their outstanding cooperation in bringing us to the point of tomorrow 's vote ; shadows and staff have truly pulled out all the stops so that we could complete Parliament 's first reading in the shortest possible time , so as to be in a position to seek a first-reading agreement and thus to avoid any further delays .
Sadly , however , the painfully slow rate of progress in the Council has put paid to that idea .
So it seems that we will have to be content with concluding this work in the autumn , following political agreement by the Council in June , and that is very disappointing both to myself and to many colleagues who have worked so hard .
Had the Council been here I would have liked to have asked them for a guarantee tonight that they will do everything possible to reach a common position before the summer , because this situation is incredibly urgent .
Illegal logging is a hugely serious problem , against which the EU has preached for many years , yet all the while continuing to provide one of the world 's biggest markets for illegally logged timber and timber products .
Between 20 % and 40 % of global industrial wood production is estimated to come from illegal sources , and up to 20 % of that finds its way into the EU .
That depresses timber prices , it strips natural resources and tax revenue , and it increases the poverty of forest-dependent peoples .
The longer-term effects are even more serious , as Commissioner Dimas indicated , since deforestation , of which illegal logging is a major driver , accounts for nearly one fifth of global greenhouse gas emissions .
With the Copenhagen Climate Conference now on the horizon , credible EU action on illegal logging is ever more important .
But credible action means effective , binding legislation .
While the voluntary partnership agreements conceived under the 2003 FLEGT Action Plan have the potential to drive positive change , to date only one has been signed and , as long as their coverage is not universal , the risks of money-laundering and circumvention are just too high .
The good news is that we do finally have EU legislation ; the bad news is that the Commission proposal is distressingly weak and will need comprehensive improvement in order to become meaningful and effective .
In spite of Commissioner Dimas ' good words about the importance of tackling illegal logging , the Commission proposal as it stands simply is not up to the job .
The preamble to the proposal states that ' weak rules to prevent trade in illegally harvested timber ' are at the root of the prevalence of illegal logging , but what the Commission has come up with , I am afraid , will do nothing to change that .
Quite simply , the Commission proposal as it stands will not achieve our aim of ensuring that the EU no longer provides a market for illegally logged timber .
The most glaring , gaping hole in the proposal is that it does not actually prohibit the import and sale of illegally logged timber - perverse as that sounds .
It requires only that operators at one particular point in the supply chain put in place a due-diligence system while everyone else is immune from any obligation as to the legality of the timber or the timber products that they trade .
Now that stands in stark contrast to the revised US Lacey Act adopted in May 2008 , which does enact an explicit prohibition on the import and sale of illegally logged timber , and there is absolutely no good reason why the EU cannot emulate this .
So , while my report maintains the Commission 's suggestion that only operators who place timber and timber products on the EU market for the first time should be required to put in place a full due-diligence system - since they are clearly the actors with the most influence - it makes clear that all operators in the market share responsibility for trading only legally sourced wood and that failing to do that may constitute an offence .
I should like to say to Commissioner Dimas that I really do believe that our proposals are supplementing due diligence : they are making it more effective , they are making it operational and there is no problem at all with WTO rules .
If the US can do it , we should do it , and that is why Parliament is seeking to amend this proposal .
As spokesman for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I regard the two items before us as being equally important : the Commission statement and Mrs Lucas 's report .
In our view , we very much need both of these to halt deforestation , forest degradation and the decline in biodiversity .
At present , almost 13 million hectares of forest , an area the size of Greece , disappear every year .
In addition , deforestation is responsible for almost 20 % of global carbon dioxide emissions , which is more than the European Union 's entire greenhouse gas emissions .
Deforestation is responsible for the significant decline in biodiversity and for the extinction of certain species , not to mention for the deterioration of the Earth 's ecosystem .
There is no question therefore that we need to act now .
This means that the European Union must assume a leading role in formulating a global political response .
Tropical forests aside , I feel it is particularly important to halt the deforestation occurring in Central and Eastern Europe , as well as to create a set of strict sustainability criteria for timber and timber products .
Green public procurement and sustainability criteria are required for timber and other forms of biomass used for renewable energy production .
Part of the auction revenues resulting from the reduction in carbon dioxide emissions must be earmarked for halting deforestation .
I welcome the aspiration expressed in Mrs Lucas 's report aimed at tightening controls and creating an effective sanction system .
Finally , I believe that it is particularly important to set up monitoring bodies and impose financial penalties which reflect proper compensation for environmental damage .
Mr President , the report on the prohibition of illegal logging , which was adopted by a large majority in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , is a balanced one .
While it is sufficiently ambitious in the prohibition of illegal logging and the import of , and trade in , products that result from it , it does not create additional bureaucracy for the operators that now behave irreproachably .
It is vitally important to control illegal logging , which is a major reason for global deforestation , which itself , as someone said here , causes 20 % of global greenhouse gas emissions and is a major cause of the decline in biodiversity .
In addition to environmental problems , illegal logging impairs the competitiveness of legal operators in the forestry sector and causes countries to lose huge amounts in income .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Lucas , for her work , thanks to which tomorrow we can vote on a good basic proposal .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , by the time allocated to this debate , one might say that Parliament attaches little importance to saving forests .
This stops the disappointment of discovering the shy Commission approach to addressing illegal logging , but what disappointed me the most was the repetition of the argument that we should not punish the good-faith EU operators in order to solve an external problem .
Part of solving a problem is also creating awareness about the problem , and it is high time we acknowledged that some European regions - like mine - are also confronted with rampant deforestation .
The illegal logging regulation does not aim to punish or to hinder trade but rather to better control trade .
It is true that the Commission proposals were not really clear on how the system should work in practice .
I am pleased that the EP managed to strengthen and clarify the proposal by covering all timber products and requiring all operators to exercise some sort of due diligence by introducing a new baseline for financial penalties and providing clear criteria for a credible and independent monitoring system .
Now our challenge is to have this system adopted and implemented sooner rather than later .
We need to give consumers the guarantee that they are not fuelling the environmental degradation by accidentally buying illegally harvested timber products .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank all the speakers in tonight 's debate for their constructive contributions .
It is important to underline that tackling global deforestation and forest degradation is a complex issue .
Solving it requires real political will and actions on the demand side .
We should keep in mind that patterns of tropical deforestation are the result of the interaction of a number of different factors which vary in importance in different locations .
Forest cover is not only affected by forest policies , but also by other policies such as taxation policy , land tenure and rights .
In the European Union we understand that working on the coherence of our policies must go hand in hand with supporting countries in their efforts to strengthen national and local institutions and make progress towards effective governance and use of forest resources .
I wish to thank again Ms Lucas , Mr Ford and the shadow rapporteurs for their excellent work .
I am encouraged that Parliament , while endorsing the approach of the Commission , wants to reinforce it further and has made amendments to this end .
Let me assure you that I fully share Parliament 's objective of putting in place an ambitious regulation to address illegal logging and its associated trade .
I also want to assure you that the Commission will give careful consideration to the amendments of the proposed regulation .
To conclude , I would like in particular to comment on two of the issues addressed tonight .
Firstly I would like to refer to the due-diligence approach , which is more comprehensive than just a certificate of legality .
The principle of due diligence reflects the legal obligation of a proactive behaviour to a certain legality and needs to be demonstrated on a basis of comprehensive measures which will enable legality to be reasonably assured .
In some cases a certificate of legality will only be a starting point , the first measure included in the due diligence procedure .
Where the risk assessment has shown that the country of origin presents a higher risk of administrative corruption , or in countries where enforcement of national laws is weak , additional guarantees are necessary to underpin the certified legality .
The other issue I would like to address is the proposed extension of the scope to cover downstream operators .
According to the principles of better regulation and a reduction of administrative burden , requiring distributors and retailers to demand proof of the due diligence from the proceeding market obligators appears to be excessive .
If timber was made subject to due-diligence enquires when first placed on the market , why unduly burden downstream operators ?
In summary , out of the 75 proposed amendments , the Commission can support fully , in part , or in principle , 37 .
I will provide Parliament 's secretariat with a list detailing the Commission 's position on the amendments .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to thank my colleagues , and Commissioner Dimas , very much for their comments .
One important point I would like to make is that great care has been taken in our amendments not to reinvent the wheel .
I have learnt from meetings with numerous industry representatives and other stakeholders that many countries , and also many companies , already have in place excellent systems which would fulfil most , if not all , requirements of the due-diligence system .
It makes sense , then , that all the work that has gone into establishing those systems does not go to waste and that we do not create unnecessary extra administrative burdens ; that is far from being our intention .
That being so , we have been very careful and have made use of good advice on including wording which would enable good existing systems to qualify under the regulation without the need to establish whole new structures .
So we have taken very seriously the message that we should not be disproportionate , that we should not be putting too much burden on the different players in the trading system , and that is exactly what our report aims to do : to make sure that all players in the trading system have a responsibility , that we do not put everything onto those who first put the products onto the market .
That is what seems disproportionate .
I think it is much more sensible that everybody has a role to play .
I would also add that many elements of our proposals are actually supported by industry .
It is rather ironic that in many senses industry seems to be far more ambitious in this area than even the Commission itself .
I have heard directly from industry how much they appreciate not only the fact that the Committee on the Environment 's report provides them with much greater clarity on what will be expected of them , but also precisely this fairer and more effective sharing of responsibility across the different parts of the supply chain which I have just described .
As far as European operators are concerned , I would like to say very clearly that the regulation as we have amended it should do nothing but benefit responsible European operators , since the vast majority of them already do most of what is being asked , and the existence of the regulation will prevent them from being undercut by other , less scrupulous , operators .
So we should be very clear that there is nothing in this report that makes life difficult for European operators .
We have also got some special measures for smaller operators , so we have taken very seriously the risk of being disproportionate ; I think we have addressed that very sensibly in the report that we have put before you .
Having heard again your comments , Commissioner , on the Environment Committee 's report , I am afraid I do maintain my view that the Commission 's proposal as it stands is disappointing and weak and simply will not do what it claims to do .
I fail to see how you can have legislation aimed at preventing the sale of illegally logged timber which does not actually make doing so an offence .
The way in which the whole Commission proposal is written is very patchy and it is very timid .
I think most European consumers would be genuinely shocked to realise that the EU does not already have in place legislation against illegal logging , and I suspect that all those who concluded , in response to the Commission 's own consultation , that legislation was the only way to really address the problem would not see the particular proposals by the Commission , the due-diligence system on its own , as sufficient to be able to address the problems that we face .
I will end my comments tonight by seeking - maybe via your good offices , Commissioner - to put some pressure behind the Council to speed up their work , because we really do want to make sure we get a common position from the Council before the summer so that we can move swiftly on with this in the autumn .
As I said earlier , we had really hoped to get a first-reading agreement .
Parliament did everything it could to enable that to happen .
It is , frankly , deeply disappointing that the Council has not acted with equivalent seriousness and speed , but I hope I can ask you once again , Commissioner , to do all you can to ensure that the Council does move swiftly on this .
The joint debate is closed .
In accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) , I have received one motion for a resolution , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
The vote on this motion for a resolution will take place on Thursday 23 April 2009 .
The vote on the report by Mrs Lucas will take place on Wednesday 22 April 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) Combating the trade in illegally harvested timber clearly has to be a priority , given its consequences for ecosystems and the unfair competition to which it subjects ' legal ' operators in the forest-timber-paper sector .
However , if we impose disproportionate constraints - particularly in relation to traceability - on operators who place timber on the market , this will result in our businesses becoming less competitive without for all that reducing instances of illegal logging , which will be redirected to other markets .
Indeed , we would be unrealistic in thinking that very binding European legislation alone would solve corruption- or State deficit-related problems , which often exist in countries that practise this illegal activity .
Similarly , I believe that this report goes too far in calling into question the Commission 's initial proposal , which is acceptable to operators .
Thus I do not think it appropriate to call into question the certification systems implemented by professionals , to exclude professional organisations and monitoring organisations financed by operators from the sector , or to do away with the national authority responsible for designating monitoring organisations .
I believe that the sector 's professionals must remain at the heart of the system and should not have overly burdensome administrative measures imposed on them .
Community control system for ensuring compliance with the rules of the Common Fisheries Policy ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Romeva i Rueda , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing a Community control system for ensuring compliance with the rules of the Common Fisheries Policy - C6-0510 / 2008 - .

Mr President , I would like to begin by reminding us all that a few weeks ago Greenpeace reported a Galician company , Armadores Vidal , to the Spanish public prosecutor 's office for receiving subsidies to the value of EUR 3.6 million from the Spanish Government , between 2003 and 2005 , despite the fact that , since 1999 , the company has accrued numerous sanctions in several countries for illegal fishing around the world .
In fact , the Commission has condemned this situation recently .
Last week the bluefin tuna fishing season began .
Scientists tell us that we have already gone beyond the acceptable limits of sustainable fishing of this species , which is clearly at risk of extinction .
The Spanish defence minister is currently in Somalia leading the operation to protect the tuna fishing boats deployed in the Indian Ocean against pirate attacks .
If European tuna vessels have to stray so far from home in order to work , it is because , firstly , the closest stocks are on the point of collapse and , secondly , we have an oversubsidised and clearly oversized fleet that seeks profitability even at the expense of using up the main element that sustains its activity : the fish .
Once again , the common factors in all these cases - and in many others - are overfishing , the excessively large European fleet and , most importantly , the lack of control and capacity to impose sanctions .
That is why our report maintains that applying the rules in a non-discriminatory and effective manner should be one of the basic pillars of the Common Fisheries Policy .
We therefore ask , for example , that it be explicitly forbidden to give public subsidies to anyone acting illegally , as in the case of Armadores Vidal .
Complying with the rules and adopting a coherent approach are the best ways to protect the interests of the fishing industry in the long term .
Such a policy is destined to fail if those people working in the fishing industry , from the fishermen to the traders who sell fish to consumers , do not comply with the rules .
Fish stocks are fated to disappear along with those who depend on them for survival .
On a number of occasions , the Commission and the European Parliament have lamented the low level of compliance and we have requested , among other things , that Member States increase controls , harmonise inspection criteria and sanctions , and that inspection results be more transparent .
In addition , we have requested that Community inspection systems be strengthened .
The proposed regulation that has given rise to this report tackles the much-needed reform of the existing control system and puts forward a series of recommendations to be added to existing ones following the adoption of the regulation on illegal , undeclared and unregulated fishing - ' yo-yo ' fishing - or the regulation concerning the authorisation of fishing activity .
The most important factor of a control system applied to 27 Member States is probably that all stakeholders should be treated equally and , in particular , that everyone along the production chain - fishermen , middlemen , buyers , people who have links to recreational fishing and others - should feel that they are not being discriminated against but also that they have their share of the responsibility on this matter .
Therefore , we must ensure that conditions are equal across the Community and also along the entire chain of custody .
While we also mostly support the Commission 's original proposal , the proposal we are tabling includes a series of aspects allowing us to make considerable progress in that direction .
I would just like to highlight one aspect by mentioning the need for the Community Fisheries Control Agency to play a particularly important role , given its Community nature and its impartiality order .
I therefore hope that the amendments we have tabled at the last minute , so as to finalise the report , will be accepted by my fellow Members as has already been the case in our committee debate , and I hope , indeed , that it will prove a useful tool to save those who are in need of saving : not just the stocks but the communities that make a living from them .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all allow me to thank the rapporteur , Mr Romeva i Rueda , who has undertaken some impressive work on this report .
What is even more noteworthy is the fact that the rapporteur has undertaken to meet with numerous international and Community stakeholders in several capitals .
This file was complex and delicate .
The Commission would like to thank Mr Romeva i Rueda for his work on this report .
As you know , the current regulation on fisheries control dates back to 1993 .
It has since been amended a dozen times , in particular in 1998 , to include the control of fishing effort , and in 2002 on the occasion of the last reform of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) .
However , the resulting system has serious shortcomings that prevent it from being as effective as it should be .
As both the European Commission and the European Court of Auditors have highlighted , the current system is inefficient , expensive , complex , and it does not produce the desired results .
This in turn undermines conservation and effort management initiatives .
Control failures thus contribute to the negative performance of the common fisheries policy .
The main aim of the control reform is to ensure the respect of the CFP rules by building a new standard framework which will enable the Member States and the Commission to fully assume their responsibilities .
It establishes a global and integrated approach to control , focusing on all aspects of the CFP and covering the whole chain of catch , landing , transport , processing and marketing - ' from catch to consumer ' .
In order to achieve this , the reform is built on three axes .
Axis 1 : the creation of a culture of compliance and responsibility of the sector .
The aim of this objective is to influence the behaviour of all stakeholders involved in the wide range of fishing activities in order to achieve compliance through not only monitoring and control activities , but as a result of an overall culture of compliance where all parts of the industry understand and accept that playing by the rules is in their own long-term interest .
Axis 2 : instituting a global and integrated approach to control and inspection .
The proposal ensures uniformity in the implementation of the control policy , while respecting the diversity and the specific characteristics of different fleets .
It establishes a level playing field for the industry by covering all aspects from capture through to the market .
Axis 3 : the effective application of CFP rules .
The reform also aims to clearly define the roles and responsibilities of Member States , the Commission and the Community Fisheries Control Agency .
Under the CFP , control and enforcement are the exclusive competence of the Member States .
The role of the Commission is to control and verify that the Member States are implementing the CFP rules correctly and effectively .
The current proposal does not try to change this allocation of responsibilities .
However , it is important to rationalise procedures , and to ensure that the Commission has the means to actually see to it that the Member States equally implement CFP rules .
I would also like to emphasise the fact that the proposal will reduce administrative burdens and make the system less bureaucratic .
The Commission 's impact assessment found that if the reform is adopted , the total administrative costs for operators could be reduced by 51 % - from EUR 78 to EUR 38 million - largely through the use of more modern technologies , such as the extension of the use of ERS , VMS and AIS .
Existing paper-based tools will be replaced at all stages of the fisheries chain - i.e. logbook , landing declarations and sales notes - except for vessels below 10 metres overall length .
For fishermen , the electronic system will make it easier to record and communicate data .
Once the system has been introduced , a number of reporting requirements will be removed .
The system will be quicker , more accurate , less expensive and will allow for the automated processing of data .
It will also facilitate cross-checking of data and information , and the identification of risks .
The result will be a more rational and risk-based approach to control actions at sea and on land , the latter being inherently more cost-effective .
The proposal will also remove the current obligation on Member States to transmit lists of fishing licenses or fishing permits to the Commission , which will instead be made accessible by electronic means to the national control services , to those of other Member States , and to the Commission .
Now turning to the report , I would like to comment on the amendments proposed .
The Commission welcomes the fact that the European Parliament supports the legislation in principle and considers that a new control regulation is necessary .
Whilst the Commission can go along with certain amendments that are in line with the discussion within the Council working group , it considers it fundamental to retain certain key elements of the proposal .
The Commission can agree with an important number of amendments , in particular Amendments 3 , 6 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 13 to 18 , 26 to 28 , 30 , 31 , 36 , 44 , 45 , 51 to 55 , 57 , 58 , 62 , 63 , 66 to 69 , 82 , 84 , 85 , and 92 to 98 .
The Commission cannot , however , accept the following amendments , which could be summarised as follows :
Concerning the monitoring of fishing activities : Amendment 23 modifies the margin of tolerance to be applied to logbook catch entries to 10 % , instead of 5 % as in the proposal .
This will seriously affect the accuracy of the logbook data that is essential when using such data for cross-checks .
Since such cross-checks will be used to identify data inconsistencies as indicators of illegal behaviour on which Member States should concentrate their scarce control resources , this amendment would also negatively affect the operation of the computerised validation system foreseen in Article 102 ( 1 ) of the proposal which is considered to be the backbone of the new control system .
The most important argument is , however , that fishermen can indeed estimate their catches within an accuracy level of 3 % .
After all , fish is stored and transported in boxes and they know how much weight of fish a box can hold .
Regarding Amendment 29 on prior notifications , the Commission believes that the idea to reserve the granting of exemptions to the Council would complicate enormously the procedure and would not allow for timely reactions to developments on the ground .
The Commission also finds that the reallocation of unused quotas is a management matter that should be dealt with in the context of the CFP reform .
Thus , Amendment 41 on corrective measures cannot be accepted .
On transhipments of stocks subject to multiannual plans , Amendment 42 deletes the entire Article 33 .
This is not acceptable because , as you know , transhipments have been used in the past to conceal illegal catches .
For that reason it is essential to maintain Article 33 and that quantities to be transhipped are weighed by an independent body before they are taken on the transport vessel .
Amendment 47 deletes the entire section on real-time closure of fisheries .
By accepting this , the Commission would lose a very important instrument for the protection of stocks .
Real time closures are directly linked to control issues .
Therefore , this amendment cannot be accepted .
Amendment 102 is not acceptable since it deletes the article on the ability for the Commission to close fisheries if so required by the Commission .
A similar provision exists already in the current control regulation , and it is a necessary tool to ensure that , if a Member State fails to close a fishery , then the Commission is entitled to close that fishery in order to ensure the respect of quotas - and this we did last year for the bluefin tuna and the year before for cod in the Baltic Sea .
Similarly , the Commission cannot accept Amendment 103 , which deletes the provisions on corrective measures .
This would weaken the role of the Commission as the guardian of EU law ensuring that all Member States are able to take full advantage of their fishing opportunities .
Moreover , this provision already exists in current legislation .
As regards new technologies : concerning the Vessel Monitoring System ( VMS ) and the Vessel Detection System ( VDS ) , Amendment 19 foresees the entry into force of these electronic devices for vessels between 10 and 15 metres as of 1 July 2013 , instead of 1 January 2012 , as laid down in the proposal .
Amendment 20 foresees that the installation of VMS devices and electronic logbooks is eligible for funding , with 80 % cofinancing from the EU budget .
Regarding Amendment 19 , the proposal already provides for a transition period , as this obligation would only apply as of 1 January 2012 , whereas the entry into force of the regulation is foreseen for 1 January 2010 .
Since the new control system intends to make the best possible use of modern technologies , in order to develop an efficient automated and systematic system of cross-checking , it is important that these provisions apply on the date foreseen in the proposal , so as not to further delay the implementation of the new approach to control .
Regarding the concerns on the cost of introducing these new technologies , the cofinancing by the Commission is already available under Council Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 , which establishes cofinancing rates , and in the framework of this Regulation the Commission will consider increasing such rates .
It would , however , go against the budgetary rules to lay down in another legislative act the rates for cofinancing .
Concerning recreational fisheries : on this controversial subject , I would like to indicate that , in contrast to what has been widely reported , the draft regulation does not aim to place a disproportionate burden upon individual anglers or on the leisure fishing industry .
What is proposed is to subject certain recreational fisheries on certain specific stocks , namely those subject to a recovery plan , to certain basic conditions on permits and catch reporting .
These requirements will also help to obtain information allowing the public authorities to evaluate the biological impact of such activities and , where necessary , to prepare the measures needed .
Concerning the EP report , the Commission welcomes the fact that a definition of ' recreational fisheries ' is provided for in Amendment 11 , and that Parliament foresees that , where a recreational fishery is found to have a significant impact , catches should count against the quotas .
It also welcomes the fact that the EP agrees that the marketing of catches from recreational fishing shall be prohibited except for philanthropic purposes .
However , I would like to stress that it is important to maintain an obligation for Member States to evaluate the impact of recreational fisheries as set out in Amendment 93 , and not just the possibility to do so as contemplated in Amendments 48 , 49 and 50 .
The Commission , of course , wants to ensure that the final regulation adopted by the Council achieves a fair balance between , on the one hand , obtaining accurate information on the impact of recreational fisheries on recovery stocks - following a case by case analysis - and , on the other , ensuring that recreational fishers , whose catches clearly have a negligible biological impact , are not burdened with disproportionate requirements .
Concerning sanctions and enforcement : Amendment 64 inserts a new Article 84 ( 2a ) indicating that as long as a holder of a fishing authorisation has been given ' penalty points ' the holder should be excluded from receiving EU subsidies or national public aid during that time .
The Commission cannot accept this amendment .
In the same vein , Amendment 61 cannot be accepted .
In fact Article 45 , point 7 , of Regulation ( EC ) No 1005 / 2008 establishing a Community system to prevent , deter and eliminate illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing already provides the possibility to ban offenders temporarily or permanently from access to public assistance or subsidies .
To introduce such a rule additionally in the context of the penalty point system would be disproportionate .
Amendment 107 deletes the minimum and maximum levels of sanctions proposed by the Commission .
This is not acceptable , since comparable sanctions in all Member States is an important element to achieve the same degree of deterrence in all Community waters and thus create a level playing field through the establishment of a common framework at the Community level .
The provision does not affect the discretion of Member States to determine which infringements are to be characterised as serious .
Concerning the powers of the Commission : Amendment 71 imposes the presence of an official of a Member State during inspections carried out by the Commission , and in the same vein , Amendment 108 limits the possibility for the Commission to carry out inquiries and inspections only in cases where a Member State has been previously informed .
The capacity of the Commission to undertake autonomous inspections would be seriously affected when officials of the Member State concerned have to be always present during inspections .
By not providing an official , the Member State concerned could even prevent an autonomous inspection from taking place .
Amendments 104 , 108 , 109 and 110 are also problematic since they restrict the competencies of Community inspectors , restrict their ability to perform autonomous verifications and autonomous inspections .
Without such competencies for Community inspectors , the Commission cannot ensure the same quality of application of CFP rules in all Member States .
Amendment 72 takes away the basis according to which Community financial assistance can be suspended or cancelled when there is evidence that provisions of the regulation have not been complied with .
The Commission cannot accept this amendment .
With this amendment the simple conclusion by the Commission that the Member State concerned has not taken adequate measures would be sufficient to take measures against that Member State .
On the other hand , Amendments 111 and 112 limit the competence of the Commission to suspend Community financial assistance .
This would seriously undermine the capacity of the Commission to apply this measure .
Furthermore , the amendment does not clarify who , instead of the Commission , is supposed to take such a decision .
Concerning the closure of fisheries : Amendment 73 limits considerably the cases in which the Commission will be able to close a fishery for failure to comply with the objectives of the common fisheries policy .
' Evidence ' of non-respect will be much harder to prove than ' reason to believe ' .
In order to ensure that the rules of the CFP are equally applied in all Member States and to avoid a particular threat to sensitive stocks , it is important that the Commission has the possibility to close a fishery when the relevant Member State fails to do so itself .
In the same vein , the Commission cannot accept Amendment 113 , which proposes to delete this article .
Amendments 74 to 78 reduce substantially the pressure on Member States to respect national quotas .
Acceptance of these amendments would simply mean maintaining the status quo .
The amendments reduce substantially the possibility for the Commission to take measures to ensure that Member State fishers do not fish on a regulated stock for which the Member State has no quota or has a small quota .
This would be particularly detrimental in cases where such fishing effectively prevents other Member States from fishing their quotas .
Amendments 79 and 80 delete Articles 98 and 100 , which give the Commission the possibility of deducting quotas and to refuse quota exchange for failure to comply with the objectives of the CFP .
The Commission wishes to maintain this provision , which is an important instrument , to ensure the respect of the CFP rules by Member States .
It responds to the recommendation of the Court of Auditors to reinforce the capacity of the Commission to put pressure on Member States .
It will also help demonstrate to national fishing industries that the respect of the CFP rules by their national administrations is also in their interest , and they can be expected to exert a positive pressure on their national administrations to that effect .
Amendment 114 proposes the deletion of Article 101 on emergency measures .
The Commission cannot accept this amendment since this provision is an important instrument to ensure the respect of the CFP rules by the Member States .
I would once again like to thank Mr Romeva i Rueda for the report and the committee for the attention it has given to this very important issue .
This report is a significant contribution to a truly efficient control system .
I would like to apologise for taking up so much time .
Mr President , Commissioner , there is one initial , major objection that has to be raised against this proposal : that is , its total failure to consult the sector concerned .
It is unacceptable for the Commission to continue stating that its whole fishing policy is to be based on talks with stakeholders , at the exact same time as it is drafting a regulation that is to have the most serious , immediate consequences for the fleet , when the industry is , in fact , deprived of such dialogue or prior consultation .
This is a bad start to an attempt to establish the culture of compliance to which the Commission so often refers .
The timing of this is also highly questionable .
While it is true that the control policy is one of the most resounding failures of the Common Fisheries Policy , it is also true that the Commission has maintained it since 1993 and has decided to modify it just as it presents a draft report on the reform of the CFP announcing a complete review of the conservation and management system .
Given that control is a permanent feature of any management system , it would have been much more sensible to coordinate both reforms without running the risk of the 2012 reform leaving this proposal obsolete ; some of its measures are not even due to come into effect until 2012 at the earliest .
These two major errors detract from what could have been real successes , such as the attempts to harmonise infringements and sanctions , and the objective of holding Member States definitively responsible for the clear lack of political will to apply control measures .
Mr President , it only remains for me to thank the rapporteur for his work and say that I am sorry we have so little time to deal with such an important matter .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mr Romeva i Rueda , who I congratulate on his openness , has the principal objective of ensuring respect for the rules of the common fisheries policy .
Respect for these rules and a European approach to fisheries are the best way of protecting the interests of the fishing sector .
If those involved in the sector - from the crews on board to the traders who sell the fish - do not respect the rules , they will be doomed to failure .
The attempt to apply European rules without taking account of the diversity of European fleets will also contribute to this failure .
That is why I suggested that the Commission 's proposal should be brought more in line with the reality facing small-scale and artisanal fleets - although I wanted to go further - which basically exist throughout the European Union , particularly in the outermost regions , without ever forgetting that a common fisheries policy needs adequate control measures .
On several occasions , as rapporteur for the fisheries budget , I have regretted the inadequate compliance with European rules .
I have particularly demanded better control by the Member States , transparency in the results of inspections and strengthening of the Community inspection policy , provided that these are accompanied by financial support measures for the sector .
Clearly we should have liked to have gone further , but I must congratulate the rapporteur on the proposal and the measures that he has presented , and I hope that the commissioner will give an appropriate response on this issue .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , beyond congratulating Mr Romeva i Rueda on his report , I would like to address the content in the wider context of the common fisheries policy .
In the last 10 years I have heard many criticisms of it , including the lack of a level playing field , insufficient stakeholder involvement , inadequate balancing of economic , social and environmental imperatives and too much by way of micro-management from the centre .
Recently , though , I have been able to assure people that the policy is undergoing significant change .
Of course there is still a long way to go - eliminating discards , for example - and there are times when the Commission still seems to veer towards micro-management .
I mention here Article 47 of the control regulation , at least in its original version .
I have often said , though , that the common fisheries policy is a bit like an oil tanker : it takes a considerable time to turn round , and I do believe that the control regulation will go a long way to achieving the necessary level playing field where enforcement and sanctions are concerned , just as the development of regional advisory councils shall do much to bring improvements in other respects .
So I would like to finish on a personal note , by expressing my appreciation of the valuable work done by members of the Fisheries Committee throughout and by thanking Commissioner Borg and his team for all that has been achieved in their five years at the helm .
Mr President , Portugal encompasses the historically defined territory on the European continent and the archipelagos of the Azores and Madeira .
The law defines the extent and limit of its territorial waters , its exclusive economic zone , and the rights of Portugal to the adjacent seabed .
The State will not transfer any part of the Portuguese territory or the rights of sovereignty that it holds over this .
Article 5 of the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic could not be clearer .
As a result , in accordance with and fighting to ensure respect for the provisions enshrined in Portugal 's fundamental law , we tabled an amendment stating that this proposal for a regulation should respect and not threaten the competence and responsibility of Member States with regard to inspecting compliance with the rules of the common fisheries policy .
However , the amendments made by the Committee on Fisheries , although in some respects they minimise certain negative aspects of the European Commission 's unacceptable proposal , do not safeguard the principles that we regard as central .
In particular , among other worrying and inadequate aspects , it is unacceptable that the Commission should have the competence to independently carry out inspections without prior warning in the exclusive economic zones and territories of the Member States , and that it can , at its discretion , prohibit fishing activities and suspend or cancel payments of the Community financial assistance for a Member State .
It is also unacceptable that a Member State can inspect its fishing vessels in the exclusive economic zone of any other Member State , without the latter 's authorisation .
I will end by recalling what this Parliament has itself approved : the importance of control in the management of fisheries , which is the competence of Member States .
We hope , once again , that Parliament will not go back on its word , as has unfortunately been its custom .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I must declare an interest in this subject .
I am a lifelong keen sea angler , as are most of my family .
I enjoy this because it is one of the last basic freedoms that we have .
We can go onto the beach or out in our boats , catch a few fish and take them home to eat .
Now , for some years , recreational sea anglers have been lobbying for their sport to be included as part of the CFP .
I have said for years , ' be careful what you wish for ' .
Well , now it has happened and it is called Article 47 , and it is called this Maltese Commissioner , Joe Borg .
There are over one million of us in Britain : we are conservation-minded ; we are sensible .
We do not need regulating , Mr Borg , by the likes of you .
That is why we need an outright rejection of Article 47 because nothing else will do .
If you get this power , you can come back year after year .
We may say now that beach angling has been exempted , but once it is under the auspices of people like you , Mr Borg , you can come back next year or the year after and start to regulate it .
As far as boat angling is concerned , the door with all of this is open for everybody being required to have licences and to report .
Any mini-victory that we feel that we won at committee stage by changing the words ' Member States shall ' to ' Member States may ' start to collect this data is lost : I am afraid , with Defra back home , I feel they will take any opportunity to use EU rules to control us in any way that they can .
Sea angling needs encouragement .
We should be building offshore reefs .
We should be recognising - as the Americans have done - the enormous economic impact that it can have .
Instead , we have a common fisheries policy that has been an environmental disaster already .
It is prejudiced against the British working fleet and it will now ruin sea angling in Britain if we give this man , and people of his ilk , power .
So , Commissioner Borg , my advice is ' sling your hook ' !
( FR ) Mr President , thank you for Sète .
There are indeed fisheries resources , and a new monitoring system , which we are debating this evening , but above all there are fishermen , their jobs and their livelihoods , and being a fisherman is the hardest job in the world .
It is not that of an official or elected representative , and it shapes men who are free , but desperate today , hence the uprisings of the tuna fishermen in the Mediterranean , in Sète , in Le Grau-du-Roi , and the irate fishermen in Boulogne , in France .
We have regulated their fishing since 1983 , so for 26 years .
However , since the entry into force of the Treaty of Rome , Articles 32 to 39 on the CAP have also related to them , and the very first Community regulation on fishing came into force in 1970 .
For 39 years we have been legislating : on the shock of the arrival of Spain in 1986 , and of Denmark in 1993 , on gillnets , driftnets , fishery agents , total allowable catches , quotas , aid , fleet restructuring , and modernisation .
We legislate on sanctions , biological rest periods , stocks , discards , monitoring systems , humans , species , cod , hake , bluefin tuna , and even international agreements , and now , on recreational fishing !
What is more , it is still not working .
Blue Europe is becoming greyer and greyer .
Why ?
Because fishing is part of the 21st-century global food challenge ; it is at global level that it will have to be managed .
Like the financial crisis , pandemics , climate change , immigration and serious crime , fish are alter-globalists .
They respect neither borders nor Community law .
Europe is too small to regulate fisheries resources , and , from Peru to Japan , Moscow to Dakar , Ireland and Valencia , we are going to need regulations on the global shared ownership of fisheries resources .
That is the path , Mr President , that Brussels must also take .
Well , after that torrent of words , Mr Stevenson has the floor .

Mr President , you are probably aware that two fishermen , a father and son , from Northern Ireland , who fish out of Peterhead , have been jailed in Liverpool after being fined GBP 1 million and that the Assets Recovery Agency , which is an agency normally used for measures against drug dealers and gangsters , was utilised to hammer these two working fishermen , who , admittedly , were involved in landing illegal catches , which no one would condone - but to treat working fishermen , even guilty of that offence , as criminals , as gangsters , in the same way as we would treat drug dealers , is appalling .
This proves why we definitely need some measure to introduce a level playing field as is contained in Mr Romeva i Rueda 's report , because a similar offence in some parts of the EU would probably merit a fine of just EUR 2 000 or EUR 3 000 .
I want , however , to use the remainder of my time to talk about Article 47 , not surprisingly , because I believe that there is a need to differentiate between the word ' shall ' and the word ' may ' as contained in Amendments 93 , 48 , 49 and 50 .
We won considerable support in committee for my amendment that contained the word ' may ' , but now you have informed us , Commissioner , that you would reject that in any case , so it seems we have been wasting our time .
I do hope you will consider this again .
If a Member State does not think it is necessary to pursue this course of action , I hope you would respect the subsidiarity principle .
( SV ) Mr President , as a eurosceptic , I often feel a certain Schadenfreude when various EU institutions come up with unreasonable and ridiculous proposals like Article 47 .
Such proposals help to undermine the unjustified respect that many citizens of EU Member States feel for the EU 's efforts - efforts to transfer power from democratic Member States to a bureaucratic Brussels .
Such proposals therefore make it easier to fight against centralisation and bureaucracy .
At the same time , however , I take my role here in the European Parliament seriously .
We must put a stop to this trend , and I hope that the majority of the Members of this House feel the same way .
If not , I hope that a majority will at least fear the voters ' judgment at the beginning of June and therefore realise that , in their own interests - something that they are fully aware of - they must reject this proposal .
If the principle of subsidiarity cannot even enable the EU to keep its paws off recreational fishing in Stockholm 's archipelago , then the future is bleak for the European project .
Mr President , I would like to tell the Commissioner that I too favour ' may ' and not ' shall ' .
I am a co-signatory as well .
The whole culture of compliance with the common fisheries policy will not be established until we have equity and fairness at the centre of the inspection policy and of subsequent proceedings taken against our fishermen .
We do need , as this regulation proposes - and as the rapporteur also says - Community-level control and compliance which the needs of this situation reflects , while leaving ultimate responsibility to Member States .
At the moment it is appalling that fines range from EUR 600 to EUR 6 000 for similar offences in different Member States .
There is no respect at all for the common fisheries policy , which is commonly agreed to be a flawed instrument .
We do not need this at the centre of it .
On Article 47 , recreational fishing , I welcome the definition , which was missing in the draft proposal .
We need a commonsense reaction .
Yes , Member States can evaluate if there is serious impact on quotas of vulnerable stocks , but we should not let it be the rule of thumb .
It must be the exception and not the rule .
Please move on discards - it is immoral and totally unacceptable that we are criminalising our fishermen .
We must not encourage by-catches , but we must not criminalise fishermen for landing them either .
Get the balance right , please , Commissioner Borg .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , your proposal is absolutely fundamental .
No one reading the Court of Auditors ' report on the state of control over the common fisheries policy can have any doubt that this initiative by the European Commission is absolutely vital .
However , it is also true that our rapporteur has done some absolutely exceptional work in this case , and has managed to take into account many of the specific characteristics , in particular of small-scale fisheries , and has included some of our suggestions .
I should like to warmly congratulate him on his exemplary work .
However , I should also like to say that I am in favour of subsidiarity .
Yet there can be no subsidiarity in control if there is no subsidiarity in the logic of the common fisheries policy .
That is the challenge facing the commissioner in the reform of the common fisheries policy .
I hope that he will be very committed to and successful in meeting this challenge , which is vital to fisheries throughout Europe .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank you for this interesting debate .
Clearly we are equally strongly aware of the need for a meaningful reform of our control systems .
Let me try to touch on a number of points that have been raised , first of all with regard to the question concerning recreational fisheries .
As I said , this is a very contentious topic , probably the most contentious of all the control provisions contained in the proposal .
However , it has given rise to a number of misconceptions as to what the real objective and purpose of the provisions is .
I said that we are prepared to accept the definition that is proposed in one of the amendments .
I will be setting out clearly our position on the definition and on the proposed regulation of recreational fisheries in the coming days , including by writing directly to the anglers ' representatives in order to spell out the objectives , the parameters and the details concerning recreational fisheries .
Then , I hope , I will be receiving feedback from them and , if necessary , we will look into the provisions in order to make them more finely-tuned to the only objective that we need to target .
We have a significant problem with recovery stock .
There are certain recreational activities which impose big pressures on such recovery stock and we need to address this point .
This is only fair for the professional fishermen that we address this .
Otherwise we can never hope to turn the situation around if there is pressure from a significant fishing effort , even though it is carried out in a recreational manner and no earnings are derived from it .
The stock cannot hope to recover if there is significant effort , as scientific reports have indicated to us .
( Interjection from the floor : ' No science for that at all ! ' )
Concerning the total lack of consultation of the sector , I think that we have consulted the industry .
I myself took part in such a conference in Scotland some time ago .
All RACs have submitted their opinions and , furthermore , as in any other legislation , we organised a public Internet consultation .
The sector was specifically consulted in the framework of the Advisory Committee for Fisheries and Aquaculture in the course of 2008 .
Concerning the point made on small-scale vessels , the Commission believes that the small-scale fleet can have a significant impact on resources .
This is the reason why there is no general exemption for this fleet in the proposal .
However , the proposal provides specific exemptions for certain categories of vessels , in general those under 10 metres , and in particular on the VMS , on log book , on prior notification and landing declarations .
In this regard , the proposal respects the principle of proportionality .
Financial aspects are also taken into account at the level of EU cofinancing of up to 95 % of the costs for those electronic devices , to help the stakeholders to use the new technologies .
Exemptions will be examined further within the final Presidency compromise .
I would also like to say , with regard to the points made by Mr Guerreiro , that many of the points that he mentioned already exist in the existing control provisions .
Therefore , were we to take up the amendments that he suggests , we would actually be moving backwards with regard to control and enforcement , rather than strengthening the provisions that need to be strengthened .
We are seeking a level playing field in the sanctions provisions as contained in the proposed regulation .
Obviously we are prepared to look into them further in order to see whether there needs to be further fine-tuning , but the main objective of the provisions on sanctions in the proposed regulation is to ensure that there are no significant discrepancies , such as exist today , between sanctions given by certain Member States , or by the judicial authorities of certain Member States , and sanctions that are given by the judicial authorities of other Member States .
Finally , I would like to thank Mr Farage for his confidence shown in my staying here for a second term !
Mr President , I would like to use these last two minutes of time to express my thanks .
Firstly , to the Commission , not only for the work it has carried out and the opportunity it has provided : indeed , I think it is never easy to raise an issue of this nature and this depth , but I feel it was necessary at least to begin the debate .
It has done so boldly ; naturally , there will always be those who think that the time is never right , but I believe that the debate has at least helped and will continue to help us to clarify some of the difficulties we have in achieving greater and better regulation of this sector .
Secondly , I would like to thank the rest of the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs because , indeed , as we have seen during the debate , we have very differing points of view and we have made a considerable effort to find common positions .
May I also acknowledge the effort everyone has made on this .
The conclusion we have reached may not be the one that all of us had hoped for .
Taking the margin of tolerance as an example , I agree with the Commission that 5 % was sufficient .
The 10 % margin is part of our compromise because there were other Members who wished to go much further .
We are in a similar situation as regards the possibility of extending or , in any case , postponing the period for implementing the electronic system .
I would also like to remind us all that this will not have any additional cost , a detail that sometimes gets forgotten .
In any case , special resources are available for this from the Commission .
With regard to the final question of recreational fishing , perhaps the most controversial but not necessarily the most important part of this resolution , I would like to focus on one aspect : that of non-discrimination .
If we fail to realise that we all have to play our part in sharing responsibility , it is unlikely that we will achieve the desired result .
The compromise we reached in our negotiations was not easy , of course , but I feel that it is fairly acceptable .
Nevertheless , our agreement did not cover the question of whether or not the study of the potential impact of recreational fishing should be carried out voluntarily or mandatorily .
Given that some exceptions for the recreational sector are being proposed , I feel it would at least be good to see Member States commit to providing the necessary information rather than be forced to do so because , I repeat , we either share responsibility or , in the end , we will all - the recreational sector included - find ourselves affected by the lack of regulation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 22 April 2009 .
Conservation of fisheries resources through technical measures ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Visser , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation concerning the conservation of fisheries resources through technical measures - C6-0282 / 2008 - .
Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur for highlighting some of the main concerns raised by the Commission 's proposal .
One is the new tendency to regulate individual areas of issues that are pillars of the common policy .
While this approach may , in theory , be understandable in the case of technical measures , we must be very careful to make sure that subsequent regional regulations are limited to aspects relating solely to the application and regulation of technical details .
I mention this because drawing up framework regulations containing minimum measures which are then followed by different laws for individual areas is , together with an increasing tendency to turn to comitology , one of the options the Commission is prepared to take if faced with the prospect of a codecision procedure on fisheries , as the Directorate-General for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries itself freely admits in the Green Paper on the reform of the Common Fisheries Policy .
We should also bear in mind that it is not an ordinary policy we are talking about here , but a common policy , which requires total clarity as regards what may be involved in a more or less covert handing-over of control to Member States or an excessive territorialisation of what should be common rules intended not to disrupt competition and to avoid discrimination among fleets .
Therefore , while it may be reasonable for very local species to have their minimum size regulated by regional regulations , those cases should make up the lowest number ; minimum sizes in general , like measurements of nets or criteria according to which catches can be unloaded and sold , should be universal and adopted by the Council and Parliament .
Some of the main changes introduced by the Committee on Fisheries also move in that direction , trying to limit any application of the comitology procedure to details alone and insisting that the Council should have rules at its disposal in order to establish seasonal closures , net dimensions and measures to eliminate or reduce discards , for we understand that all Community fisheries have to be bound by certain rules that are the same for everyone .
It should be remembered that the only truly communitised aspect of this policy that we call ' common ' is access to markets , while the conservation and management policy - let us stop calling it a control policy - leaves certain room for manoeuvre that Member States generally have no qualms in using to the benefit of their fleets and to the detriment of those of others .
We have just witnessed the Commission 's strong commitment to communitising and standardising control , and it would prove difficult to understand the way in which the remaining measures serve , on the contrary , to break up and fragment that control , or the fact that different rules are created for the same activity , depending on where it is carried out .
This jeopardises the entire credibility of the Common Fisheries Policy and its own future as such , something that should not be assumed before the 2012 reform .
Finally , with regard to the controversial ' one net ' rule , I believe that Parliament has offered the Commission a good alternative approach , indicating in which cases this may be unviable ; it should , therefore , be acceptable to take more than one fishing net on board .
Hence , I hope the Commission can show sensitivity to what are clearly major concerns for the fishing industry and our own Committee on Fisheries .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me express my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Visser , Ms Fraga and the Fisheries Committee for the draft report on the Commission 's proposal for technical measures for the Atlantic and the North Sea .
This is a very technical file and , as you are aware , technical conservation measures in the Atlantic and the North Sea originate to a large extent from existing rules .
In Community legislation the measures are spread out in different regulations : the 1998 general technical measures regulation for the Atlantic and the North Sea ; the additional technical measures regulation for the recovery of cod and hake ; and the annual TAC and quota regulation , which also contains a number of technical conservation measures .
Apart from this legal complexity , the present rules are in some cases very complicated and difficult to implement and control .
The Commission adopted the proposal for a new Regulation on technical conservation measures for the Atlantic on 4 June of last year .
The proposal was drafted after extensive consultation of stakeholders and Member States during 2006 and 2007 .
It groups together all the relevant rules into one single legislative act , which will therefore improve legal consistency .
Furthermore , the proposal seeks to simplify , clarify and streamline the various rules .
Special attention has been paid to simplifying onboard inspections and reducing the costs for fishermen .
There are also some additional rules to reduce discards , such as the establishment of a legal framework for real-time closures , already applied in the North Sea .
A new decision-making structure is being proposed , using a Council-level decision for the general and essential provisions and comitology for the more detailed and technical region-specific provisions , thereby avoiding micro-management at a political level .
This new approach is not supported in your report , where Amendments 1 , 6 , 7 , 25 and 26 call for Council regulations both for general and for detailed technical rules .
The Commission , particularly in the framework of the CFP reform , does not want to continue with micro-management measures at a political level .
However , taking into account the point made in the report regarding comitology , the Commission is ready to study any procedure which , while maintaining comitology for regional technical rules , will enable the raising at Council level of any matter which appears to be essential or political .
The Commission can partially accept Amendments 2 and 3 , relating to additional illustrations of fishing gears , if needed , and to certain specific market provisions , particularly on the minimum size of species , with the aim of harmonising measures .
In line with discard policy , the Commission is proposing new rules about real-time closures and moving-on provisions for specific fisheries in order to reduce discarding practices .
Both measures are considered to be efficient tools and , in order to reduce discards , are important in order to allow for a switch from rules dealing with landings to provisions on real catches .
For that reason , the Commission cannot accept Amendments 4 , 5 , 21 , 23 and 24 .
However , Amendment 20 , only in so far as it calls for ' quantity ' to be replaced by ' weight ' to define the level of by-catch , is acceptable .
In addition we can positively consider the second part of the amendment regarding the derogations on distance .
The parameters of such a derogation , however , would have to be studied in some detail and will be laid out in the implementing regulation .
The Commission , mainly for inspection purposes , intends to implement the one-net-rule provision , which should be applicable to most European fisheries .
The Commission is ready to examine possible derogations for specific fisheries , where these are justified and well argued , and where they take into account the criteria set out in Amendment 11 .
Such derogations should be part of the regional regulations .
The other aspects of the Commission 's proposal are very technical , with many details related to the construction and use of fishing gears in the Atlantic .
I note that the rapporteur and the Fisheries Committee also addressed the very technical elements of the proposal and suggested a number of amendments , with the intention of improving the proposal .
However , I must express my reservations regarding Amendments 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 and 22 .
The technical rules proposed on the basis of scientific advice have been simplified in comparison with current legislation , and will facilitate inspection on board and reduce costs for fishermen .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 18 and 19 , since the provisions proposed are already in force , subsequent to a political agreement in Council on a proposal from the Commission based on scientific advice , and no new information is available to justify any modification .
I can support the idea set out in Amendment 27 , and therefore , when introducing new technical measures , the Commission agrees to delay their entry into force so as to allow fishermen enough time to make the necessary adaptations .
Let me again express my gratitude to the rapporteur and the Committee for their work on this proposal .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate the Commission on its legislative initiative , and also our rapporteur who is represented here today by our fellow Member , Mrs Fraga .
I believe that it was indeed vitally urgent to simplify the legislative framework in this respect .
However , I also believe that we must go much further , particularly in two fundamental areas , the first of which is discards .
I believe that the planned reform must , in principle , purely and simply prohibit any discards .
Discards must be absolutely prohibited .
Secondly , I believe that we must establish the principle of respect for stricter rules than the European ones by all vessels in regions in which the regional or national authorities understand it as such .
These are two fundamental principles that are absent here , and I hope that these will be taken into account in the reform of the common fisheries policy .
Mr President , I welcome these measures to encourage selective fishing practices , which minimise harm to the complex ecosystem in which the resources are found , while enabling responsible fishing to continue , and to maximise returns while minimising by-catches and subsequent discards .
We must get to the point of banning discards as soon as possible , Commissioner .
The variety of the fishing grounds found in the EU is part of our strength , but consequently an additional complication when producing legislation that is adequate , responsive and coherent .
Each of the seas in Europe has its own specificity , and it is important to recognise the level of knowledge and expertise that can be provided by the stakeholders on the ground and to resist the temptation to micro-manage on an EU level .
As this is our last debate on fisheries in this political mandate , I would like to thank you , Commissioner , and all your staff for your huge commitment and thorough knowledge of your brief and for the time and attention you always gave to the PECH Committee . You were always available for us .
It has been much appreciated and noted and the comparison made with other Commissioners ' availability .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank Mrs Davis for her kind words just expressed .
I would like to say that with regard to this regulation , as I said in my opening statement , the issue of comitology is aimed at simplifying the currently over-complex system of decision-making on very technical issues .
However , I agree that we have to have a procedure in place that will nevertheless allow an issue to be raised at Council level should any matter appear to be of a significant or political nature .
On the question of discards , we have already started to take measures to reduce discards , in particular within the parameters of the North Sea and of the cod recovery plan .
We will continue and we will be coming up with further proposals , for example on the banning of high grading , in a general manner which we will be proposing for 2010 , and we hope that we will be dealing with this issue holistically in the discussions on the reform of the common fisheries policy with a view , I hope , to the final result being the total elimination of discards .
I would like myself to thank the Members of Parliament , in particular the members of the Fisheries Committee , for the constant support they have given the Commission in dealing with the sometimes intricate and politically sensitive issue of fisheries .
Mr President , I am grateful to the commissioner for one comment he made in particular , which is that he is prepared to reconsider the Commission 's position on the issue of comitology .
I welcome the news because Parliament has clearly shown that , throughout this debate in the Committee on Fisheries , it does not agree with the Commission 's keenness - also apparent in the draft Green Paper on the reform of the Common Fisheries Policy - to turn to the subject of comitology excessively and with particular interest .
In addition , the Commission justifies this in the Green Paper , alleging that proceedings may now be delayed , given the codecision procedure that Parliament is going to apply to the area of fisheries for the first time , once the Treaty of Lisbon comes into effect .
I do not believe this to be true ; I feel that legislative procedures are often delayed not because of Parliament or the codecision procedure but , rather , because sometimes the Commission is also late in presenting its proposals .
In my view , this is a matter of interest and one that should be debated .
I understand the commissioner 's point when he says that with a regulation as technical as this one , some aspects have to be decided by comitology and cannot all be dealt with by the Council .
However , I think , Commissioner , that there is a certain difference between what you consider to be ' technical ' and what we in Parliament consider to be ' technical ' .
We are more restrictive than you tend to be .
As a final point - I do not wish to spend too long on a matter for which I am not the rapporteur - I wish to mention the one net rule .
Commissioner , during the debates we had in the Committee on Fisheries , it became apparent that the Commission defends this principle chiefly for reasons of control .
We all understand that the issue of control is a great deal simpler with the single net rule , but this matter also poses serious problems for certain fisheries , as you are indeed aware .
Therefore , let us not always use the issue of control in order to be highly restrictive at times , for some decisions do not always need to be made .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 22 April 2009 .
Common Immigration Policy for Europe : Principles , actions and tools ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mr Busuttil , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on a Common Immigration Policy for Europe : Principles , actions and tools ( 2008 / 2331 ) ( INI ) ) .
If I had to sum up my report in two lines I would say , firstly , the European Parliament is strongly in favour of a common policy on immigration , and secondly , that Parliament does not want a fragmented immigration policy anymore .
Rather , it wants a coherent one , because only a coherent policy can be effective .
I say this now with stronger conviction , in light of the recent case that took place these past few days , which saw the ship Pinar save 154 immigrants found in international seas .
This case highlights the need for a common policy .
In fact , this underscores the price that we are being forced to pay because of the lack of a sound common policy .
What price ?
The price being that everyone shrugs off their responsibility and places it on the shoulders of others , and while we are busy pointing fingers at each other , there are people who are drowning and dying every day in front of our very eyes .
It is a disgrace that a country of a population 60 million uses its laws in an attempt at brushing off its responsibility onto a country with a population of less than half a million .
I augur that this was simply an isolated case , and that the Italian minister from the Lega Nord was playing to his audience a few weeks before the European Parliament elections .
These political gimmicks are easy to spot but this does not make them acceptable .
I would like to laud the constructive spirit that the Maltese and Italian Prime Ministers favoured when they intervened to solve the Pinar situation .
Thanks to their intervention , reason triumphed over dramatic antics .
Common sense prevailed over intransigence and respect for the law reigned over the law of the jungle .
I hope that , owing to the Pinar incident , we all come to understand that while it is easy to shrug off one 's responsibility onto others and to accuse each other of wrong doing , the easy path does not lead to solutions .
It is the path to a truly European policy that leads to a solution , even though it may be harder .
There are six main points to my report .
Firstly , that we must put a stop once and for all to the human tragedy that we are facing because of illegal immigration ; secondly , that the burden sharing mechanism found in the immigration pact has to be implemented without delay and that it must be converted into a binding legal instrument ; thirdly , greater emphasis must be placed on the return of immigrants who have no right to remain on European territory ; fourthly , that every agreement concluded between the European Union and a third country must also include the issue of immigration ; fifth , that the FRONTEX agency must be strengthened , not only financially , but even more importantly in resources ; and finally , that we must be tougher in our battle against organised crime .



To conclude , we managed to reach compromises on several points in this report .
Unfortunately there is still one pending point that was entered due to a majority formed within the Socialist Group on the immigrants ' right to vote .
This was not something I could accept .
Therefore , I have presented an alternative resolution to the report ; that is , to substitute the reference to the right to vote with a compromise that comprises a re-wording .
On behalf of the European Commission , I would like to congratulate Mr Busuttil on the important report he has drawn up .
This report discussed a central issue that is tied to the continuous development of the European Union ; that is , a common immigration policy .
As the report indicated , the Immigration Pact adopted by the European Council last year served as a launching point towards a common policy in the field of asylum and immigration .
We must now ensure that the commitments stipulated in this Pact are implemented .
Next month , the Commission will propose means by which the implementation of this Pact can be monitored .
This will take place through an annual report that will be issued by the Commission .
These reports will serve as the basis for the annual debate within the European Council on the immigration and asylum policy as of the year 2010 .
The definition of the general aims for the common policy as established in this Pact shall also be included in the multiannual programme , that is the Stockholm Programme that is due to be adopted later this year under the Swedish Presidency .
The Busuttil report provides the Commission with extremely useful information which will help it to make its planned contribution in the form of a communication , which should be adopted by this summer .
I would like to underline the general convergence of our ideas .
In various parts the Busuttil report urges the Commission to take action .
Here I would like to reply by saying that the Commission has already actively committed itself .
Examples of this can be seen in the development of facilities for temporary and circular immigration , the improvements made in the area of data collection and analysis , the dissemination of information both on the realistic opportunities available to immigrants and the risks involved in illegal immigration , and also in the area of cooperation with third countries .
I would like to refer to a particular area where Mr Busuttil voiced his concern , which is solidarity between Member States on immigration issues .
As the rapporteur stressed in his speech , the recent events that took place in the Mediterranean have once again accentuated the problems and the serious pressures that certain Member States are facing .
I would like to assure you , Mr Busuttil , that the Commission is fully committed to finding solutions to help these Member States that are experiencing particularly intense immigration pressures .
Here I would like to mention three examples of measures that have either already been taken or are due to be taken in this regard .
The Dublin Regulation shall be amended in such a way as to allow the suspension of transfers to those Member States that are undergoing particular pressure .
The European Asylum Support Office is going to be set up in order to provide support to these same Member States , and funding will be made available to the Member States aiming at internal and voluntary redistribution of immigrants .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 22 April 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The European Commission estimates that by 2050 the EU will need 60 million workers from third countries at a time when the working population will be declining at an accelerated rate .
Consequently , in the long term , the Lisbon Strategy 's ambitious objectives are subject to the contribution of labour from outside the EU .
However , at the moment , during the economic crisis , the unemployment rate is seeing a significant rise , with many cross-border workers from the new Member States featuring among those affected by job losses .
As a result , it is vital to link immigration and employment policies in order to achieve a fair and practical position , while observing the Community preference principle .
I feel that it is wrong for us to grant immigrants the right to move around inside the EU , while Romanians and Bulgarians do not enjoy complete freedom of movement in the European labour market .
It is immoral and dangerous for us to encourage the brain drain from developing countries without taking into account the risk of the boomerang effect and without showing any concern for the discrimination taking place , whereby the majority of immigrants are offered jobs below their level of qualifications , especially women , making them all victims of the negative stereotypes and practices in the country of origin and of those in EU Member States .
According to Eurostat , population ageing in the EU will become a reality in the medium term .
Immigration could act as an important stimulus to ensure good economic performance in the EU .
Against this backdrop , we must recognise the essential nature of immigration to the EU .
Illegal work needs to be tackled given that it fundamentally violates the rights of migrant workers .
We must promote a European policy which encourages illegally resident migrant workers to register with the authorities , whilst ensuring that this does not lead to summary procedures of return in violation of their rights .
These workers are already in a position of inferiority when they arrive in Europe and it is clear that proper management of migratory flows can benefit the EU and third countries simultaneously .
We must combat the wastage of skills that is being seen repeatedly among migrant workers . These workers , notably women , often end up in jobs for which they are over-qualified .
I feel that the Commission must pay particular attention to the question of skills recognition and the incentive for lifelong training , while also ensuring that immigrants have opportunities to learn the language of the host country in order to ensure their social , professional and cultural integration in the European Union .
Migration to Europe is a phenomenon which has been going on constantly for a long time , and is fostered by factors such as significant material differences in standard of living between Europe and other regions of the world .
Europe definitely needs a common approach to immigration in the EU .
The failure of one Member State to act may have a direct influence on other States .
Bad management of migration may have serious consequences for the countries of origin and for the immigrants themselves .
We should be aware that legal immigration is a beneficial phenomenon which brings opportunities to many different groups .
Migrants have played a very significant role in the development of the European Union in recent decades , and the EU still needs their work .
In connection with this a common political vision is necessary , which is based on past achievements and also has reference to the future .
To achieve that objective , more effective cooperation is needed .
There are many people who risk their lives or their health to cross the new southern and eastern borders of the EU in particular .
Thousands of them die at sea , while they are looking for a better life .
Immigration is one of the most serious challenges which Europe currently faces , and how we respond to it depends on us .
We can turn it into an opportunity , or we can do harm to many people by handling it wrongly .
Based on the fact that Europe is the main destination for immigrants , harmonising the immigration legislative framework must be among the EU 's priorities .
If we Europeans are not going to take measures now to promote a common immigration policy , we will suffer the consequences later of not having done it on time .
I can envisage the scenario of thousands of illegal immigrants losing their lives at sea .
I think that it is our duty to prevent the loss of human life .
In this respect , we must totally commit to active cooperation with the countries where the illegal immigrants come from .
I believe that a common European immigration policy must prove to be a policy supporting solidarity with Member States located at the EU 's borders , which suffer large influxes of immigrants .
I support the view that the battle against illegal immigration can only be waged through promoting controlled legal immigration .
Every Member State must individually make firm commitments to create favourable conditions for legal immigration .
I welcome this report , which has turned out to be fairly ambitious , and I hope that it will get through with flying colours during the plenary session vote .
Control of the budgetary implementation of the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on Control of the Budgetary Implementation of the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance ( IPA ) in 2007 .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to reiterate that the instrument for pre-accession assistance is the Union 's new financing instrument for granting pre-accession assistance for the period 2007-2013 and replaces the previous programmes for candidate and potential candidate countries , namely the PHARE , CARDS , ISPA and other programmes .
The new instrument includes five components which cover the priorities defined in accordance with the needs of the beneficiary country , namely transition assistance and institution building , cross-border cooperation , regional development , human resources development and rural development .
This report by Parliament is the first examination of the application of this new instrument and has a twofold objective :
firstly , to bring the project financed more closely into line with pre-accession priorities , especially for the environment , gender equality , nuclear safety and increased employment ;
secondly , to avoid the mistakes of the past , such as those belatedly identified in the application of the PHARE , SAPARD and ISPA programmes in Bulgaria and Romania .
We believe that this can be better achieved if Parliament closely monitors the application of the new instrument from the outset , which is why we called for this own-initiative report .
Parliament expresses its satisfaction in this motion for a resolution at the high implementation rate of IPA commitments in 2007 and its regret at the considerable delays both in approving the relevant regulations and implementing the programmes which started in 2008 .
We would also point out that the objective of parliamentary control of pre-accession assistance is not only to examine if the funds available were used legitimately , but also to evaluate if they were actually allocated to accession priorities and if the desired results were achieved .
We call in our report for a better balance between projects earmarked for meeting political criteria and projects earmarked for bringing the country into line with the Community acquis and we call for horizontal and regional programmes to be strengthened .
We also call for particular emphasis to be placed on combating corruption , organised crime and unemployment , especially unemployment among young people .
We call for more funds to strengthen women 's rights and equal opportunities in general .
We also call for cross-border cooperation to be strengthened , in order to promote reconciliation and good neighbourly relations between beneficiary countries and between them and the Member States of the European Union to a greater degree .
To close , we consider that the instrument for pre-accession assistance is a rational and flexible mechanism for optimising financial assistance to candidate and potential candidate countries .
However , in order to get the maximum return , it needs to remain firmly in line with accession priorities and the social and political conditions peculiar to each country .
For this reason , Parliament hopes to play a fundamental role in the application and adaptation of this instrument .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , on behalf of the Commission I would like to thank Parliament for giving us the opportunity to comment on the report on the control of budgetary implementation of the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance ( IPA ) for 2007 , and to extend our thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , for the very valuable report that she initiated and prepared .
We can , overall , concur with the findings and recommendations of the report , which are fully in line with the views of the Commission on how best to use financial assistance for the Western Balkans and for Turkey .
The Commission acknowledges the late launch of IPA 2007 programmes because of the late adoption of the legal framework for IPA .
I can assure you , however , that the Commission made all efforts to limit the delay of implementation on the ground , and that preparation of management structures and detailed project design were pushed ahead all through 2008 .
Within this framework the Commission will ensure that the impact of IPA will become visible in the beneficiary countries .
Allow me to elaborate on some of the issues raised in the report .
As regards the balance between political criteria and transposition of the acquis communautaire , the Commission has already increased the allocations for projects in the area of the political criteria in IPA 2008 in all countries , and will continue to do so gradually .
However , in the face of the current financial crisis , we will also need to strike an appropriate balance in the 2009 and 2010 programmes between continued support for political reforms and financial assistance to help the countries mitigate the consequences of the economic downturn .
In this regard the report rightly identifies the challenges generated by the financial crisis and the need for an EC response .
To that end , the Commission has put together an IPA crisis response package of about EUR 250 million at the end of 2008 with the aim of leveraging some EUR 600 million in loans from international financial institutions .
Measures will focus on support to private sector SMEs , energy efficiency investments , and support to investments and infrastructure under national IPA programmes in close coordination with international financial institutions .
The Commission also fully concurs with the need to establish the decentralised management system as a step to promoting ownership and responsibility of candidate countries and potential candidates .
Guidance and assistance is being given to them in order for these countries to build the required public management structures and public financial control systems .
According to the principles of IPA , environmental protection , good governance , civil society development , gender equality and non-discrimination are all cross-cutting issues and are an integral part of project design .
Civil society organisations are now more actively involved in the development and the initiation of projects .
In 2008 the Commission launched the civil society facility as a tool for promoting civil society development and advancement of regional cooperation , for which an indicative budget of EUR 130 million is earmarked for 2008-2010 .
The Commission also shares the rapporteur 's views as regards the importance of education , regional and cross-border cooperation and gender equality , to name but a few issues .
The services of the Commission have fully taken on board the recommendations of Parliament and we look forward to reviewing progress with you during our regular rendezvous where we have the opportunity to discuss the financial assistance strategies and their implementation .
This will allow the further enhancement of the ongoing dialogue between our respective institutions .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 22 April 2009 .
Effective enforcement of judgments in the EU : the transparency of debtors ' assets ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs Gill , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the effective enforcement of judgments in the European Union : the transparency of debtors ' assets ( 2008 / 2233 ) ( INI ) ) .
rapporteur . - Mr President , behind the Commission consultative paper on debtors ' assets is the concern that late payment and non-payment of debts jeopardise the interests of businesses and consumers .
This is particularly the case when the creditor and the enforcement authorities have no information about the debtor 's whereabouts or his or her assets .
The problem can be resolved where the debtor has assets in the EU and it is possible to trace them and bring legal proceedings .
The Commission , in its report , suggested drawing up a manual of national enforcement laws and practices and highlighted the possibility of increasing access to population registers .
It also raised questions on whether enforcement authorities should be given better access to social security and tax registers .
The proposal suggested that the cooperation between public enforcement bodies might be improved and , lastly , it put forward the idea of a European assets declaration , which would oblige debtors to disclose all their assets in the European judicial area , possibly backed by sanctions .
My report , as voted by the committee , suggested that creditors would benefit from the introduction of a simpler , more flexible procedure , effective throughout the EU , to obtain an order to disclose information about assets which may then be made the subject of a judgement .
Such measures could take the form of an interim payment order , giving the creditor immediate payment pending resolution of the underlying dispute .
The report also calls for a study into how the present national systems work , with a comparison between common-law countries , such as Britain , and other European jurisdictions , and how existing arrangements could be improved .
It also highlights the need to consider areas in which further cooperation with Member States could have a positive effect and how the proposals will work alongside existing data protection and human rights legislation .
We have endeavoured to shape the report along these lines and the compromises arrived at by the committee have already ironed out some of the discrepancies between Member States ' legal systems .
Many of the additions we have made are designed to make the proposal more transparent and easier to use for the creditor .
It will therefore be imperative to ensure that the proposed manual of national enforcement laws and practices is kept updated and that the information is provided in easy-to-use format and that it should be written in an accessible language .
It will also be crucial for the initiative to act in tandem with - rather than replacing the work of - national courts .
This will require the legislation to be restricted only to cross-border cases .
By bearing this caveat in mind , the enforcement of this legislation will made to work efficiently and proactively .
Overall the report will do much to help small businesses and enterprising individuals to overcome a significant obstacle to their success because they lack the resources of large enterprises to track down debtors and bring legal action against them .
Small businesses are affected disproportionately by people defaulting on payments .
If companies are thereby discouraged from trading abroad , this represents a real threat to the very functioning of the common market .
It will be vital to protect the activities of small businesses at this difficult time because SMEs make up a large proportion of our economy .
I would like to thank the Legal Affairs Committee secretariat and to praise the excellent support they have given me on this report .
Thanks must also go to colleagues from other groups who have made very constructive suggestions .
What is key , I believe , is for this legislation to be brought forward as soon as possible .
I call on the Commission to act on Parliament 's recommendations with urgency .
Much of the good work that the Member States have been doing in responding to the market downturn has to be focused for large-scale enterprises .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am very pleased to have this opportunity to discuss Parliament 's concerns regarding the issue of debt recovery abroad .
I would also like to thank Ms Gill for the report .
What is at stake ?
Both Parliament and the Commission agree that the problems of cross-border debt recovery may constitute a serious obstacle to the free circulation of payment orders within the European Union and may impede access to justice .
Furthermore , this is key for the survival of small businesses in the current economic climate .
Against this background and in accordance with the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality , what should be the Community objectives ?
The European Union has an impressive set of legal measures to ensure access to justice in cross-border cases and to facilitate the free circulation of civil and commercial decisions within the Union .
However , there is no doubt - as stated in the Hague programme on mutual recognition adopted by the European Council - that it would in fact be much easier to enforce judgments within the European Union if it were possible to obtain accurate information on debtors ' financial positions .
The Commission published a green paper on the transparency of debtors ' assets in March 2008 , and all the replies - including a summary - can now be accessed by consulting the public web site .
Most of the respondents agreed with the need for measures at Community level to increase the transparency of debtors ' assets , though views differ as to what can be done in practice .
I am grateful to Parliament for presenting such a detailed response to the green paper .
The report is rather sceptical of the ideas put forward in the green paper , believing that the main problem is that of recalcitrant debtors who are unscrupulous .
The report is also very concerned about the data-protection / privacy issues related to obtaining information about people 's financial situation .
The Commission is also committed to protecting privacy and the personal data of citizens .
The report instead calls for the adoption of national directories of foreign lawyers working in other Member States as a way to help creditors and suggests a Community provisional measure .
I would like to inform Parliament that improving the practical enforcement of judgments will be a high priority of the Commission in the future Stockholm programme in the area of justice , freedom and security for the period 2010-2014 that the Commission will present in 2009 .
However , the Commission has not yet programmed any specific legislative measure in terms of follow-up to its green paper .
Finally , in the light of the first results of the consultation , the Commission believes that this proposal - that is , to draw up a manual of national enforcement laws , to increase access to commercial and public registers , to improve cooperation between enforcement authorities and to create a compulsory assets declaration by the debtor - will go some way towards fulfilling our objectives .
In this respect , of course , careful consideration will be given by the Commission to Parliament 's resolution on the different issues incorporated in this report .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 22 April 2009 .
Annual report on the deliberations of the Petitions Committee 2008 ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs McGuinness , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the year 2008 .
rapporteur . - Mr President , by its very nature this report contains a great deal of statistics .
You can look at , read and analyse those , but obviously the work of the committee throughout the last 12 months is there on view .
This committee that I sit on is a peculiar committee of Parliament .
It has very direct links with citizens and it deals with problems raised by individuals and groups .
Yes , people come to this committee with problems that we very often cannot solve , but at least they have a port to call on and , where cases are inadmissible , we try to redirect .
We deal with many , many problems from across Member States but , as the statistics show , some countries use the services of the committee more widely than others , perhaps because there are members of the committee who are from those countries and therefore they attract problems from their constituents .
I am always fascinated by the reality , particularly in an Irish context , that sometimes people complain that Europe is too powerful and yet , when they have a problem and turn to Europe for help , they sometimes complain that Europe is not powerful enough .
I think that is quite significant .
The Petitions Committee works , in my view , on the basis of ' soft power ' and I think the work of the last 12 months has been about trying to influence Member States who are not implementing legislation in the manner that they should to change their ways .
But we can only work by virtue of the people who come to us with problems and address them and their particular needs .
I want to talk about some of the issues we dealt with , not in detail but just to give a flavour .
Obviously , the environment is the major area where complaints come to us from citizens of the European Union .
Some of the major ones relate to water quality .
The Baltic Sea issue was a very contentious one dealt with by the committee in harmony with other committees of the Parliament .
Property rights are a very major concern for citizens and one that I fear will become increasingly so , if I judge by the complaints coming into my own constituency office from citizens who have purchased properties across Member States of the European Union .
Our powers in this regard are limited but this does not mean that we cannot speak on these matters and try and make improvements .
In relation to business directories - where companies , individuals , schools , have been trapped into paying money to companies that publish names and then require payment , where people initially did not believe payment was necessary , or indeed required , or worse still , where people did not want the service at all - we are still inundated by individuals who are trapped and feel powerless to resist the pressures of these unscrupulous business directory companies .
We have called for the Commission to take action in this regard .
We also stress in this report that we are concerned about the lack of progress on Equitable Life , on which the Petitions Committee did some work in 2007 and on which I chaired the Committee of Inquiry .
We would urge the UK authorities to take on board all of our recommendations : apologise , yes , but also compensate those who were so severely affected .
In my final few seconds , let me talk about the committee itself and the procedures under which we work .
We would rather only admissible petitions came our way and we need to work very hard with citizens so that they know what we can and cannot deal with .
I want the timeframe in which complaints are dealt with to be improved as we go forward .
As one who has served on this committee in this parliamentary term , I believe that , because it deals directly with citizens , it has a great role to play in reducing what I discussed in a school in Ireland yesterday , the so-called democratic deficit .
At least people come here to the Parliament and they are heard and listened to .
I think that is extremely important .
As we move to another year , let me thank the secretariat of the committee , the group staff and my own staff for their assistance in this report .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to express my appreciation for the work of Mrs McGuinness on this report , which I know she did in difficult circumstances .
She has succeeded in illustrating the great variety of the work of the Committee on Petitions and I would like to reconfirm , as I have no doubt she expects , the Commission 's willingness to cooperate in all ways we can with the work of the committee .
I would just like to pick up on two of the points she makes in the brief presentation of the report .
Mrs McGuinness , first of all you underline the importance of direct contact between Parliament and the everyday , very real concerns of citizens who petition you .
I agree , and I should know .
You have dealt with nearly a hundred petitions coming from Malta since 2004 , which is a rather high rate when taken pro rata to the population .
Some of these petitions are common to many other Member States as well , but many were quite specific to Malta .
This demonstrates the useful direct contact with the citizen that the committee provides .
In addition it is also true to say that a good collaboration with the national authorities and the organisation of fact-finding missions are definitely useful ingredients for your work .
Besides agreeing on the importance of working directly with citizens , the second thing I would like to pick up on is the general issue of fundamental rights .
They crop up in many places in your report , whether about nationality and related rights , individual and family rights or the right of property , and as you know it very often happens that people who petition Parliament about their fundamental rights end up being disappointed .
This is because such rights , more often than not , turn out to be outside the scope of Community law , as you have just rightly pointed out .
To use your own words , there is a lot to be done to separate the wheat from the chaff , those concerns which we can work on and those on which we cannot .
My wish , my very sincere wish , is that your report will help people to see this clearly and realistically .
With these two comments , which I am sure will be taken in the spirit in which they are intended , I would just like to say that I wish the rapporteur every success and thank her again for this report .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 22 April 2009 .
Gender mainstreaming in the work of committees and delegations ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs Záborská , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on gender mainstreaming in the work of its committee and delegations .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
In recent years women 's dignity and calling have taken on a new dimension .
This is particularly noticeable within the framework of Community horizontal policies defined in the Lisbon Strategy , demographic challenges and efforts to achieve a work-life balance , as well as moves to combat violence against women and people trafficking .
The report on gender mainstreaming in the work of committees and delegations is one of the regular reports of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality which I have had the honour to present to Parliament on two occasions during the legislative period .
Although some people welcome the growing presence of women in the European Parliament , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality deplores the fact that women are still insufficiently represented in the senior functional bodies of the Parliament .
At the general directorate level the representation of women is still insufficient .
We support the creation of networks of officials in secretariats , committees and delegations specially trained in this issue , with the aim of regularly exchanging tried and tested procedures .
The report calls on the general secretariat to continue implementing an integrated work-life strategy and to facilitate the career progress of women officials .
The report emphasises that gender mainstreaming is a positive development both for women and for men and that the requirement for gender equality must make itself felt through a practical approach which does not pit women and men against each other .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality stresses the need for committees and delegations to have suitable instruments at their disposal for ensuring maximum awareness of gender mainstreaming .
We need indicators , data and statistics grouped according to gender , and we also need budgetary resources to be allocated from a gender equality perspective .
We call on political groups to take account of gender balance when nominating persons to senior roles .
The gender mainstreaming report is the result of cooperation between parliamentary committees and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
As Chairman of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and rapporteur I would like to thank you sincerely for this work .
I would especially like to thank my fellow Members on the various committees who were responsible for this work .
The work has been unanimously adopted in committee and I value that highly .
The committee has created a new methodological model which makes it possible to evaluate the work of every parliamentary committee .
The model is described in detail in the explanatory statement .
The evaluation would certainly have greater evidential value if all of the committees and delegations of the European Parliament had responded .
Within the framework of the discussions a number of amendment proposals were adopted , increasing the significance of the report .
I value the fact that the report was created through pluralistic parliamentary discussions and has stressed the importance of this topic .
In the context of the European elections I would like to stress the importance of voters of both genders making an effort to ensure that women are represented at the European Parliament in the greatest possible numbers .
Women are in the majority , this evening , in Parliament , in the Chamber . I should just like to point that out .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 22 April 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
We welcome the fact that some progress has been made with regard to achieving a balanced representation among the administrator and assistant positions at committee secretariat level .
We hope that similar measures will be adopted too in relation to senior posts within the political groups and especially at political function level in Parliament .
We cannot but fail to note , however , that these changes are only a minor aspect of what is required by gender mainstreaming .
The application of gender mainstreaming would mean that every piece of legislation is accompanied by a preliminary gender-specific impact study .
Similarly , awareness of gender issues and a minimum level of expertise would be required in every committee .
The reality shows us that during the 2004-2009 parliamentary term , not a single piece of legislation submitted by a committee was rejected for not including this impact study , even though its inclusion would be mandatory since the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Unfortunately , we must acknowledge that minor positive results have been achieved and that the objective of gender equality is still far off .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Záborská on her report , which highlights the fact that , although some of the European Parliament 's committees have adopted a strategy for promoting gender equality , there are also still obvious deficiencies when it comes to the consistent application of this principle .
This report also makes a number of forward-looking recommendations .
One such proposal , for instance , is the initiative for officials working in the European Parliament to attend equal opportunity training , since appropriate knowledge is indispensable when putting this principle into practice .
Gender equality is one of the basic principles of Community law .
However , the European Parliament can only retain its credibility in the eyes of the public if it insists on the introduction and total implementation of measures promoting gender equality within this institution too , especially with regard to its committees and delegations .
With this aim in mind , we must devise a strategy which sets out concrete objectives for actively promoting equal opportunities and in relation to gender mainstreaming .
The regrettable fact is that practically no progress has been made since the report drafted by Mrs Záborská on the same topic in 2007 .
We hope that this latest position statement will yield more results .
Women represent 52 % of the European population .
The task of women who are active in politics is to convince female voters in particular that the participation of women in European politics is important for future generations and for the proper functioning of democratic systems .
I firmly believe that the representation of women in politics should not be based on the introduction of mandatory quotas , which would establish minimum numbers of female candidates , but on the ability of female politicians to seek , adopt and promote the kind of issues that will help women to solve their actual problems .
As a member of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality I have spoken in the European Parliament many times about the suggestions I receive in meetings with women .
In particular I regard the inclusion of child-rearing in the calculation of pensions and the provision of more crèches and nursery schools as key to achieving a work-life balance .
I firmly believe that a politician who acts on the basis of her personal experience of motherhood and family life will best understand women 's problems .
The report by Mrs Záborská on gender mainstreaming in the work of committees and delegations testifies to the fact that the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality is working exceptionally actively in the European Parliament .
It has adopted many reports and opinions which deserve more attention from the other committees in Parliament .
For this reason too the numbers of women MEPs should increase a one third to a half .
Nowadays , there is an ever-increasing number of women becoming involved in politics and making major decisions in companies .
In 2006 , 32.6 % of managers in the EU were women .
The percentage of women in the European Parliament rose from 16.3 % in 1979 , when the first European elections took place , to 31 % in 2009 .
However , it still seems necessary to adopt and apply a gender mainstreaming strategy incorporating specific targets in all Community policies which come under the remit of parliamentary committees and delegations .
I support the need for the parliamentary committees and delegations to have at their disposal appropriate means for gaining a sound understanding of gender mainstreaming , including indicators , data and statistics broken down by gender , and for budgetary resources to be allocated with a view to ensuring gender equality .
All these options must encourage the continual exchange of good practice , with the aim of implementing the integrated strategy for combining family life and work life and facilitating the career development of female employees .
As a social-democrat , I believe that this is an excellent initiative for transferring to national parliaments the positive model offered by the EP on gender equality ( 11 % of the members of the Romanian parliament are women ) .
Green Paper on the future of TEN-T policy ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs Lichtenberger , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Green Paper on the future TEN-T policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for remaining here for this topic , which is actually a lot more important than it would seem from the number of Members present in the House .
It relates to the revision of transport policy in respect of the trans-European networks .
Firstly , allow me to extend my thanks to my colleagues who have contributed to this , in particular the Commission and the secretariat , which provided excellent support .
The trans-European networks have a long history .
For 15 years , projects were presented , lists discussed and decisions deferred .
This was and is a reason to look more closely at the whole story , to revise it and to see to what extent the goals have been or can be achieved .
The trans-European networks have not always been successful .
That - as so often in the European Union - is partly down to funding , and in particular to the lack of funding in Member States which still have the unfortunate habit of demanding a lot of support from the European Union .
However , when it comes to payments to the European Union budget , the sack is then firmly drawn shut and very little is given out .
Well , since nothing comes from nothing , many projects did not get off the ground , and we need to look at this more closely once again , particularly in light of the more recent challenges that we are facing with regard to European transport policy as a whole .
On the one hand , we are facing new challenges brought about by climate change , and we must respond to these challenges .
The question of sustainability with regard to transport and the question of damage to the climate caused by certain means of transport must be asked anew again and again and must also be reflected in the actions of the Member States and the European Union .
The second point that we , of course , need to deal with very decisively is the current financial crisis , which under certain circumstances will restrict still further the ability of some Member States to take action with regard to infrastructures and the associated investments that are needed .
However , enlargement has brought us completely new tasks to do in Europe that did not exist when decisions were taken on the list of trans-European networks .
Therefore , after long discussions in committee , the decision was taken in favour of an approach that is intended to address these issues in particular .
Firstly , the various modes of transport should be networked considerably better than they have been up to now .
This has been ignored in the past .
This affects ports and the hinterland in particular , which have been neglected in recent years and now form the main focus of this report .
However , this also requires the development of a core network and the network connections on which the whole system is based and with which the whole system is connected , allowing sound development in the transport sector and the continual improvement of its management .
We need not only a geographical network , but also a conceptual network between the modes of transport , better intermodal links and better technical work being carried out on the networks .
This relates to software rather than hardware .
This is the core of our report and I hope that we can agree on this resolution , which has broad support , and that we do not take a retrograde step , as currently indicated in an alternative resolution .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , since the trans-European transport network policy was established 15 years ago , it has contributed significantly to the functioning of the internal market and to economic , social and territorial cohesion .
It now needs to be adjusted to new challenges .
The green paper on the TEN-T policy review addresses these challenges and proposes measures to tackle them at both the network planning and the project implementation stages .
The Commission appreciates very much that the European Parliament is following this revision process from the outset , as reflected in this resolution .
This underlines the determination of both institutions to develop a future-oriented TEN-T policy .
There is a high degree of conformity between our proposals and the objectives and calls set out in Ms Lichtenberger 's report as adopted by the Committee on Transport : that is , a more integrated and coherent network approach is necessary , in which intermodal connections such as rail connections to ports and airports and intermodal terminals , the link between long-distance and urban transport systems as well as interoperability must be strengthened so as to improve the basis for efficient , safe and high-quality services for passengers and for freight transport .
The Commission also shares the view set out in the report that - in particular in the freight sector - it is vital to facilitate co-modal chains in which waterborne and rail transport play an important role and intelligent transport systems help to optimise infrastructure use .
In the draft report , the Transport Committee has chosen option three , a dual layer consisting of a core and a comprehensive network .
By supporting this option , Parliament confirms the need to combine traditional transport infrastructure policy with an appropriate consideration of new conditions and circumstances ; the need for more flexibility and responsiveness to changing situations and more openness for the identification and support of infrastructure measures resulting for transport service requirements ; and the economic and environmental challenge to promote a coordinated improvement of transport corridors through a series of small infrastructures and ITS projects .
We note that , after the vote on the draft report by the Transport Committee , an alternative resolution has been proposed which supports option two , a single-layer network with priority projects or a priority network only , and therefore without a comprehensive network .
This is , as we see it , in contradiction with some other points of the draft resolution .
I would also like to recall on this occasion the advantages and disadvantages of the comprehensive network .
While being too large to allow for clear priority-setting and the focus of Community instruments to stimulate its implementation , it contributes to ensuring the TEN-T access function and to facilitating cohesion .
It has also proved to be vital as a reference framework for various transport policy actions and legislation : in particular , interoperability in the railway sector and road safety .
Elimination of the comprehensive network would therefore have some perverse effects .
On the network implementation side , we fully agree with the view set out in the report that Member States have a crucial role in deciding , planning and financing transport infrastructure .
Sufficient financial resources are needed under the TEN-T budget and coordination of territorial development objectives and TEN-T policy need to be enforced , whereas public / private partnerships have to be further promoted .
The Commission also underlines that TEN-T investment is key to sustainable economic development and thus is an essential way of helping to overcome the current crisis .
To conclude , we are very grateful for the motion for a resolution on the future of the trans-European transport networks policy .
We would like to thank the Transport Committee for its constructive debate on it , and in particular Ms Lichtenberger for her comprehensive work .
It will constitute a valuable contribution to the next steps of the process in the debates with the other institutions .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 22 April 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
As the current term of the European Parliament draws to a close , we have the opportunity to comment on the changes in approach to the Community 's biggest infrastructure project , the trans-European Transport Network , which are being planned by the Commission for the near future .
Currently , sections of the network are being built in Member States .
The logical continuation of this , which will also be the final stage , is the integration of individual components in different countries into a cohesive whole to create a trans-European system .
The geography of the European Union is changing .
Therefore , the need to introduce changes to the alignment maps of the network appears justified .
In connection with this the financial needs of the investment are changing .
The final stage of integrating the network should place greater emphasis on the financing of its cross-border elements .
Raising the quality of existing transport connections in Europe and building new ones will help reduce road accidents , which is our constant priority in the fight for better mobility for EU citizens .
In addition , introducing all forms of technological innovation , and the recent popularisation of intelligent transport systems , is justified by European infrastructure priorities for the 21st century .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
All that remains is for me to thank our members of the public , who are few in numbers but attentive , for their presence .
It also remains for me to close what is surely my last evening sitting as president .
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
Documents received : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Credit Rating Agencies - Reporting and documentation requirements in the case of merger and divisions - Insurance and reinsurance ( Solvency II ) ( recast ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mr Gauzès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on Credit Rating Agencies - C6-0397 / 2008 - ,
the report by Mrs Weber , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directives 77 / 91 / EEC , 78 / 855 / EEC and 82 / 891 / EEC and Directive 2005 / 56 / EC as regards reporting and documentation requirements in the case of merger and divisions - C6-0330 / 2008 - , and
the report by Mr Skinner , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the amended proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the taking-up and pursuit of the business of Insurance and Reinsurance ( recast ) - C6-0231 / 2007 - .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report on rating agencies with which I have been entrusted has been particularly interesting to draft , and I am delighted , above all , that we have been able to reach an agreement with the Council and with the Commission so that this report has a chance of being adopted at first reading .
Analysing the various causes of the financial crisis has shown that there was an urgent need to enact legislation on rating agencies .
The proposal for a regulation submitted by the Commission has been examined very carefully by Parliament in order to ensure that European legislation is at once exemplary , effective and pragmatic .
The recent conclusions of the G20 have further strengthened this determination .
The compromise reached by the Commission , the EU Presidency and Parliament adheres to the guidelines sought by Parliament on the essential points of this regulation : the scope , the ratings of third countries , and the prevention of conflicts of interest .
Above all , however , I am delighted that this text has been able to lay the foundations for European supervision in the spirit of the findings of the de Larosière group 's report .
Indeed , Parliament has kept to the idea that the CESR should be the single point of entry for the registration of agencies .
We knew that , given the current state of the law , there was not much more that could be done , but by acting in this way we have laid the foundations for this future European supervision .
Over the coming months the Commission will propose a legislative initiative that will enable the guidelines of the de Larosière report to be implemented , so as to create European supervision that is effective and coordinated .
As a stop-gap measure , and in anticipation of the Commission 's legislative initiative , the regulation will be overseen under the coordination of the CESR by a college made up of representatives of the competent authorities of the Member States , the legal force of the decisions being guaranteed by the competent authority of the place in which the agency is registered .
I should like today to point out how appreciative Parliament was , during the second stage of negotiations , of the very constructive and very cooperative attitude of the Czech Presidency .
This has meant that , through intelligent discussion , we have been able to develop a number of rules that should make it possible to guarantee this necessary transparency and to remedy the problems and the shortcomings that have resulted from the absence of legislation on rating agencies .
This result is therefore most satisfactory , and for this reason a global amendment reproducing the text on which the Commission , Parliament and the Czech Presidency - that is to say the Member States - have come to an agreement will be presented tomorrow to Parliament .
I believe that in this way the European Parliament , the Commission and the Presidency will have proved that , when faced with a crisis on an unprecedented scale , the European institutions were very resourceful .
I hope that , in the same spirit , we will be able to adopt the other provisions of this financial package , and in particular the recast of the Directive on the capital requirements of banks , also referred to as Basel II .
During this period in which Europeans are questioning Europe 's effectiveness , it seems vital to me that we be able to prove that Europe is capable of tackling the crisis .
rapporteur . - ( RO ) I believe that we are now at a time when we must do as much as we can to keep alive commercial companies in Europe and , in particular , find those incentives to make successful businesses capable of providing as many jobs as possible .
Such an initiative is all the more important now during the period of crisis we are going through .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal for a directive to simplify the reporting procedures in the case of mergers and divisions because its objective is to cut European companies ' administrative costs by 25 % by 2012 , the precise aim being to boost their competitiveness .
The report which we have drafted and which we will vote on tomorrow reflects the Commission 's thinking and is guided in particular by the following few factors .
Firstly , the reporting obligations in the case of mergers and divisions must be reduced so as to offer Member States and companies greater flexibility in deciding which reports they really need on a case-by-case basis .
At the same time , provisions resulting at the moment in double reporting , thereby incurring unnecessary costs , must be removed .
Thirdly , the rules on publishing and providing information must be adapted to the new realities involving the use of the Internet so that we make full use of these new means of communication , while also conveying a message about protecting the environment .
We must not forget either that the measures stipulated by the directives currently in force on providing information to shareholders were thought up 30 years ago and have never been adapted for the current technological options available .
I would like to sincerely thank the shadow rapporteurs for the close cooperation we have had with them and for their support throughout this process of drafting the report .
I would also like to thank the representatives of the Council and Commission for making themselves available and approachable over these recent months .
On 7 April COREPER reached an agreement on the entire compromise package negotiated with Parliament with the aim of adopting a directive on mergers and divisions at first reading .
We would like this to happen , which is precisely the reason why many amendments have been submitted for tomorrow 's plenary session vote , by adopting the compromise which we reached during the informal trialogue .
Issues which were of major concern to some Member States , such as publication in local newspapers or the provision of hard copies and the use of the Internet were resolved , and the representatives of the political groups have given their consent to these amendments .
With regard to publishing information in local newspapers , this practice will still be possible in those Member States which will consider this to be necessary .
Regarding hard copies , the rule is that they will no longer be necessary if shareholders have the opportunity to download and print the documents , but Member States can arrange for commercial companies to provide these documents at their office for consultation .
Another important compromise relates to the date of the directive 's implementation , which will be 30 June 2011 , as specified in the Commission 's proposal .
Member States will also have the opportunity to decide what the consequences will be in the event of temporary disruption to Internet access as a result of technical problems .
A substantial amendment relates to simplified mergers and divisions , when general meetings will no longer be required to approve them .
Based on applying these simplified procedures alone , it is estimated that savings of around EUR 154 million will be made every year , which makes it worth us adopting this directive at first reading .
rapporteur . - Madam President , you caught me slightly unawares as I had not seen the complete change of the timetable today , but I am very grateful for the chance to address the Chamber about a very important issue of the financial services industry , that is , the insurance and reinsurance industry , what we have done with the Solvency II report and how we have finally brought this now to Parliament in order to be able to establish what I think will be a very concrete basis for regulation across the European Union .
It is , of course , something which we are coming back to .
There was Solvency I , and I am grateful to Mr Ettl when previously in Parliament we discussed this at some length and we managed to come up with some basis .
But now we have to modernise , and the insurance industry is amongst many financial services industries which have to be at the forefront of change .
It is clear , with the financial crisis and everything that has gone along with it , that the insurance industry is something which cannot be left alone .
There are several measures which come about from Solvency II which I think have helped to make this one of the leading reports , which will be a global leader at that .
Amongst them is the issue of management of risk .
I think it is not enough now that regulators simply tick boxes to establish whether or not the industry that they are meant to be guarding and protecting on behalf of the consumer is doing the right thing .
It is essential that the day-to-day business of insurance and reinsurance companies is actually watched , managed and monitored by regulators over a period of time .
It is by this process and this process alone that we will be able to establish a proper and appropriate form of regulation .
It is the reporting of companies : yes , they will be doing things to tell regulators what they are doing , but regulators will have to be involved .
And across 27 Member States : not each individual Member State with their own separate rules now , considering what they can apply in terms of that regulation , but indeed they will be applying a standard formula of regulation across the European Union , which will lead , frankly , to the better consumer platform of protection that we expect .
Similarly , companies will manage to get economies of scale from this regulation , because now they will be reporting only in one way to each of the regulators .
What they produce , what they have to say , what they do and how they report , will not just be to one regulator but it could be to a college of regulators , especially for groups , because , as insurance companies cross borders , it is now important that regulators team up and work together to ensure that the appropriate levels of reporting , the appropriate levels of figures and what information is supplied , are brought to bear to make sure that the markets are best protected .
It was during the discussion with the Council that Parliament saw some interesting and perhaps sometimes even deliberate ploys to move national industries one way or another , so I cannot pretend that this has not been a very difficult dossier to try to negotiate with the Council : it has .
Parliament has pushed the Council a long way .
It pushed it further than I think the Council established and really wanted to go under the last two presidencies , so I am very proud and pleased to have worked with the team that I have in order to be able to get the Council to move .
Unfortunately we will not have the kind of group support that we initially envisaged that we should , but because we are able to insert a review clause in this directive , we will be able to come back to group support and , three years after the introduction of this particular directive , I am hoping - and I expect the Commissioner to tell me that he will anticipate doing this as well - to be able to bring back group support in one way or another , specifically to match the economic side of this particular approach .
We want a regulation that is risk-based and principle-based , but one that will also support the capacity of the industry and one that will promote the very best instincts of regulators across the European Union and abroad .
I will just finish on this one note . We must also challenge regulators elsewhere in the world and recognise country-to-country regimes only .
I hope the Commissioner will agree with me about that .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , today 's debate takes place at a time when we are facing the greatest challenge to the European economy in modern times .
Action is needed urgently : vigorous , targeted and comprehensive action in order to restore confidence , growth and jobs and to repair the financial system , to rebuild stability for the future , to promote trade and investment and to better protect our citizens - in short , to deliver an effective and stable financial system .
Based on the Commission 's communication of the beginning of March , the Spring European Council set out a strong EU action plan for the future - a strategy to address the regulatory gaps in the financial sector , to restore incentives and to reform supervision to match the single EU financial market .
In a few weeks ' time the Commission will present its views on the road towards building a state-of-the-art supervisory framework in Europe .
These will be discussed by the heads of state or government in June .
The Commission is ready to put concrete measures on the table in the autumn .
Clearly , global problems also require global solutions .
The EU initiative to agree a coordinated global response to the financial crisis has been very successful .
At the London meeting , G20 leaders made extensive commitments to address the weak points of the financial system in a coordinated manner , to jointly build a new financial architecture while defending an open , global economy .
The situation in the EU financial sector is serious .
But a lot has already been done , and I am glad to note that the Commission , the European Parliament and the Council have reacted quickly and cooperated closely to respond to the crisis .
We are about to successfully conclude the adoption of three key measures : firstly , the regulation on credit-rating agencies ; secondly , the recast of Solvency II , as well as , thirdly , the revision of the Third and Sixth Company Law Directives on domestic mergers and divisions .
Firstly , the agreement reached on a regulation on credit-rating agencies will help address one of the problems that contributed to this crisis and thus will offer some prospect of restoring market confidence .
The proposal adopted by the Commission last November sets some clear objectives for improving integrity , transparency , responsibility and good governance of the credit-rating agencies .
The thrust of the initial proposal is preserved in this regulation , which will in particular secure the analytical independence of credit-rating agencies , the integrity of the rating process and an adequate management of conflicts of interest that existed before in the rating process .
Moreover , a comprehensive supervisory regime will be put in place .
European regulators will supervise the conduct of credit-rating agencies and take enforcement action where necessary .
On the issue of supervision , I have been vocal about the need to strengthen supervisory cooperation .
I have therefore no difficulty in agreeing on the need to push forward in this crucial domain .
Therefore , in order to ensure consistency and coherence in all relevant financial sector regulation , the Commission agrees , on the basis of the recommendations of the de Larosière report , to examine the need to strengthen the provisions of this regulation with regard to supervisory architecture .
On the issue of the treatment of credit ratings issued in third countries , the outcome of the G20 summit has changed the global situation .
All G20 members have agreed on regulating credit-rating agencies through the introduction of mandatory registration and oversight regime .
That is why I agree with the solution agreed in the negotiations between the Council and Parliament on the treatment of ratings issued in third countries .
I am pleased to note that the ambitious goals set by the Commission proposal have been kept .
The Commission is very pleased with the outcome of the codecision process .
Let me now turn to Solvency II .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Skinner , and Parliament for their work and their willingness to compromise in order to reach agreement in a single reading on this important subject .
Such an outcome will be widely welcomed by the EU insurance industry , by supervisors and by stakeholders in general .
However , I also have to admit that I am disappointed with certain aspects of the compromise .
The deletion of the group support regime , which I consider one of the most innovative aspects of the Commission 's proposal , means that we will not be able to modernise - as much as we wanted - the supervisory arrangements for insurers and reinsurers operating on a cross-border basis .
I also remain concerned that some of the amendments regarding the treatment of equity risk could result in the introduction of an imprudent regime for investment in risk-based capital .
This is particularly the case for the amendments which introduce the so-called duration approach as a Member State option .
The Commission will pay close attention to ensure that the implementing measures brought forward in this regard are prudentially sound .
Nonetheless , the Commission will support the agreement between Parliament and the Council , if it is endorsed by your vote .
The current Solvency regime is over 30 years old .
Solvency II will introduce an economic risk-based regime that will deepen integration of the EU insurance market , enhance policyholder protection and increase the competitiveness of EU insurers .
As confirmed recently by CEIOPS in their report on lessons learned from the financial crisis , we need Solvency II more than ever as a first response to the present financial crisis .
We need regulation that requires companies to properly manage their risks , that increases transparency and that ensures that supervisory authorities cooperate and coordinate their activities more effectively .
Solvency II will bring about a regime for the insurance industry that can serve as a model for similar reforms internationally .
The introduction of a review clause specifically mentioning the group support regime will enable the Commission to come back to this issue .
I expect that progress in a number of different areas , connected to the recommendations of the de Larosière report , will have created a more favourable environment for reforms related to cross-border cooperation between home and host supervisors .
I now turn to the Weber report .
Thanks to the efficient work of the rapporteur , Ms Weber , it has been possible to identify a compromise on simplified reporting and documentation requirements , in the case of mergers and divisions of public limited liability companies which will maintain a very significant part of the savings potential of the original Commission proposal , which amounts to EUR 172 million per year .
Measurements and studies carried out in the context of reduction of administrative burdens show that company law is one of the most burdensome areas of the EU acquis .
For several reasons , administrative burdens hit SMEs harder than bigger companies .
An expert report from 2007 estimates that small enterprises spend 10 times the amount that large enterprises have to spend in order to comply with information obligations imposed by legislation .
Ten times , I repeat .
At the same time , small businesses are the backbone of our European economy , and they are currently facing very difficult economic times .
In the current difficult and challenging economic situation we cannot afford such impediments .
Instead we must strengthen our effort to ease the burden on our companies .
In its resolution of 12 December 2007 , the European Parliament welcomed the Commission 's determination to reach the goal of a 25 % reduction in administrative burdens on undertakings at EU and national level by 2012 and underlined that it would examine legislative proposals in this light .
Today , only seven months after the proposal was put forward by the Commission , I am very pleased with this compromise , even though the Commission had gone even further in its original proposal .
I look forward to Parliament endorsing this compromise , which will rapidly bring significant benefits to companies , especially to SMEs .
And we should not stop there .
Simplification and reducing red tape will remain at the heart of the Commission 's agenda .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - Madam President , I do not want to aim this at anybody in particular .
I think that Solvency II , regulation and CRAs are all very relevant and very important , but we need to build a fire station as well as douse the flames .
I think we have got too much into the detail of saying : oh , we are going to build this fire station at some time in the future .
I cannot believe that , if President Sarkozy were still President of the European Council , we would still be going at the snail 's pace we are going at .
The Czech Presidency is a great disappointment , and the President of the Czech Republic in particular is a great disappointment .
I would say to you that if the Czech Presidency , or its successors , is not capable of doing the job , then it shows that we really do need Lisbon : we really do need somebody on a more permanent basis to give leadership to the European Union .
People are looking for hope ; they are looking for some information about recovery .
Does anybody in this House really believe that , if Jacques Delors were President of the Commission , we would be going at this snail 's pace ?
It is time for action and for leadership , and we are not getting that action or leadership , and that is an issue that needs to be raised here this morning .
The European Investment Bank could do much more .
The European Union and its institutions , together with countries like China , could do much more .
This is not 1937 .
We did not have the institutions or the capability of addressing things that we have now .
We do have those institutions now , within and outside the European Union - a small number of institutions that can cooperate together .
What we are missing is leadership .
Bring back President Sarkozy , or somebody like Sarkozy , and let us get the Commission properly led , to give people hope and let us start talking about that recovery .
I do not see this coming from the European Council and it is time it did .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - Madam President , I welcome the agreement for Solvency II and , like others , I regret the relegation of group support to a future review and the eventual inability on the part of the Council to explore with us ways to make it workable , taking into account some well founded concerns .
In both the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs I looked at what happens to the movement of capital at times of group stress , such as near-insolvency , and it is certainly not as straightforward as the Commission draft or insurance industry representatives portrayed .
However , there are instruments available that could achieve the objective and we recommended Level 2 measures , but now we are left to look for the future for ways to maximise safe , economic use of capital in a group .
I hope that Member States will rise to the challenge when it comes to looking for better solutions on winding-up .
Turning now to some of the things in the package , changes to Article 27 specified that supervisory authorities must have relevant expertise and capacity .
I made the original amendment in part with the report on Equitable Life in mind , but in the context of the financial crisis it has a wider resonance and I have achieved similar inclusions in the capital requirements and credit-rating proposals .
It must be absolutely clear that taking a risk-based approach is not a soft option .
Proper understanding of models and underlying assumptions should be a more intensive way of supervising than tick-boxes .
Stress tests must challenge beyond the comfort zone of assumptions , and correlation factors should remain under active review .
Group supervision is now made an inclusive process , not winner-takes-all for the group supervisor , although there has to be responsibility at a single end point ultimately .
The role of CEIOPS is augmented , and it is worth stressing that it was the discussion around Solvency II that led the way towards mainstream thinking on enhanced roles for the Level 3 committees .
Importantly , it is also clarified that there should not be conflicts between the mandate of a national supervisor and its role within CEIOPS .
These amendments were somewhat prescient when made quite some time ago , but have shown their worth as the financial crisis has developed .
As the rapporteur has said , the Parliament team has done well and in the context of Solvency II ; so has the Czech Presidency .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur has already pointed out both the aspects worthy of criticism and the positive aspects of the result achieved on Solvency II .
I believe we can say that it represents significant progress towards rendering the European insurance industry workable in future , even in times of crisis .
I also believe that , as has already been said , we have made clear where the aspects worthy of criticism lie , namely in group supervision .
There is , of course , more work to be done in the combined area of group supervision and group support .
In a crisis , however , when capital flows are not as would normally be expected , it is natural that there is a need to catch up in this field and also to show consideration for countries experiencing difficulties .
We have also discussed another issue that is crucial , since there are 500 million consumers in the European Union , who are also all insured persons , with ' equity risk ' .
Industry , the economy and the Member States also all have clear opinions on the subject .
We have had to accept a compromise on this , which may also be reflected in the analysis at some stage under a review-clause system .
The important thing is that we can say that the European Union has sent out a signal in this regard that Europe is on the move , that it is capable of action .
I believe that the United States , China and the other countries working on these prudential issues and preparing better systems for the future in these particular circumstances have also recognised this signal .
That is one of the important insights .
I should also like to reiterate the following very clearly with regard to the past .
Four presidencies have been involved , including the current one .
The negotiations have varied widely , naturally also under the influence of pressure from the respective Member States , but we have achieved a result .
That is one insight .
The second is that we have worked together with the European insurance industry , and that the impact studies on the individual fields were very important in this regard .
Why was that ?
It was because of the need to involve the insurance industry in finding a path to this solution in view of the very complicated system and subject matter .
If we consider that 1 400 undertakings took part in the last impact study - both large and small , as the aim is not market clearance but to involve all actors in the interests of consumers - then this has been a great success .
Together with the Solvency II negotiating team , we have refused to be intimidated by any particular sources of pressure , and instead have steered a clear course in the interests of consumers , of the insurance industry and , above all , of course , of our parliamentary duties .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is clear to everyone that a cycle of development is over , a cycle that in recent years brought to light the imbalances and contradictions of a certain way of understanding globalisation : an ultraliberal globalisation that in too many cases has benefited from the weakness of the institutions and has looked on politics as a hindrance , an annoyance of which to rid itself .
It now falls precisely to politics to restore citizens ' faith in light of the severe economic crisis we are experiencing .
In order to do so politics must take the lead , indicating the future prospects and obstacles to be overcome .
We must redress the contradiction between the rapid growth of the world market and the weakness of the institutions capable of counterbalancing and controlling the excessive power of the financial economy .
The rating agencies regulation represents an important step forward in this sense .
I have worked on this dossier as the shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , in full cooperation with JeanPaul Gauzès , the report 's author , whom I sincerely congratulate .
The most significant points of the regulation are the product of Parliament 's commitment during the difficult negotiations with the Council .
I refer to solid achievements such as the requirement for agencies to register on European territory , forecasting and civil liability , the dual security system for the approval of notes from third countries and above all the possibility that this regulation may enter into force quickly and not after two years , as initially requested by national governments .
The regulation also has a strong symbolic value , however .
We are in fact regulating a sector that like others - I am thinking for example of speculative funds - has benefited in recent years from a total legislative void .
The outcome of this kind of self-regulation is clear for all to see , and it is terrible .
Now is the time to take courage and build a new structure for the financial markets .
We must be aware that in this sector , even more than in others , Commissioner , it is not enough for national governments to act alone !
For this reason , I feel a pang of regret despite the excellent result obtained , because an opportunity was missed ; due to opposition from the Member States - for which the Council has a serious responsibility - the will was not there to make provision in the text for a single , European supervisory body for the ratings sector .
An official request for this was made to Parliament , but a lack of political ambition and realism has so far prevented it from finding support .
On this point , Parliament continues to demonstrate its ability to look well into the future , and I hope that the national governments will do the same .
Madam President , the failings of the credit rating agencies that preceded the crisis have made the regulation of these agencies inescapable .
The objectives of the present Regulation on the registration of credit rating agencies are , once again , transparency , guaranteed high quality , greater competition , the overcoming of conflicts of interest and , as a result , better protection of investors .
Reaching agreement was no easy task .
The positions of the Commission , Parliament and the Council started off far apart but , on the whole , these objectives have now largely been achieved .
One good thing is that there is to be only one rating category .
Categories 1 and 2 for regulatory and other purposes will be a thing of the past .
Conflicts of interest have been overcome : there will be no advisory services in addition to credit rating activities .
Credit rating agencies from countries outside the European Union will have the opportunity to approach the European market and operate here by means of an equivalence regime involving certification - which is important for small agencies - or by means of the endorsement system - which can be used by large agencies .
The Committee of European Securities Regulators ( CESR ) will play a crucial role in the registration and supervision of credit rating agencies .
For all this , I also note a number of shortcomings in the present dossier and Regulation .
I fear that , in practice , the opportunities to enter the European market will be impeded by all the rules and requirements .
These requirements are perhaps too restrictive , and they could end up cutting off the European market , and could thus lead to protectionism through the back door - which would be a bad thing .
I hope that my fears will prove to be unfounded .
Our rules for internal governance go a very long way - too far , in fact .
They are almost overkill .
There are no comparable rules in any other EU regulation .
We would have done better to define clear principles and leave responsibility for implementing and developing these principles with the undertakings themselves .
Finally , in my opinion , we have not made any progress on putting an end to oligopolies .
We shall have to endure many years of very little competition .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the economic crisis is far from over , although membership of the euro zone has given Europe a certain stability .
The International Monetary Fund puts the cost of the financial crisis at USD 4 000 billion , two-thirds of which can be attributed to the banks .
There are many goals to be reached : restoring confidence , supporting growth and protecting employment .
This can only be achieved through an economic policy capable of setting the financial system to rights , but Europe does not yet have an economic policy !
Despite the London G20 proposals to give a new boost to the credit system , there is still a severe lack of clear rules - as we have been saying for years - to govern the financial market , its operators , the products offered and the derivatives .
The markets should be subject to regulation and surveillance , most importantly for the financial sector , which , uncontrolled , has opened the way for an escalation of unprecedented indebtedness .
What to do with this enormous debt that has built up by granting credit without guarantees ?
Should it be written off ?
Should it be included in a cleansing mechanism put in place by the banks ?
Should future transactions in OTC derivatives be banned and the banks asked to put an end to their derivative contracts once and for all ?
We need definite responses , new lines of credit for small and medium-sized enterprises and for savers , to prevent uncontrolled relocations and to realign OMC rules to the real situation .
If we do not talk about world trade rules we will resolve nothing : that is to say , in the face of this systemic crisis we must reform the system , restoring to politics that steering role that is too often lacking , refocusing attention on the real economy and abandoning the easy opiates of virtual finance !
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to state that I fully agree with what Mr Mitchell said in his speech .
We are not on schedule ; we are not up to speed .
Nonetheless I would point out to him that it is important not to make the same mistake regarding the French President that the French sometimes make regarding Mr Brown .
Speeches about action do not guarantee that the action will be effective .
In terms of the crisis itself , it is clear that , for us , the crisis did not start with finance .
It is rooted in the social and environmental spheres .
That being said , it combines with the financial cycle , that is to say that , when the cycle is going well , we take risks , but when it is no longer going well , we tell ourselves that it might be wise to regulate things slightly .
We are at the stage where regulation - and strong regulation at that - is required .
Regulation at single market level is required , that is to say that we need far more centralised regulation at European level .
This is what guides us in our choice of votes .
We fully support the Gauzès report and the progress it makes .
For years now we have been calling for more centralised regulation and supervision at European level , and the first stage that has been achieved with the CESR is in our view entirely appropriate .

However , despite Mr Skinner 's efforts - and , on this point , our criticism is exactly the same as Mr Mitchell 's - we regret that the governments have not understood .
We do not agree with the compromise that is proposed and that rejects the system of group supervision .
I believe that such a method will lead to further disasters .
We shall therefore vote against the Skinner report - not against the work of Mr Skinner himself , but against the compromise imposed by the governments .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , like public security , justice or environmental protection , stability of the financial markets is a public asset and , as such , should be under public scrutiny .
After all , we have already seen it happen : anyone who leaves the regulation of financial markets up to the big banks , insurance companies , hedge funds and credit rating agencies in the private sector runs the risk of seeing gigantic sums speculated away in search of maximum returns and , ultimately , the general public having to foot the bill for the losses .
The crisis has shown only too clearly that voluntary self-regulation has failed , yet the Commission has not wavered in its commitment to this .
Instead of prohibiting risky finance products and imposing clear rules on the financial sector , it is to continue to allow private actors to decide for themselves what risks to run and how these are to be assessed .
We believe this to be irresponsible .
It has now become clear that , in the interests of profit , the credit rating agencies have systematically underestimated the risks of structured finance products and thus really set in motion the trade in unrecoverable loans .
The appropriate course of action , therefore , would be to put a complete stop to the outsourcing of risk management to private , profit-oriented actors and to create a European public rating agency to give an independent opinion on the quality of the various securities .
The Commission has yet to even consider this solution .
The Gauzès report rightly demands that the rating of sovereign debt must be considered a public good and must therefore be undertaken by public actors .
Why should this principle be restricted to sovereign debt , however ?
In the case of the planned Solvency II Directive , too , the Commission and the rapporteur back the failed concept of self-regulation .
For example , insurance groups are to be allowed recourse to internal models of risk assessment when calculating capital and solvency requirements .
Time will tell whether Member States ' supervisory authorities have sufficient capacity to understand these models .
Personally , I doubt it .
Moreover , both the Minimum Capital Requirement and the Solvency Capital Requirement are much too low , and must be increased substantially .
Since this could pose problems for some banks or insurance companies , we advocate that this capital increase take the form of government holdings entailing corresponding influence on company policy .
Such part-nationalisation would be a courageous first step towards reorienting the financial sector towards the common good .
In the longer term , the whole financial sector should be moved to the public sector in any case , as only nationalisation can ensure that this sector fulfils its public duty instead of gambling itself away in search of ever higher returns on the global financial markets .
It is high time conclusions were drawn from the disaster that has been caused .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , I have spent 40 years in financial services , so I think perhaps I know a little bit about what I am talking about here .
Let me just say a little about the UK Financial Services Authority ( FSA ) , which will guide us onto the target of how mistakes are made .
The FSA in the United Kingdom has a rule book of half a million words .
Nobody understands it - least of all the FSA .
The FSA interprets its own rule book in secret ; they keep the fines that they impose to beef up their own salaries and pensions ; there is no court of appeal .
I have written to Commissioner McCreevy on this subject and it drives a coach and horses through Articles 6 and 7 of his own Human Rights Act .
There is no court of appeal .
There is no legal recourse at all if they get it wrong .
The general public has been given the impression that if a regulation has an FSA stamp on it it cannot go wrong .
There is no concept of caveat emptor .
Now it is going to be , it would appear , subsumed by some sort of EU overseer , consisting no doubt of ignorant bureaucrats , Scandinavian housewives , Bulgarian mafia and Romanian peg-makers .
Frankly , I think you are going to get on really well with each other .

( FR ) Madam President , the reports by Mr Gauzès on rating agencies , by Mrs Weber on reporting and documentation requirements in the case of merger and divisions , and by Mr Skinner on the taking-up and pursuit of the business of insurance and reinsurance , contain provisions that are undoubtedly useful , but they cannot be described as measures to combat the financial crisis .
The crisis that we are experiencing is clearly on an altogether different scale , and it cannot be resolved by these technical and one-off measures alone .
What action is needed to resolve the terrible crisis that we are experiencing ?
Firstly , there has to be a break with the dogmas on which you have based your work up to now , namely those that believe in the benevolence of the international division of labour , of the free movement of persons , and of goods and capital .
There has to be a break with the free movement of goods , which has pitted European workers against the workers of countries which , like Communist China , are a haven for the most cynical form of capitalism , where workers do not have the right to strike , freedom of association , adequate retirement pensions , or social protection , and where they earn ridiculously low wages .
China is not the only state in this situation , however .
There has to be a break with the free movement of persons , which has led us , which has led you , to accept and even to recommend , as the only means of replacing future generations , a mass immigration policy , the disastrous consequences of which we can clearly observe today .
Lastly , there has to be a break with the free movement of capital , which was the trigger factor of the crisis , since it allowed the crisis in the US home mortgage market - which was an entirely circumstantial crisis that should have remained confined to the US market - gradually to contaminate all our economies and to ruin our savers , our workers and our employers .
It follows that small and medium-sized enterprises must be released from the shackles of tax meddling and red tape ; simple rules are needed so that monetary values actually correspond to what exists in terms of industrial or service assets ; and an investment policy must be launched , but it must be a viable one .
Those are just a few essential measures that we would like to see taken by the Member States ' governments ultimately in the context of these national policies that have shown their superior ability to react .
Madam President , I am pleased that Solvency II has at last reached the point of decision .
Mr Skinner and his shadows have displayed exemplary resilience and patience in achieving this .
I am sorry , also like others , that group support is excluded , but not surprised , frankly , in the current febrile circumstances .
We need to work hard to achieve a group system that will work for and in a truly European single market for insurance , which is also effective with third countries - we cannot have any more AIG fiascos .
I would also like to compliment rapporteur Gauzès and the Council on reaching a reasonable conclusion to the regulation of credit rating agencies .
Clearly , these agencies have made serious mistakes , and some form of increased regulation was inevitable .
But who has not made mistakes , not least the regulators themselves , and can we be sure they are now above making any future errors ?
I was concerned that the rabidly hostile scapegoating of credit-rating agencies would result in excessively intrusive and counter-productive regulation , with an overwhelming Eurocentric , protectionist and extraterritorial dimension .
The compromise , I am glad to see , has muted these tendencies to some extent , but not to the extent I would have liked to have seen .
Credit ratings are an opinion - they are useful opinions , they are expert opinions , but they are only opinions , so it is up to investors to take full responsibility for their investment decisions .
No doubt these lessons have now been learned and all too starkly and at a cost .
I am glad the scope is restricted to ratings used for regulatory purposes .
I am glad to see that we have moved away from equivalence and endorsement , when dealing with third-country ratings , to equivalence or endorsement .
But could the Commissioner please confirm that this means that investors can still invest freely in stocks and bonds in third countries which are not rated in Europe or which do not have equivalent status ?
We must be on the look-out for unintended consequences .
With no prior impact assessment , these will almost certainly appear and , therefore , the review requirement in Article 34 is of vital importance .
( FR ) Madam President , as far as Solvency II is concerned , that is a reform that was launched well before the crisis and that the latter has shed new light on .
As legislators , we have hesitated : did this agreement need to be concluded at first reading ?


In the end , the determination of the negotiators will have enabled us to reach a compromise which , I believe , has at least two virtues : firstly , it forces the insurance sector to assess its risks better , a process which , until now , still involved relatively old mechanisms that were without doubt unsuitable for the reality of what the insurance sector had become ; and , secondly , it emphasises the need for supervision mechanisms to adapt to what insurance companies have become , in terms of both their multitude of consumer-focused products and offers , and their transnational set-up .
As legislators , we were very keen to take account of the reality of this market , that is to say of a market where , for example , in certain countries there are life insurance mechanisms that account for a substantial share of this sector and where , in the light of the crisis , we had to take account of the effect of pro-cyclicality when applied to the insurance sector .
We also had to ensure that the adoption of this legislation did not disrupt the architecture of the insurance market and , in particular , that it enabled mutual associations to occupy a place within this legislation .
However , it is quite clear that this is just one stage , and I should like to mention six points , in relation to the sector , on which we shall have to resume our work immediately in future .
The first is obviously taking on board the conclusions of the de Larosière report and the need to ensure that equality and harmonious conditions exist among the various colleges of supervisors , and , to this end , the need to strengthen the European authority responsible for monitoring insurance companies .
The second point - many of my fellow Members have mentioned it - is to implement this infamous group support mechanism , and , on this point , I do not share the view of Mr Lipietz .
Of course we would have preferred to have had group support , but what is unclear about the fact that it is difficult today for countries in which 80 % or 100 % of the insurance sector is in the hands of foreign companies , without any solid legal basis , to accept this mechanism ?
We need to make progress in this area .
The third stage for the future is harmonisation between what we are doing here and what is happening with pension funds .
How can we conceive of having to improve solvency in insurance terms , but not of asking ourselves the same question where pension funds are concerned ?
This is an absolutely huge challenge .
The fourth task for the future concerns the installation , the creation , the establishment of a deposit guarantee mechanism , as we have today in banking , and which is still lacking in the insurance sector .
The fifth point concerns the marketing of insurance products and the guarantee that the way in which insurance intermediaries offer products to the insured makes it possible to accommodate their interests and protection requirements .
Finally , the last point concerns the transposition , in this sector , of what we are going to put in place for the banking sector , namely retention mechanisms in relation to securitisation .
On that basis , I hope that , in future , we will be able to learn from the lessons of this crisis in order to guarantee European citizens an insurance sector that represents for them a real guarantee of ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Madam President , our rapporteurs are not to blame , but I do believe that the Commission 's proposals have come rather late in the day and are no match for what has taken place .
To prevent any further crisis , we obviously need to be much more ambitious and more pro-active .
We have to be more ambitious and more pro-active in the area of regulation , firstly .
We have to harmonise our legislation , and the most powerful signal would undoubtedly be to provide ourselves with a European regulator .
That is ultimately the way to make a statement .
In terms of rating agencies , we need to create European agencies whose independence is guaranteed and to put a stop to this scandalous business of seeing agencies rate businesses that pay them .
Regarding hedge funds , we need to regulate them and to devise a form of taxation that penalises all short-term financial transactions .
Lastly , as regards tax havens , some very simple measures must be taken .
We have to ban any banks that perform transactions with tax havens or that refuse to cooperate from operating in Europe .
That is all for now .
However , I do believe that we need to go further , and I should like here to suggest two courses of action .
The first is that we must , in my view , give thought to enlarging the euro zone and to integrating new members .
This political gesture would probably be as powerful as the reunification of Germany was in its day , and it would show the solidarity that exists within Europe and would increase the influence of our Union .
Finally , the second is that we must progress towards economic , budgetary and monetary integration , and towards tax harmonisation , which is the only way to combat fiscal dumping in Europe .
All of this is necessary , but what our fellow citizens expect most of all - and I hope that the Commission is listening - is for us to take action in response to the crisis .
Our fellow citizens are still waiting for a true European recovery plan and , for example , a substantial loan .
They are still waiting for Europe to offer proper support to our SMEs , to genuinely plan investments for the future and , above all , to support all those in Europe who are affected by the crisis .
I am thinking of the unemployed , of those working part time , and of the households that are experiencing huge difficulties at the moment .
This , in my view , is where the urgency lies and this is what Europe 's leaders will be judged on in the future .
( PL ) Madam President , the introduction of Solvency II and of the change to the system for conducting and supervision of insurance activities which had been in preparation for the last few years is a move of great importance , especially in a time of financial crisis .
I have been involved with pension schemes for years , and I am aware of the significance of the financial supervision of pension funds in relation to the mobility of workers and the necessity of cross-border supervision .
When we encourage people to be mobile , we must ensure that those who change their country of employment and their pension system can be sure that their social insurance contributions are deducted in the right way and are credited to the right accounts , and that the security of their future pension will rise as a result of Community solutions in the area of principles of investment and supervision of pension funds .
I congratulate the Committee of European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Supervisors and its consultative panel , in whose work it was my privilege to participate until September 2007 , and I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Skinner .
Madam President , the Global Financial Stability Report of the IMF estimates that the financial crisis will cost USD 4 billion .
This is an estimate that may rise .
This crisis has been brought about , as we all know , by a kind of casino capitalism , crony capitalism , and a financial services sector that has been subject to no regulation - or to light-touch regulation , as it is sometimes politely referred to .
The fall-out of all of this for workers and families across Europe has been nothing short of catastrophic .
I have been struck in the debate and in the reports that have been produced by the very polite way in which we are addressing this scandal .
I am struck by the fact that the Liberal and Christian Democrat groups are concerned at over-prescription , or that protectionism may be introduced through the back door .
The fact is that the EU response to the financial crisis has been sluggish and minimalist .
The fact is that we do require a protectionism , and those that must be protected are workers and the real economy .
We have yet to have a debate on the issue of jobs - although that is what matters for citizens - and this institution remains wedded to a system that has failed .
Let us acknowledge that and be radical and brave .
. - ( SV ) Madam President , a global financial crisis is shaking the world economy and proposals for how to prevent it happening again are now coming thick and fast .
More regulation and more supervision are the ' in ' things .
Of course , the starting point must nevertheless be to ask ourselves what went wrong .
Allow me to summarise the causes in 50 seconds .
We have an ownerless capitalism .
The finance companies are run by officials who can design systems which give them gigantic bonuses and pensions when profits rise .
Profits can be increased in the short term by the management raising the risk level in the companies by means of lower equity .
When the risks become reality , the management have got their money and the losses are borne by others .
There is no incentive for those who could change these policies to do so .
People depositing money in banks know that there are deposit guarantees .
Everyone knows that most banks are too big to be allowed to go bankrupt .
They will be saved by taxpayers .
Rating agencies know that they will not get the work if they question the solvency of their clients .
The policy that is pursued by central banks and finance ministries is based on the idea that bubbles must not be burst .
They therefore grow unreasonably large .
Are we discussing solutions to these problems ?
No , we are not !
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the economic and financial crisis , the most severe since the Second World War , has a global impact .
The uncertainty , impatience , helplessness and loss of confidence are palpable , as are the gaps in the regulation of financial markets .
We are spurred on by the need to adopt joint European responses and take a global lead .
The realisation of the need to create ' more Europe ' makes things possible that were rejected and prevented only months ago by members of the Commission and the Council when they were called for by Parliament .
Our model of the social market economy - as much market as possible , as much regulation as necessary - provides the framework not only for European but also for all global regulation .
The actions of the European Union have been a success , but we are still far from finished and far from achieving our objective .
Another stage is being completed , and further chapters must be tackled or completed without delay .
It is only resolve and the courage to take bold regulatory action at European level that build confidence .
We are also deciding today - much too late - on regulatory action for credit rating agencies .
We need registration , we need scrutiny , we need to deal with incompatibilities .
We are adopting the Solvency II Directive - something we would have had to do even in the absence of a financial market crisis .
The Banking Directive is due for adoption in May .
We must eliminate the pro-cyclical effects from the existing regulatory system once and for all .
Not only hedge funds but also private equity investments need to be regulated .
All executive pay with a bonus component should also have a loss component .
There is less discussion of liability issues in Europe than in the United States , and the system of European supervision is not yet ready .
We should organise this according to the European System of Central Banks and hasten to take as many decisions as possible by the summer .
I call on you to do so .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament is about to adopt rules governing international finance .
They will not be enough , since there is evidently no political will in either Europe or the United States to eliminate the excesses of pure speculation , such as , for example , naked short selling , the sale of goods that one does not even own .
The international financial crisis did not start on the islands .
It started in the United States , and it spread through the City to the other large financial centres .
All of these centres were supposed to have been properly regulated .
Nevertheless the G20 found ideal culprits : tax havens , whether real or not .
As far back as in 2000 , I recommended , in my report for Parliament on the reform of the international architecture , eliminating all the black holes in international finance , starting with hedge funds and the other purely speculative funds .
The G20 intends to regulate only speculative funds that pose a systemic risk .
The systemic risk becomes apparent afterwards , when the crisis has erupted .
In reality , the leading G20 powers have spared their own offshore centres , the Channel Islands , the Virgin Islands , Hong Kong and Macao , not to mention onshore centres such as Delaware .
As Jacques Attali said , in the future , London and New York will have the monopoly on speculation .
The message is clear : international finance will be regulated for the benefit of the major countries only .
All pigs are equal , but some pigs are more equal than others .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is right to criticise and to point out delays , but it is also right and opportune to say that today we are taking a step forward , and that in the face of this dreadful crisis , which has rocked the world 's economies , the European institutions are introducing specific legislative measures in key sectors such as rating agencies and insurance .
I believe , at least from what I have followed closely , that the directive on the taking-up and pursuit of the business of insurance and reinsurance is highly significant .
The agreement reached in extremis with the Council has in essence given these sectors new , more efficient rules , which take account of the dynamics of the real market , outside set formulae .
The principles of economic assessment and capital requirements , corresponding to the risks actually taken by companies , as well as risk management incentives , harmonisation , report supervision , public information and transparency are all essential aspects to making the insurance sector more competitive and strengthening protection for the insured .
The final compromise enabled reasonable solutions to be found to the problems of the possible pro-cyclical effects of the new rules and of the rules on the handling of investments .
We could have done more , of course , but I believe we have reached a point from which we can take further steps forward .
( EL ) Madam President , the current economic crisis has again turned the spotlight on our firm position on the need for regulation , not deregulation of mergers between and the establishment of multinationals and other companies , the need for changes to antitrust legislation and the need for intervention to prevent monopolies and cartels which , among other things , manipulate the market , set prices and make workers redundant and which are driven solely by the profit motive .
Citizens can see the results of growth without any social face which , instead of creating permanent jobs , aims to further concentrate wealth and power into the hands of a few .
The liberalisation of the financial markets , which is the standard policy of the right and others , has caused a deep economic wound which directly affects the people .
Given that , up to a year ago , the political advocates of deregulation and adversaries of government regulation were boasting about the state of the economy , allow me to remind you that it was precisely these policies that resulted in waves of poverty and inequality , in negative growth in the economy and in profiteering by food companies , which made profits in the order of 40 billion each in 2008 .
However , the citizens will send a message to those who created the crisis and , with it , the inequalities .
( NL ) Now that the central banks of Europe and the United States have predicted the first signs of economic recovery , it is important not to waver in the implementation of guidelines to prevent a repeat scenario .
The role of the rating agencies in the credit crisis is considerable , as indeed , investors relied blindly on the advice of these agencies without consulting third parties .
There are various reasons why the ratings were not adjusted adequately in a changing market - reasons that cannot all be prevented by introducing new rules .
Introducing an establishment requirement within the European Union for carrying out rating activities is a good start but , given the global character of the market , it is no more than a start .
The European Commission must harmonise the guidelines with third countries as a matter of urgency , for which reason it would be preferable to adopt a central approach within the European Union in this area .
It is clear that more is needed to regain trust in the financial markets .
Let us therefore make a start with new financial morals .
( DE ) Madam President , today , we are seeing the first legislative proposals to emerge from the financial market package .
Solvency II was long overdue : I wish to start by setting this aside .
The negotiations on this were very good , the results are useful , and we shall be giving it our support .
In the case of credit rating agencies , a problem has arisen that one can really describe as a case of market and policy failure .
For years , Parliament has been calling on the Commission to present proposals on various aspects of the causes of the financial market crisis , which have been a very long time in coming .
What Mr Gauzès has now negotiated is useful .
It establishes independent criteria and new supervisory structures and does indeed have the potential to resolve this conflict of advisory and assessment interests and to increase transparency .
It is a sound proposal .
Yet it is not enough .
I remember the debate in this House with British Prime Minister Tony Blair , who was acting as though he had the solution ahead of the G20 Summit in London .
The fact is that , over the last 10 years , there have been refusals even from within the European Union - particularly by the United Kingdom , but also by the European Commission - to regulate certain things in a manner that should have been obvious .
These were not new phenomena ; the bubble had indeed grown very large .
The task now is to make progress with the accounting rules - as the Commissioner mentioned in connection with executive assessment and bonus schemes .
It is unacceptable for there to be no regulation in this field .
In addition , we must resolve the issue of capital - of securitisation , for example - by the end of May , and also find a speedy solution with regard to European supervisory structures and the de Larosière report in general .
We cannot wait for the United States on all the issues .
Let us proceed as we did with the climate action and renewable energy package : let us Europeans take the lead and present the world with a useful template .
Then we shall have made our contribution to overcoming the crisis .
( NL ) If you will allow me to make a preliminary comment , I would like to say that I have listened with astonishment to all kinds of speeches that have been delivered here by Members of this Parliament about leadership and tackling capitalism .
These are all Members we never saw when we were doing the actual groundwork in order to steer the capital in the right direction .
I was shadow rapporteur for the report by Mrs Weber , and she is someone who did do the groundwork in a dossier that is about modernising , simplifying and lightening the burden for businesses when it comes to European rules and regulations .
The dossier formed part of a large package of superior legislation , and I should like to stress that this superior legislation is not simply a question of deregulation and lightening the burden , but also about responding more adequately , more flexibly and more dynamically to developments with clear powers , not least for the supervisors involved .
In this connection , I should like to say two things which , in fact , also relate to the other two dossiers that are up for discussion today .
First of all , there is no point in trying to solve yesterday 's problems .
We should , instead , anticipate what will happen in the future and put a process in place which will enable us to react to dynamic developments and innovations adequately .
This is exactly why we have introduced such a process in the Lamfalussy procedure , which we developed recently .
Secondly , we should consider the level that is under scrutiny .
The actors within the market transcend borders and have become international .
As such , there is no point in fooling ourselves into thinking that these actors can be controlled by small national supervisors .
These major actors who very much dominate the market really have to be tackled at the European and the global level .
This means , in my view , that powers should be put in place at that level so that direct supervision is possible .
As it happens , the rating agencies allowed for this .
It was Parliament 's intention initially to grant the Committee of European Securities Regulators ( CESR ) the power to take care of registration , but , sadly , it did not work because of the tug-of-war that will inevitably ensue between the big countries and large financial centres to attract those head offices and be able to play first fiddle there , in an attempt to get the large rating offices under their wings .
This is regrettable , to my mind .
I would have preferred to see this done at European level from the word go .
The same scenario unfolded in the case of Solvency II .
Firm action was also lacking when powers were granted in a bid to make binding statements at European level in the event of supervisors failing to reach agreement .
This also means that these guest supervisors refuse to transfer powers to supervisors who play first fiddle .
Although this is regrettable , provision has been made , not least in recital 25 , for us , as Parliament , to clearly indicate that , next year , we should try to improve and strengthen this aspect based on the Larosière proposals .
( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner , the financial and economic crisis has shown that we in Europe must be able to act together .
We should be pleased that Europe had , and still has , the euro rather than 16 different currencies .
This has alleviated the difficult times .
It was only when the euro zone countries met in Paris last autumn that the crisis could be stabilised and the recovery could begin .
Following this , the global efforts continued with the G20 summit , which was the start of something new - a world where the major nations of the world met on equal terms .
We must now ensure that we are better equipped next time the crisis strikes .
The directives that are being discussed today are important and , in my opinion , balanced .
We need greater openness and transparency on the market , greater opportunities to act across borders and improved supervision .
We must also combat protectionism and , in my view , support free trade .
We must also limit risk-taking and put a stop to excesses .
The free market also needs its boundaries and rules .
As a Liberal , I can also agree with this , of course .
However , we must take care not to over-regulate , which is a risk in the current mood .
Let us not forget that the market economy creates prosperity .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , at the beginning of the month we were told that all remedial measures against the financial crisis have been taken .
The budget of the International Monetary Fund will rise by as much as USD 500 billion , which means it will treble in size .
The World Bank will be USD 100 billion richer , and USD 250 billion has been set aside for subsidising international trade .
There is to be a supposedly more stringent supervision of the finance market and control of tax havens and bankers ' salaries .
President Obama said that the recent G20 summit will be a turning point in the pursuit of global economic recovery .
On the whole there is probably nothing to worry about , although perhaps there is one exception .
Why did world leaders wait so long to bring in their elaborate emergency support plan , and why did they not condescend to bring about global economic recovery earlier ?
Did they not have that trillion ?
The fundamental question is , therefore , where did that trillion come from ?
From the sale of 400 tonnes of gold ?
It would appear that in official communiqués not a word is said on this subject .
Perhaps the money was borrowed from a bank ?
Since there will now be a recovery - and here I direct my request to Mr Barroso and Mr Topolánek - perhaps the leaders will hold another meeting and add another trillion , so that we will have a kind of ' turbo-recovery ' .
( EL ) Madam President , there can be no doubt that in Europe we are today suffering the consequences of an anarchic , eccentric American / Anglo-Saxon model of organising the financial markets , which learned how to function without rules , without supervision and without democratic accountability and which , of course , polluted the global and European economy .
With the texts which we are debating today and will vote on tomorrow , we are building a protective shield here in Europe for the citizens .
A protective shield which will safeguard them from this paradox in which we are currently living , where money flows are supranational and the rules of supervision and accountability , where there are any , are national .
So Europe is reacting , albeit slowly , but better late than never .
This , of course , leaves two major questions which need to be answered .
The first question is : why did we need to live through a crisis in order to react ?
Why did we need to wait for all this to happen in order to introduce rules ?
The answer will be given by the citizens , by rewarding those who are calling for legislation and punishing those who wanted to persuade us that self-regulation is the panacea for all the evils we are experiencing today .
The second question is , will these texts that we are debating today be the only ones or will there be overall supervision and an overall review of the legislative and regulatory framework ?
The answer to this second question will be given by us because , as co-legislators , we shall exert pressure so that we do not just stay with the Gauzès report on credit rating agencies , which failed to see the iceberg coming towards the Titanic , which is why what happened did happen , but which quickly saw that certain Member States needed to be downgraded because they did not ' allegedly ' have an adequate credit rating .
We need to examine and correct all this from the beginning : nothing will remain the same in the European Union after the current crisis .
( ES ) Madam President , I refer solely to the report by Mrs Weber on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directives 77 / 91 / EEC , 78 / 855 / EEC , 82 / 891 / EEC and Directive 2005 / 56 / EC as regards reporting and documentation requirements in the case of mergers and divisions .
We are in the process of simplifying administrative procedures .
Our position is in favour of the proposals from the Commission introducing certain changes , but we have included some amendments which have been tabled by nearly all the political groups and which , naturally , I have supported , since they make it possible to simplify matters .
We are speaking , of course , of a very important change , which is the elimination of documentation , the introduction of web pages and references to web pages , the elimination of requirements for experts and other types of requirement that up until now have been obligatory , which could lead to a fairly significant reduction in costs and time , while still providing guarantees both to creditors and , for instance , to workers in the undertaking and other persons with access to it .
I believe that the proposals made to us by the Commission are fairly positive and that the proposals to amend the text that we are tabling adopt the same approach , guaranteeing independence , above all in the case of the use of web pages , and the need for references , in other web pages that are used , to any information in these web pages , so that this use is not complicated and there is sufficient additional information .
In short , Madam President , I believe that Parliament will be able to adopt this proposal for a directive by a considerable majority and that the resulting text will be better than the text originally submitted to us by the Commission .
( LT ) We can see from current events the influence large financial groups , and the mistakes they make , have on the real economy , especially the economies of small countries .
Therefore , the documents presented should create a legal framework to manage two main processes : firstly , to harmonise the free pro-cyclical movement of capital within a financial group with the necessity to ensure the liquidity of the real economy and macroeconomic stability during the economic recession ; secondly , to help share responsibility between home and host supervisory institutions , to ensure that a financial group 's activities are appropriate , and to clarify who will cover losses if mistakes are made .
It must be said that the document presented is only the first step in this direction , and I would like to stress that these problems will not be solved unless the impact of competition law on the activities of financial groups is assessed .
We always forget this aspect and it should be a priority in the new term of Parliament .
Madam President , I think that this package , which is part of the measures to deal with the financial crisis , is quite good with regard to Solvency II and the credit rating agencies and will result in good compromises and outcomes .
However , when we look to the future , I would like to raise three issues .
Firstly , I would like to see the European Union being more ambitious and active at global level .
Even though the G20 outcomes are steps in the right direction , they are still too modest and far from having a proper , global , convention-based regulation , both on funds and different financial instruments , and on regulation .
Secondly , when it comes to the de Larosière report and our own actions , I think that the outcome of de Larosière was rather good , especially when it comes to supervising and analysing the systematic risk at European level .
But I would like to point out two pitfalls here .
Firstly , concerning micro-supervision : I do see that the proposed moral there , which would still be based very much on cooperation instead of a centralised European aspect , has very serious problems .
Secondly , from what we have already heard about the Commission 's preparation concerning venture capital and hedge funds , there is much to be hoped for and expected from there .
So , if we really want to be effective at this level globally , we will have to do our homework properly , and I would really like to see a better and more ambitious approach from the Commission in this field .
( ES ) Madam President , the package of measures on credit rating agencies , insurance and company mergers and divisions is a first step in boosting the confidence and efficiency of the financial markets .
It is in line with the principles endorsed by the European Union and the G20 of reinforcing transparency , responsibility and integrity within the financial markets and places the European Union in a position of international leadership .
For this reason , I support the measures , even though we will have to go further .
The failings of the credit rating agencies are one of the causes of the financial crisis : self-regulation is not enough .
The regulation plays a pioneering role in introducing registration , responsibility and monitoring of the agencies , in tackling conflicts of interests , improving working methods and the quality of various types of qualifications , including those from non-EU countries .
A future revision of payment systems and the creation of a European public agency are still to be dealt with .
The directive on solvency codifies all the existing acquis on private insurance and incorporates technical advances on improved risk management that will give impetus to innovation , improve resource use and increase the protection of insured persons and financial stability within the sector .
The new framework for the supervision of insurance groups takes a prudent line , open to further development .
The creation of supervisory bodies is a step forward in the process of the integration and reinforcement of European financial supervision , which must continue to advance and could be a model that could become a world standard .
Parliament will monitor and promote its development .
Finally , the amendment of various directives in relation to reporting and documentation requirements in the case of mergers and divisions is a form of legislative simplification , and highlights the fact that the aim of reducing burdens on businesses by 25 % can perfectly well be combined with strengthening the rights of the public and shareholders , provided that information and communication technologies are used .
Madam President , I am glad that , in the end , common sense has prevailed in Parliament and the Commission concerning the causes of this financial crisis .
People have realised that this crisis is not of a cyclical nature and that a thorough overhaul of the regulation and supervision of financial markets is badly needed .
The de Larosière group report and the Turner report , too , have made this quite clear .
These reports are in analytical tune with the Lamfalussy follow-up report of Parliament .
The documents which are being debated today are to be seen in the same logic of action .
Unfortunately , our economies will still suffer for quite a while , not least because of the public budgets and , probably , future inflationary facts of the efforts which are being undertaken to clean up the huge mess .
Let us hope that we will learn more this time than we have from previous episodes of crisis .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a really interesting , good debate - for the simple reason that , looking at the reports , we are combining two aspects that do not , at first , appear to be directly linked but which are related to ways of coping with the crisis and reviving the economy .
I was shadow rapporteur in the Committee on Legal Affairs for the Weber report , on which I should first like to congratulate Mrs Weber most warmly .
The Weber report is not about crisis management in the traditional sense but about simplifying company law and helping to cut red tape and eliminate burdens on companies .
This , coming at this specific point in time , at the end of the parliamentary term , clearly proves and exemplifies the European Parliament 's handling of this particular issue and its attempts to further develop company law in the interests of companies - which I very much welcome .
As this debate also presents the opportunity to say something about financial market legislation in general , it should be noted that the fact that we in Parliament are now achieving results and concluding our proceedings at first reading on the first financial market package also sends out a signal towards the end of this parliamentary term .
I believe that this , too , is important .
Nevertheless , I should also like to point out that the second package - which , of course , is still being prepared by the Commission at the moment - will unfortunately be too late for this parliamentary term .
There are reasons for this .
As you will remember , we have indeed discussed the regulation of certain areas of financial markets in the past , namely in the committees of this House and on various occasions in plenary , but this always met with massive opposition .
There was opposition from the Council .
The socialist UK Prime Minister , Gordon Brown , refused to acknowledge certain realities for a long time .
There was also opposition from the Commission - which had been offering resistance on hedge funds and other sectors for a long time - and from within this House .
When it came to launching legislative own-initiative reports , the Chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs rejected this for a long time on account of an unnecessary dispute over competences .
I am pleased that everyone has now seen the light .
Commissioner McCreevy is regulating hedge funds , Mrs Berès is permitting own-initiative reports and Gordon Brown , too , has changed his mind .
This is a positive development , one that my group and I very much welcome .

( FR ) Madam President , my speech will relate to the report on rating agencies , and my first words will be an expression of gratitude to my friend , Mr Gauzès , who has acted competently , lucidly and pragmatically .
However , at the risk of straying from the subject somewhat , Madam President , I should like to speak about the problem of the rating of states .
In this crisis that we are experiencing , states have become major financial players in the face of the potential collapse of the financial sector .
They have taken guarantees , they have debts , they have equity stakes , and that is why I wonder whether the European Union ought not to propose , as part of the new global regulation of capitalism , the creation of a global public state rating agency , an independent body that would come under the International Monetary Fund and would enable citizens to have an idea , via these ratings , of the quality of the finance of states , which , I repeat , have become key financial players .
( DE ) Madam President , three brief points are important in my eyes .
Firstly , we have achieved a sound consensus on the need to subject all financial institutions , without exception , to regulation in future .
The Commission is now able , little by little , to put forward proposals encompassing all actors - which is absolutely essential .
Secondly , we should consider how to develop the European financial supervisory authorities thus necessitated and bring them under our control , and to significantly reduce our dependence - be it official or unofficial - on the regulatory institutions of the United States , since we know these to have been a spectacular failure .
My third point is that I am concerned about financial developments in the euro area as a whole , as the spreads and indebtedness between the various countries of the euro area and the credit rating activities of these countries are growing apart rather than together .
We should take every possible measure in this regard , and should require the individual countries to enforce discipline .
My final point is that we need to ensure that the EU does not end up falling into debt .
The EU Member States are deep enough in debt as it is .
We do not need any more indebted institutions .

( FR ) Madam President , I would just like to point out to Mr Lehne that it was the socialists in this Parliament who wanted legislation on speculative funds , and that it was their determination that above all led to our having this legislation on speculative funds and , also , in Mr Gauzès 's report , to the call for the Commission to work on the idea of a public credit rating agency .

Moving on , I should like all the same to take advantage of this opportunity to tell the Commissioner that I am astonished at this situation where double standards exist in relation to the Commission 's monopoly on legislative initiatives .
When the Council asks the Commission to put a proposal on the table to harmonise the bank deposit guarantee , the proposal is there three weeks later .
When the European Parliament submits a proposal for a legislative initiative by Mr Rasmussen , which was voted for by the vast majority of this plenary , you work it so that the proposal in question is put on the table just when the European Parliament will no longer be able to debate it .
We asked you for a legislative initiative in this area last September .
What have you been doing since then , Commissioner ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I express my appreciation and admiration for the efficient handling of these three files by Parliament and the three rapporteurs in particular .
This has resulted in a quick consensus , which will definitely improve the functioning of our financial markets .
The EU regulation on credit-rating agencies will improve integrity , transparency , responsibility and good governance in the credit-rating activities .
Mr Purvis asked a couple of questions in this particular regard , concerning the freedom to invest in particular products .
Now , investment is free to all products , whether from the European Union or not .
Ratings are not mandatory , so EU firms are not obliged to invest in rated products .
But let me stress that , for regulatory purposes - that is , calculation of capital requirements - the ratings that can be used are those either issued in the EU for both EU and third-country products , or endorsed or recognised as equivalent in the European Union .
Although I am disappointed with certain aspects of the agreement on Solvency II , as I outlined earlier , the EU will have a framework for the insurance industry which could serve as a model for similar reforms internationally .
Of course , this is not the end of the story .
Much work remains to be done : implementing measures will need to be in place some time before October 2012 in order to give Member States and the industry some time to prepare for the introduction of Solvency II .
I can assure you that the Commission will play its role in order to facilitate this process and put these long , overdue reforms into practice as soon as possible in the interests of all the parties involved .
Even though I referred to this in my earlier introductory remarks , I would just like to stress again that group supervision remains in the proposed Solvency II , although group support is out - I think it is just important not to get two concepts mixed up entirely .
Finally , with the simplified reporting and documentation requirements in the cases of mergers and divisions of public limited liability companies , the agenda on the administrative burden reduction is advancing , and this will contribute to the potential for growth and help Europe on the way to economic recovery .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall limit myself to two or three brief remarks .
The first is that there has been fairly broad agreement in this House concerning the report on rating agencies , and , of course , European legislation will evolve over time , but I believe that , for now , it may serve as a model for an international agreement .

Finally , allow me to thank the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Pittella and Mr Klinz , who have worked hard alongside me , the teams from the Commission , the Presidency and , of course , the secretariat of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the experts , without whom this work could not have been concluded so successfully .
rapporteur . - Madam President , it was quite interesting listening to all the speeches this morning in Parliament at a time not only when we are living through the toughest financial and economic crisis , but also when the European elections are approaching .
The reports which we have discussed today , and will vote on tomorrow , are not meant to solve the financial crisis , but we hope they will help us avoid making the same mistakes in future , or at least major mistakes , and hopefully they will support a relaunch of the European economy .
When one hears that small enterprises today have to spend 10 times more than big companies in order to comply with EU legislation on reporting requirements , it is normal to wonder why this is so and how we have come to have rules which through their effects may actually kill these small enterprises and why it has taken us so long to change this .
I am glad that Commissioner McCreevy mentioned that company law is probably the toughest in the EU acquis communautaire .
Maybe it is time to change it , certainly not to make it softer , but perhaps to bring it more in line with the current realities we are living through .
If we want to be more efficient , it is better to put our energy into being constructive , and I think it is fair to say that what happened with the package we discussed today is proof of this .
It is proof that we have acted responsibly and we have reached a compromise with the Council and the Commission in order to adopt this package at first reading .
Can we do more ?
Certainly , but let us vote on this and work in the right direction .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I would like to start by saying what I should perhaps have said first of all , which is a thank you to all the services of the Commission , the Council , and particularly the Parliament , for the work that they put into this .
I have to say that without their work and their help , we would not have achieved this .
Like many around the room , we are quite astounded by the level of technical detail that goes into many of these reports , but let us say about Solvency II that it was forged outside a crisis to face a crisis .
It has risk management in it and - as many people have heard round the room - this is a first for much of the financial services legislation .
It also does - and I agree with the Commissioner - contain group supervision .
Group support , unfortunately , is out , but we have heard all about that .
Let us hope that we can get that back .
Capital is defined as well .
Many aspects of this report make it a world leader .
My second point is about the strategic impact of using such legislation .
In many respects , just having a regulation that works over 27 Member States is not going to be helped if we do not have the twin , which is a strategic regulator at a European level which works over 27 Member States as well .
We need to overcome the differences that exist between regulators and make sure that we speak with one voice .
It is particularly important when we come to recognise regimes elsewhere in the world .
Just this weekend I met with Paul Kanjorski , Chair of the Subcommittee on Finance in the US Congress , and others , who are now talking about accelerating the prospects for a single regulator at a federal level in the United States .
It they do that before we do it in Europe , we could be severely embarrassed by not having the regulator we need at a European level .
This is a report which is at a global level and a global measure , a process about which we could all feel proud , but we also need to make sure that we continue to push for the changes on the issues thrown up by the de Larosière report and also on group support which will bring about economic efficiency .
I hope that everybody can support those measures .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote on the report ( Α6-0191 / 2009 ) by Mr JeanPaul Gauzès will take place on Thursday , 23 April 2009 .
The vote on the report by Mrs Renate Weber and the report by Mr Peter Skinner will take place today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I do not wish to discuss here the importance of rating agencies .
Everyone knows that they are crucial in providing a sound basis for investment decisions , whether in relation to the financial products or the issuers ( meaning therefore that they provide much more than simple opinions ) .
However , I do want to emphasise the importance of setting up a European agency .
During a period of deep economic crisis like the one we are just going through at the moment , rating agencies should remain , regardless of the economic conditions , transparent and credible instruments , providing support as Europe steers through these troubled times .
We cannot disguise the fact that the current crisis is also down to rating agencies as they have analysed in a totally confused manner conventional instruments along with other hybrid instruments , all against the backdrop of accusations of a lack of transparency and conflict of interests .
We need new organisations in this sector , which will generate competition in providing objective ratings .
We must think about protection for the investors and their confidence in rating agencies .
The EU must guarantee that rating agencies operate according to clear regulations .
What better way then to fulfil these conditions than to set up a European rating agency which operates according to Community regulations .
I would like to say that I welcome and support the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending previous directives on reporting and documentation requirements in the case of mergers and divisions .
I particularly welcome the concrete measures proposed for reducing the administrative burden which needlessly disrupts the economic activities going on in the European business sector .
I support the objective of this initiative to help boost the competitiveness of companies within the EU by reducing the administrative burden imposed by European directives in the area of commercial company law , where this reduction can be achieved without having a major adverse impact on the other parties concerned .
I strongly advocate the effective application of the action programme approved by the European Spring Council in March 2007 , aimed at reducing the administrative burden by 25 % by 2012 .
I believe that European firms and citizens greatly need a reduction in the red tape imposed by the Community acquis and certain national legislations .
Facility providing mid-term financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments - Facility providing mid-term financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mrs Pervenche Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Financial Affairs , on a facility providing medium-term financial assistance for Member States ' balance of payments - C6-0134 / 2009 - and
the statements by the Council and the Commission on a facility providing medium-term financial assistance for Member States ' balance of payments .
Madam President , the European Council has decided to double the ' balance of payments ' facility for countries outside the euro zone , and on 8 April the Commission introduced the concrete provisions designed to turn this proposal into a reality .
Here at the European Parliament we wish to accept our responsibilities and to enable the Ecofin Council to act promptly for , as we see it , this proposal contains a sign of solidarity towards non-member countries of the euro zone that is of vital importance for tackling the root of this crisis .

Back in November , we were already doubling this ' balance of payments ' facility , since it rose from EUR 12 to 25 billion , and , today , to take account not only of the reality , the severity of the crisis that we are in and that is having a particular impact on countries outside the euro zone , but also , without doubt , of the European Parliament 's timetable , we propose to you that this facility be doubled , to bring it up to EUR 50 billion .
This is in light of the fact that what we decided in November has already enabled support to be given to Hungary , to Latvia and , yesterday , to Romania .
We feel that this is necessary , and we have held a debate among ourselves , which I will not hide from you , to learn whether this assessment of countries outside the euro zone should be done exclusively on a case-by-case basis , or whether , in reality , there was basically a more global situation that was that of countries outside the euro zone .
That is why , in our resolution , we propose that the issue of enlargement conditions be considered and the extent to which membership of the zone can be a protective factor be confirmed .
We are also very insistent in calling for the European Parliament to be informed of the substance of the analyses of the crisis situations these countries are facing .
This is because , when the Commission grants its loans to countries outside the euro zone , there is a certain transparency and substance to the information on the behaviour of private banks and on the behaviour of operators which has led to this crisis , that the European Parliament must be informed of .
Lastly , we believe that all possible mechanisms for tackling this crisis should be used and implemented by the Commission .
This is particularly the case as regards Article 100 of the Treaty , which would also permit the implementation of special mechanisms for countries within the euro zone .
We believe it is essential to explore these given the severity of the crisis .
There are two final elements .
Firstly , as we see it , the conditionality of these loans is an element for discussion ; we understand that .
Generally speaking , the Commission carries out this work in harmony with the IMF .
What we want is the creation of a working group to look at how these memorandums are drawn up and how they take account of the actual situation of the country in question , but also of the European Union 's overall strategy , particularly as regards arbitrage between investments , purchasing power support and conditionality in terms of a strategy on environmental growth and sustainable development .
Lastly , we identify in this mechanism evidence of the ability of the European Union and of the Commission to borrow on the international markets , and we therefore believe that we have here a useful foundation on which to base a debate that we are also conducting on European borrowing and on the capacity of the European Union to finance future strategies and investments through such borrowing .
To conclude , the Commission has implemented a new mechanism to ensure that repayments will enable the European Union 's budget to cope with these demands .
We support this amendment to the regulation and we hope that this Parliament will give its full support to this worthwhile proposal .
Member of the Commission . - I am taking this debate on behalf of my colleague , Mr Almunia .

The proposal on the table today concerns one of the core values of the Union , namely solidarity .
Against the backdrop of the international financial crisis , the Commission proposes further reinforced solidarity with the Member States that do not yet benefit from the protective umbrella of the euro .
The facility for supporting Member States ' balances of payments is , by definition , foreseen for exceptional circumstances and was only used on a few occasions in the past .
We do , however , live in exceptional times .
As you know , the Commission proposed last year an increase in the ceiling of outstanding loans that the Community can provide to support Member States ' balances of payments .

The ceiling was raised from EUR 12 billion to EUR 25 billion , but a substantial part of this amount has already been earmarked .
At the request of the countries concerned , the ECOFIN Council decided to provide balance of payments support to Hungary of up to EUR 6.5 billion in November .
On 20 January it decided to grant up to EUR 3.1 billion to Latvia , and the decision to provide up to EUR 5 billion to Romania is in the pipeline .
Already earmarked financial assistance under the regulation thus adds up to around EUR 15 billion .
There is , moreover , no immediate end in sight to either the financial crisis or global deleveraging , and ongoing financial stress in other Member States could result in further needs for financial assistance .
The European Council of 19 and 20 March therefore welcomed the announcement by President Barroso that the Commission intended to make a proposal for increasing the ceiling of the Community 's balance of payments support to EUR 50 billion .
The doubling of the ceiling will provide an important signal to financial markets of the European Union 's strong commitment to helping Member States under financial stress .
The extension of the total possible credit line to EUR 50 billion will provide a large buffer to cater for further possible needs for financial support .
Such strong signs of solidarity among Member States should also help to calm financial investors ' fear of further financial market deterioration in the Member States outside the euro area .
By reducing the incentive for capital withdrawal , it would decrease the probability of balance of payments problems in the concerned countries .
In this context I would like to express my gratitude and respect for the excellent spirit of cooperation at the European Parliament and , in particular , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The Commission adopted this proposal just before the Easter holidays on 8 April and only two weeks later you are now about to vote your legislative resolution and motion for resolution in plenary .
Thanks to your swift and efficient work , the ECOFIN Council will be able to adopt the amended regulation on 5 May .
The European Union will thus be well equipped to react rapidly should the need for further balance of payments support arise .
This is a powerful signal to Member States that the European Union is willing and ready to help and should be turned to in the first instance in case of balance of payments problems .
This obviously does not exclude that a Member State would also ask for assistance from other international organisations such as the IMF , with which the Commission has been closely cooperating on the latest financial support packages .
I would like to conclude by saying that I agree with the statement in your draft motion for a resolution that the current international situation proves the relevance of the euro and that all Member States outside the euro area should be encouraged to fulfil the Maastricht criteria in order to join it .
The Council has announced that it will not be making a statement .
The debate will therefore continue with speakers from the political groups .
Madam President , among other aspects , the crisis has not only revealed the huge gaps between countries in the euro area , which was perhaps the main conclusion of the EMU @ 10 report , but in particular the extreme vulnerability of those countries which , while belonging to the European Union , are not part of the euro area .
That is why boosting the EU resources available to assist with balance of payments crises is absolutely vital .
That is also why we welcomed the financial assistance ceiling being raised from EUR 12 billion to EUR 25 billion , and now to EUR 50 billion .


However , it is more important to tackle the root causes of the problems , and not just their most obvious manifestations .
The enlarged Europe and the euro area must now reinterpret the sense of European solidarity and the objectives of cohesion and real convergence .
In this respect we not only need to understand the capacity of Europe 's cross-sectoral policies , but also revisit new financing instruments , such as Eurobonds .
Financial assistance for balances of payments is essential , but is in no way enough to guarantee the sustainability of the European project and the European single currency .
( LV ) Thank you , Madam President .
The increase in the European Union medium-term financial assistance mechanism to EUR 50 billion is the response that is needed to the current situation .
It is an important signal to European Union Member States which are not in the euro zone , and particularly to those Member States that have joined the European Union comparatively recently .
The effect of the world financial crisis on the financial and economic situation in this group of states has differed , but in all of them local and international confidence in those states ' financial systems has diminished significantly .
Therefore , the reinforcing of the Community assistance mechanism is a demonstration of solidarity between Member States ; it will have a stabilising role on the financial markets and will serve to reduce the risk of instability in the European Union 's economy as a whole .
The strengthening of the medium-term assistance mechanism will also make it easier for Member States to obtain the funding they need from international financial institutions .
I support the proposal by the relevant committee to instruct the Commission to inform the European Parliament about memoranda of understanding with Member States in receipt of assistance , as well as the need to carry out a check in two years ' time on the conditions providing the basis for assistance . Thank you .
Mr President , Commissioner , this is the second time that we have had to increase the guarantee provided by the European Union to overcome the difficulties of its members , non-members of the euro zone .
This is the second time : we already increased it in December .
Mr McCreevy has congratulated us on the promptness of our action .
We already acted promptly in December , and we should like to say to Mr McCreevy , as Mrs Berès did a moment ago , that the lift ...
Yes , Mr McCreevy , please ?
Please ?
Commissioner ...
...
We should like reciprocity to be applied , by which I mean that , when Parliament asks you to submit a draft on the regulation of hedge funds , you respond to us immediately , and in the same timeframe that we apply when you ask us to increase aid for the protection of the balances of payments .
We are indeed in a crisis ; we may not need to sit every day , but at least let us not have to wait six months from the European Parliament 's requesting a directive on hedge funds to the Commission complying !
Clearly , then , as far as this aid is concerned , we fully agree on the need to increase this credit line , and I am slightly surprised by Mr Becsey 's remarks .
We had exactly the same discussion in December .
Commissioner Almunia explained to Mr Becsey that it was the Hungarian Government itself that had requested aid from the IMF , but not from the European Union , and that it was the European Union that said : ' But we too can help you ' .
It is quite clear that the European Union has a duty to show solidarity towards countries outside the euro zone , but there is also no reason why IMF aid , to which each of us , Hungary and Romania included , contribute , should be turned down .
Thus , in the Berès report - which we shall , in any case , vote for - there are two things that bother us .
Firstly , what is the point of saying in paragraph 4 that we must commit ourselves to inter-country solidarity only to then point out in paragraph 11 that under no circumstances are we bound by a country 's commitments ?
It is true that we are not bound by a country 's commitments , but there is no use in pointing this out when we say that we will show solidarity with one another .
The second problem is the assertion that there is no legal basis to increase this solidarity , but it is precisely the responsibility of the Commission to provide this legal basis .
We are in a crisis , and it is high time we were given a legal basis .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to start by thanking Mrs Berès for the speed with which she produced a draft report .
As you know , the procedure comprises two stages .
The first is the consultation ; the opinion on the Council regulation .
This is not a codecision procedure .
At this stage , we in the committee were unanimous in our view that the increase from EUR 12 to 25 to 50 billion was the right step to take .
Three Member States have already availed themselves of funds : Hungary - whose situation Mr Becsey has just discussed along with its domestic responsibility - Latvia and Romania .
These European funds enable us to provide effective assistance and thus to actively support countries that have run into payment difficulties .
Yet we should not forget that , at the same time , the international institutions have decided to increase funding from the international financial institutions - the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , the World Bank and development banks - by USD 1 100 billion .
This means we have a dual instrument .
Europe has contributed to increasing this funding whilst also assuming its own responsibility .
Against this background , the draft resolution on which we in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs voted yesterday evening on the basis of compromise proposals is also suited to the adoption of Parliament 's requests , requirements and demands of the Commission and of the competent Council in this regard for future legislation .
In this connection , there is a legal issue with regard to the Eurobonds and Article 100 , which is binding on only the euro area .
If we consider that there is no legal basis for Eurobonds in the Treaties at present , we are on the right track .
On the other hand , however , the Commission must be given the task of examining the conditions required to make such measures possible in the first place .
I regard this as a responsible course of action .
Therefore , our group will be supporting the proposal as a whole - both the proposal for a regulation and the motion for a resolution .
We hope that this does not mean Europe embarking on some sort of additional financing responsibility that would shoot any budget to pieces .
Therefore , the limit of EUR 50 billion is completely justifiable at present .
If new challenges should present themselves , we shall not be able to close our eyes to them .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to express emphatic support for the Commission 's proposal to double the amount of financial aid permissible for new Member States which are not in the euro zone .
I would like to congratulate the Commission on its quick reaction , and also to thank our rapporteur , Mrs Berès .
The present crisis has shown beyond all doubt that new Member States which do not belong to the euro zone can be very vulnerable to fluctuations in financial markets , often through no fault of their own .
It has been said here that European Union aid should originate from the principle of solidarity .
I agree entirely with this , but I would like to add that it is also required by the fact that the crisis did not arise in the new Member States and they are not responsible for the turbulence in the financial markets , and so giving them aid is fully justified .
At the same time I would like to add that irrespective of whether the proposal is appreciated and supported or not , the most effective method to eliminate similar threats in the future is to allow these countries to enter the euro zone as quickly as possible .
This will be less expensive and will give the European Union greater stability .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Berès .
We are unable to predict the duration and magnitude of the crisis , but we are constantly monitoring it .
Even if we are unable to tackle the crisis ex ante , we must try to keep the response time to a minimum and achieve the maximum degree of transparency , democracy and efficiency .
On the subject of time , we are dealing with the crisis like the Greek god , Cronos : the time spent handling the crisis is swallowing up its own children .
We will become victims of the crisis if we are unable to take quick , effective action .
The European institutional system must assume the role of Rhea , Cronos 's wife , which means we have to get the better of Cronos , in other words , make the most of the time for dealing with the crisis .
I would like to thank the European Parliament , the European Commission and the European Council for their joint decision in favour of boosting solidarity and efficiency .
However , since Mr Becsey has brought up domestic political matters , I would also like , if I may , to draw attention to the fact that while tackling this crisis , it is the duty of MEPs to work together in national parliaments .
What we need is not division between the government party and the opposition , but help from every party involved in managing the crisis .
This applies to my country , Hungary , and to every other country too .
( RO ) I would like to thank the European Commission , the Council and European Parliament for the efficiency with which they have devised this measure .
Many Member States which are not part of the euro zone will benefit from this top-up to the intervention fund for balance of payment requirements , including Romania .
Without this measure , the situation triggered by the economic and financial crisis would have been much more difficult in these Member States outside the euro zone .
Given also that it has been shown once again that the Member States which use the euro have weathered the financial crisis better , I would suggest that in the memoranda of understanding which will be signed between the Commission and Member States to be able to use these funds , Member States should be reminded , especially the new ones , that they have an obligation to take every measure to join the euro zone .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I wholeheartedly support Mrs Berès 's report , and I note that the very fact that we already have the G20 instead of the G8 is a considerable step forward .
I believe that the positions adopted in London , especially by the Europeans , are reasonable , but we must not stop there .
It is not just a question of being able to monitor the markets and hedge funds better , or of supporting our balances of payments and the economy with billion-dollar cash injections .
The international monetary system is not working properly because we do not know exactly how much goods and services cost in the various countries .
We therefore need to go further and to give thought to the idea of introducing an international currency or , at the very least , of creating a common political system bringing together a few main currencies .
China , Russia , many developing countries , but also the new members of the Union - we all need stability and ground rules .
However , Commissioner , that also depends on us , the Union .
- ( LT ) I would like to draw attention to an unpleasant fact which is hiding behind fine words .
In reality , Europe is now split in two : the euro zone and the non-euro zone .
An hour ago we discussed the control of financial markets ; it is obvious that the aim is to ensure the movement of capital and the activities of financial groups uniformly throughout the whole of Europe .
This means macroeconomic management is left in national hands and if there are problems , countries are left to solve those problems themselves .
This is not the sort of attitude that will help us strengthen the common market .
We need common macroeconomic management and this will be achieved if we support the proposal of the de Larosière Group .
However , we need this macroeconomic management on a European scale , not just within the euro zone , and we need it now .
I think that one of the European Parliament 's proposals for the ECOFIN meeting should be to discuss macroeconomic management not just on the basis of the euro zone , but at European Union level .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , Mr Becsey raised the question of the conditionality attaching to loans .
Let me just say that conditions are discussed with governments and with all Member States within the Council , so they are not imposed unilaterally .
A number of speakers raised the question of the legal base on which this particular provision has been made .
The use of Article 100 as the basis for a new instrument on EU balance of payment assistance has been considered by the Commission .
However , due to the urgency of the matter and to ensure continuity , it has been fair to stick to the current legal instruments and limit the revision of Regulation ( EC ) No 332 / 2002 , establishing a facility providing medium-term financial assistance for non-euro-area Member States to a minimum , i.e. to the increase in the ceiling as agreed by the European Council , and to some necessary technical improvements that appear necessary on the basis of the experience gained with the implementation of the balance of payments facility since last autumn .
A number of speakers raised that particular point .
Let me once again thank the European Parliament for the efficient way that it has dealt with this particular file .
Mr President , it is true that we would at times like the Commission to show the same sense of responsibility and effectiveness as the European Parliament .
I would say to Mr Becsey that , in my view , the resolution on which we are going to vote in this House clearly underlines the issues involved in membership of the euro zone , as well as the importance of bringing the concept of solidarity to life within the European Union , and that is one of the reasons why we strongly support this proposal .
Commissioner , on the matter of Article 100 , the problem is not one of knowing whether Article 100 is going to be used here , but of knowing whether we in the European Union are finally providing ourselves with all the tools to tackle the reality of this crisis and its potential future developments .
We believe that the Commission must implement the secondary legislation so that , in future , it may be able to use Article 100 in order to tackle problems within the euro zone for which the EUR 50 billion to be voted on today could not be used .
That is the spirit of the European Parliament 's position , and I hope that the Commission will hear this message , whether it be on the arrangements , on the complete set of tools required to tackle this crisis , or on the conditions for drafting the memorandums and on the conditionality of these loans in the negotiations with the Member States concerned .
I have received a motion for a resolution pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Friday 24 April .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.20 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

1 .
Parliament 's calendar of part-sessions - 2010
2 .
Agreement between the EC and Pakistan on certain aspects of air services (
3 .
Accession of the EC to UNECE Regulation No 61 on uniform provisions for the approval of commercial vehicles (
4 .
Animal health conditions governing the movement and importation from third countries of equidae (
5 .
Trade arrangements applicable to certain goods resulting from the processing of agricultural products (
6 .
Coordination of social security systems (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( NL ) I can be very brief .
We discussed the first reading of this dossier less than a year ago .
At that point we , as Parliament , pleaded for better provision of information to the employees involved or European citizens who move freely .
At the European Parliament 's instigation , after the Council of Ministers had determined its position , negotiations started , which we managed to bring to a successful conclusion .
I should , above all , like to say a word of thanks to my fellow Members , and Jean Lambert in particular .
We managed to work well with the European Commission .
The Czech Presidency also recognised the significance of this dossier , and I think we achieved a sound result , not least for everyone who wants to move freely in Europe .
I should like to leave it there .
7 .
Coordination of social security systems : implementing Regulation (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking all colleagues who have been involved in this over the last five years and the Commission and the Council for their work on this implementing regulation .
The coordination of social security systems has been in place since 1971 - it is not new , as some thought the last time we discussed it - and it is this regulation that will be discussed in the context of the cross-border health-care debate on Thursday morning .
This is the regulation to which that refers , and this is the implementation of it .
We believe we have made considerable progress , not least in terms of the electronic means of communication , which hopefully will speed up the process for all citizens , but we in Parliament believe that we have added to citizens ' rights within this process , that they are now entitled to much more information , not least in the case of those who have been posted for work purposes .
We also believe we have made minimal progress on deadlines - although that is something that rests with the Member States .
This is important : it now means we can bring in the updated regulation and , hopefully , this will work more rapidly and in the best interests of all citizens .
Again , I would like to thank all colleagues who have been involved in this long , difficult but , hopefully , very fruitful outcome .
( Applause )
8 .
European metrology research and development programme (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the reason we are able to conclude this procedure at first reading is that we have succeeded in bringing about excellent cooperation across the group divide and with the other institutions .
For this , I should like to offer particular thanks to my fellow MEPs , the Council , the Commission , the secretariat of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , the European Economic and Social Committee and , of course , the large body of researchers behind it all .
We now have within reach concerted European research , in the context of future cooperation between the 22 National Metrology Institutes .
This will introduce substantial Europeanisation into the important field of measurement .
In addition , there is to be enhanced cooperation in future involving the five Member States not yet participating in this integration .
We have achieved this by means of Article 169 , which we apply when coordinating national and European research funding .
Each amounts to EUR 200 million , and this will enable us to achieve cooperation between the nation-states .
Research in the field of measurement covers a wide range of fields , from diabetes to the nanotechnology or space fields , and will be important to the whole field of standard setting in relation to CO2 in future .
So , then , I wish to reiterate my particular thanks to everyone involved .
I hope that this will lead to enhanced European cooperation in this very important research area in future .
9 .
Timber and timber products (
10 .
Minimum stocks of crude oil and / or petroleum products (
11 .
Critical Infrastructure Warning Information Network ( CIWIN ) (
12 .
European Network for the Protection of Public Figures (
13 .
National restructuring programmes for the cotton sector (
- Before the vote :
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , since the adoption of the new cotton reform by Council in June 2008 , much work has been invested in setting up restructuring programmes in the main cotton-producing Member States .
This proposal is the Commission 's response to the Council 's invitation to propose adjustments to the framework for these restructuring programmes .
The main modification concerns the possibility of introducing an eight-year , instead of a four-year , programme , which would allow for more substantial restructuring operations .
The Commission thanks the rapporteur for the support given to the Commission proposal .
We are pleased when the Commission praises our work ; this should always be the case .
14 .
Protocol on the Implementation of the Alpine Convention in the field of Transport (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , the accession of the EU to the Transport Protocol of the Alpine Convention is a small but perfectly formed piece in the jigsaw of a new transport policy in Europe .
We are still left with the subjects of the efficiency , fluidity and safety of transport , and to these we are adding concerns relating to the people living near , and the environment surrounding , the routes .
This sends out an important message .
Particularly after a 15-year membership of this European Union , we Austrians feel reassured by the fact that it was we who introduced our European Community to a great many of these concerns , and that this has led to Europe taking on these concerns .
Many thanks to all the Members who contributed to this .
15 .
Draft amending budget No 2 / 2009 (
16 .
Draft amending budget No 3 / 2009 (
17 .
Request for defence of the immunity of Aldo Patriciello (
18 .
Request for defence of the immunity and privileges of Renato Brunetta (
19 .
Request for consultation on the immunity and privileges of Antonio Di Pietro (
20 .
Request for waiver of the immunity of Hannes Swoboda (
- Before the vote :
( DE ) Mr President , I just wanted to make known that I shall not be participating in this vote .
21 .
Control of the budgetary implementation of the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (
22 .
Effective enforcement of judgments in the EU : the transparency of debtors ' assets (
23 .
Annual report on the deliberations of the Petitions Committee 2008 (
24 .
Gender mainstreaming in the work of committees and delegations (
25 .
Common rules for the internal market in electricity (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , Parliament has moved from its first-reading position on the Electricity and Gas Directive .
I would just like briefly to explain why .
The report as it stands is far from perfect , but we believe that we have made substantial gains for energy consumers in the European Union .
We have put the issue of energy poverty onto the European agenda for the very first time and we have ensured the independence of the national regulatory authorities and given them an increased role to police the new system .
We would like , however , to encourage the Commission and , in particular , the competition authorities to continue their work in ensuring that companies that own both generation and transmission systems play by the rules and do not abuse their positions .
I would like to thank colleagues for all their help over the years .
26 .
Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (
27 .
Access to the network : cross-border exchanges in electricity (
28 .
Internal market in natural gas (
29 .
Conditions for access to the natural gas transmission networks (
30 .
European public administrations ISA : interoperability solutions (
31 .
Machinery for pesticide application (
Before the vote on Amendment 39 :
In July 2006 the Commission presented a strategy the objective of which was to reduce the general risk and adverse impact of pesticides on human health and the environment .
The last element of that strategy is the proposal for a directive on machinery for pesticide application , amending Directive 2006 / 42 / EC on machinery .
The directive sets out the requirements with which the machinery for application should comply in order to limit the adverse effects of pesticides on the environment , the operator and the surroundings .
Establishing these requirements will reduce the differences between regulations and the procedures followed in some countries of the Community concerning the application of pesticides , ensure a uniform level of environmental protection in the Community , and enable free flow of these machines in the EU market , which is especially significant for small and medium-sized enterprises , which are most often the producers of this type of equipment .
The draft of the proposal and suggested amendments were the subject of discussion during workshops , at meetings with representatives of the Council , the Commission , shadow rapporteurs and interested parties , and during tri-partite talks .
In view of the large technical differences between different types of machine - from simple , hand-operated ones to those operated by qualified personnel - some of the amendments were not adopted and it was decided that they will be contained in standards developed by the European Committee for Standardization at the request of the Commission .
Thanks to this a consensus was achieved , Amendment 39 was adopted , and this position has been confirmed by the Council .
I would particularly like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , representatives of the Commission and the Council , the administration of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection and interested parties for their help and cooperation .
I propose adoption of the directive , which will contribute to increased protection of the environment , operators and their surroundings when applying pesticides .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Rutowicz , for his work and efforts in processing this proposal .
The Commission welcomes compromise Amendment 39 and is looking forward to the rapid adoption of the proposal along those lines .
The Commission would like to make the following statement : ' To support the essential requirements included in Section 2.4 of Annex I , the Commission will mandate CEN to develop harmonised standards for each category of machinery for pesticide application , based on the best available techniques for preventing unintended exposure of the environment to pesticides .
In particular the mandate will require the standards to provide criteria and technical specifications for the fitting of mechanical shielding , tunnel spraying and air-assistance systems for spraying for preventing contamination of the water source during filling and emptying and precise specifications for the manufacturer 's instructions to prevent drift of pesticides , taking account of all the relevant parameters , such as nozzle pressure , boom height , wind speed , air temperature and humidity , and driving speed . '
32 .
Fuel efficiency : labelling of tyres (
33 .
Amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 717 / 2007 ( mobile telephone networks ) and Directive 2002 / 21 / EC ( electronic communications ) (
- Before the vote :

Mr President , this is a minor modification requested by the Council in order to remove an inconsistency about the exchange rates applicable for SMS caps and the cut-off limit .
Therefore , as agreed with the Council , the following text should be added at the end of Article 1 ( 4 ) of the original regulation , which is Article 1 , point 2 ( b ) , of the amending regulation : ' The same reference exchange rates shall be applied to annually revise the value of the charges governed by Articles 4a , 4b and 6a ( 3 ) where these charges are denominated in currencies other than the euro . '
34 .
Reporting and documentation requirements in the case of merger and divisions (
Before the vote on the amended resolution :
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the adoption of the Weber report endorsed in the compromise text on simplified reporting and documentation requirements in the case of mergers and divisions of public limited liability companies .
Even though the Commission had gone even further in its original proposal , this will maintain a very significant part of the savings potential of the original Commission proposal , which amounts to EUR 172 million per year .
The agenda on administrative burden reduction is advancing , and this will contribute to the potential for growth and help Europe on the way to recovery .
35 .
Insurance and reinsurance ( Solvency II ) ( recast ) (
- Before the vote :
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to express my appreciation and admiration for the efficient handling of the Solvency II file by the European Parliament and for your willingness to compromise .
With Solvency II , the EU will have a modern framework for insurance supervision , which will then be official for the insurance industry and for policyholders .
I personally regret the deletion of the group support regime , because it is a missed opportunity to make further progress in group supervision .
However , the Commission will support the agreement between Parliament and the Council if it is endorsed by your vote .
This , of course , is not the end of the story .
Much work remains to be done : implementing measures will need to be in place some time before October 2012 in order to give the Member States and the industry enough time to prepare for the introduction of Solvency II .
I can assure you that the Commission will play its role in order to facilitate this process and to put these long overdue reforms into practice as soon as possible in the interests of all parties concerned .
36 .
Interim Trade Agreement with Turkmenistan
- Before the vote :
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , let me remind you that the Council has always examined the opinions and resolutions of Parliament with great interest and attention .
At the same time , the Council has taken the issue of human rights very seriously , as evidenced in the contractual relations of the European Union with countries in various parts of the world .
Under the Cotonou Agreement , a treaty between the European Union and the group of African , Caribbean and Pacific States , there have been more than 15 cases since 1995 when the Community has partially or fully suspended the application of agreements in relation to some of the countries for non-execution of obligations relating to the human rights clause .
You will certainly also know about the sanctions the Council imposed on Uzbekistan following the Andijan events in 2005 .
Of course , much remains to be done in the field of human rights and respect for the rule of law and democracy in Turkmenistan .
We will continue to push , in particular , for the release of all political prisoners , for free access of the International Committee of the Red Cross to prisons , for lifting of the restrictions on foreign travel and for freedom of the media in civil society .
We are committed to taking appropriate measures in conformity with the agreement , including , if necessary , the suspension of the agreement with Turkmenistan , in case of a violation of human rights , as stipulated in the agreement .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission has carefully taken note of Parliament 's concerns about the democracy and human rights situation in Turkmenistan .
We welcome the statement in the joint draft resolution that the conclusion of an interim trade agreement would be a good first step that will allow us to engage more with Turkmenistan in order to promote further positive developments and cooperation .
The Commission is aware of Parliament 's concerns regarding the possibility of suspending the agreements .
I recall the statement by my colleague , Ms Ferrero-Waldner , at the debate last month that both the Interim Trade Agreement ( Article 1 ) and the PCA ( Article 2 ) contain human rights clauses which constitute an essential element of those agreements .
As well as these provisions , Article 28 of the ITA and Article 94 of the PCA will enable each side to take appropriate measures in case of grave violations of the agreements .
In the Commission 's view , these measures could also include the suspension of the agreements .
The Commission undertakes to monitor closely the human rights situation in Turkmenistan , together with Member States , and to report on a regular basis to the appropriate bodies of Parliament .
Should Parliament recommend taking measures in the light of reported grave violations of essential elements of the Interim Trade Agreement , especially with regard to human rights , the Commission will seriously consider duly reflecting Parliament 's recommendations in its proposal to the Council .
( FR ) Mr President , the declarations by the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner are very interesting since they prove the European Parliament right in calling for the signing of a new trade agreement with Turkmenistan to be linked to respect for human rights .
The latter is a fundamental principle for trade agreements made by the European Union .
However , given the huge number of human rights violations in that country , even now , I believe that the best way to establish this philosophy is to start by postponing this new trade commitment that you are proposing to us , and thus not to give our assent , which we are being asked to give today .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to say that , in its debate and its papers , Parliament has called on both the Commission and the Council to state that , if Parliament were to call for this agreement to be suspended or revoked , they would do so .
The statements were very different .
The President-in-Office of the Council expressed no opinion at all as to how the Council would react if Parliament were to call for this .
The Commissioner merely replied that the Commission would give some thought to what it would do if Parliament made this request .
My point is that Parliament 's demands have in no way been met by either the Commission or the Council , and therefore I can only recommend that we now withhold our support for this .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have now been debating the subject of Turkmenistan for three-and-a-half years in various committees in this House .
There are European Treaties by which Parliament , too , must abide , even if we do not always like it .
Today , we have managed to obtain , in the Council and Commission statements , the assurances that are possible within the framework of the European Treaties .
The Commission and the Council have agreed to seriously consider following Parliament 's lead when it delivers opinions and possibly even calls for the suspension of the agreement .
As we all know , unfortunately , this is all Parliament can hope for within the scope of the European Treaties .
There is one mistake we should not make , and that is to hold our relations with a country hostage in order to obtain more power for the European Parliament .
I urge you to recognise the statements by the Council and the Commission .
That was all that could be hoped for .
Against this background and in these circumstances , I would ask you to support the signing of the agreement .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , if that was not on behalf of the group , I move adjournment on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
37 .
Interim Agreement with Turkmenistan (
38 .
Community framework for nuclear safety (
39 .
Community control system for ensuring compliance with the rules of the Common Fisheries Policy (
40 .
Conservation of fisheries resources through technical measures (
41 .
Common Immigration Policy for Europe : Principles , actions and tools (
42 .
Green Paper on the future of TEN-T policy (
Voting time
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to welcome you all most warmly .
I am particularly pleased that we are joined by Czech Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Karel Schwarzenberg .
Mr Schwarzenberg , I wish you a very warm welcome to the European Parliament .
( Applause )
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , you might think that , because I am leaving this Parliament in July , I should have no views at all on the programme for Parliament in 2010 .
But I would be failing those who sent me here for the last 10 years if I did not use this opportunity as a protest against holding this Parliament in Strasbourg at all .
It is a scandalous waste of taxpayers ' resources .
There is no reason for it : there is an adequate Parliament building in Brussels .
When I mention this to people in the United Kingdom - the expense and the trouble that everyone goes to to come here - they are absolutely astounded , particularly in a time of economic stringency , that we should pursue the habit .
The time has come to end the Strasbourg farce , to ensure Parliament operates only in Brussels and make a real contribution to saving public money for better reasons to spend it on .
Mr President , each year the Conference of Presidents tables different amendments to try to ensure that we spend more time in Strasbourg than we should .
In fact we spend more time in Strasbourg than anybody out there really appreciates , because just getting to this place involves almost a day of travel for most people .
We should not be choosing to come to Strasbourg at all .
The one extra right I would like this Parliament to have is the right to choose where it sits .
My colleague , Mr Posselt , recognises there is some local advantage to politicians who live close to this place .
However , it is not easy for all of us just to commute across the border from Germany .
To get constituents here - people who want to visit to see how this Parliament works - it takes over a day .
We have perfectly good facilities in Brussels .
We should not be voting to extend the time we spend in Strasbourg : we should be voting to get rid of it .
Mr President , I have just one issue to raise here , which is the scandalous saga of the land-grab laws in Spain , which has been before the Committee on Petitions in one form or another these past six years .
Throughout this House all of us will have constituents , whatever our nationality , who have been suffering from abuses under the urbanisation law in the Spanish Costas , as indeed thousands of Spanish citizens are .
The attempts to bring this matter to judgment in this House have been shamefully frustrated by a number of Spanish deputies in both parties , and I would particularly appeal to my colleagues in the Spanish Partido Popular to remember the importance of the sanctity of property .
They of all people should understand - knowing their history and knowing what happened in the Second Republic , when ownership was not secure - how important it is that people should feel that their title deeds are not up for violation by state abuses .
( FI ) Mr President , first of all I want to say that Mrs Záborská 's report adopts the right approach .
It is very important that equality can be implemented in Parliament 's various roles , be they committees or delegations .
It is also very important that when candidate lists are compiled for the European Elections , they can also contain as many female as male candidates .
We need one another , and I hope things will develop in a direction where , one day , gender no longer plays such a big role as skills and expertise .
When Parliament takes its decisions , it is most important that we have skilled and expert people - both men and women - in the committees .
That way everyone will have a common , clear view on how to build a better future and a better Europe using knowledge and skills .
Mr President , there are enormous savings to be had by the creation of a common European grid .
Somewhere in Europe , at any given moment , there is surplus electricity , and breaking down national barriers will substantially reduce our dependence on imported energy sources .
Unfortunately , though , that kind of model of integration - a free-market , decentralised , organic one - is not what we have been voting on in our series of reports today .
We are instead going down this road towards harmonisation , towards fixed prices , towards protection , towards a common negotiating position vis-à-vis Russia and other third parties .
It is a basic ideological difference in the European Union between a free market based on mutual product recognition and a harmonised market based on the reduction of consumer choice , the protection of producers and the regulation of authority .
I think there are particular dangers for a country like Britain .
We were , until two years ago , the EU 's only net energy producer .
Even now we are roughly in equilibrium .
A common energy policy could end up being for us like the common fisheries policy , one where we are the only country putting a substantial amount into the common pot , from which all others are then drawing on an equal basis .
Mr President , before I go further I would just like to pay tribute to the rapporteur , Mrs Morgan .
I know she is about to leave this place and , though we do not always agree on issues , I think everyone will agree that she has done a tremendous amount of work on this report .
We all know , if we look at the history of liberalisation in the EU , that telecoms liberalisation has been a great success , offering choice , lower prices and better services to consumers right across the EU .
It is a shame that the postal market and the energy market , in particular , have lagged behind in this respect .
This is certainly a few steps in the right direction , but we still need to sort out the problem of network unbundling and also access to other markets .
It is not right that some markets , such as the UK market , remain open to competition , whereas companies in Germany and France are able to access the UK market , yet prevent companies from the UK and other countries accessing their own market .
The time for protectionism is over .
It is time to have more faith in the market .
( FI ) Mr President , first of all I would like to say that Mr Belet 's report is excellent .
It is very important that we make sure we are being energy friendly , saving energy and acting efficiently in every way - in transport and in other areas .
This is what we should also be aiming for in the case of tyres .
This specific report talks about transport and tyres , but it is important to remember that safety is the most important issue and something that must never be compromised .
In this matter we need to find the right sort of balance .
Energy efficiency in tyre manufacture must not be allowed to override safety .
In other words , if we want to guarantee energy efficiency and increase it , at the same time we have to ensure that safety is not undermined in the slightest , because on motorways , small roads and everywhere , safety must be the priority and main objective as we develop transport in Europe .
( FI ) Mr President , first of all I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Vălean , for her excellent report .
It is very important that we get to a situation in the future in Europe where the costs of mobile phone calls throughout Europe can be lowered and become uniform across the internal market .
At present , the problem is of course that , when we go from one country to another , we often have to purchase new subscriptions , or if we do not purchase a new one , we have to pay very high charges .
It is important that , while there is free movement of people and labour and a common economic space is being built - something which should in fact be in operation at Union level - a coherent system for mobile charges should also be established .
That would be in the interests of the public .
The European Union must act in a way that gives priority to the interests of the public , and if we want to we can act to ensure that prices for voice calls come down .
Mr President , as the rapporteur of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection on this report , I am very proud of the work that we did in introducing more transparency .
One of the big problems for many years has been the issue of bill shock for a number of consumers when they return home to find a larger than expected bill .
However , if we look at the rest of the report , and particularly the issue of price caps , I think we should recognise that , without this regulation , prices have been falling anyway .
The Commission itself admits , on its own figures , that most consumers do not roam : 70 % of consumers do not roam at all during a year .
The level for regular roamers is much lower .
So what we are really doing is reducing call costs and data costs for a privileged few MEPs , Commission officials , European journalists and European businessmen .
Let us hope that companies , when they try to regain that revenue from elsewhere , do not start charging domestic users - and particularly the poor - more for their calls .
Let us hope that we are not robbing the poor to pay for cheaper calls for the rich .
( FR ) Mr President , I welcome the report by Mrs Vălean on a subject where , for once , the European Union 's powers are fully applicable .
In this field of telecommunications , I must say that the situation is at times absolutely unbearable .
There is the deception of consumers who , having used a mobile telephone such as this one , which their contract told them included international calls , have a shock when they discover the cost of their bills .
To give an example , this is what happened to me only recently when , having used an Internet connection two or three times in Italy one day , I received a bill from the virtually nationalised French operator Orange for EUR 1 200 , and for another day spent on the very edge of the French border , between Evian and Geneva , I received one for EUR 3 000 !
These are absolutely unspeakable practices that are bordering on daylight robbery , and these operators are responsible - they provide no transparency for consumers .
The rules on the transparency of mobile telephone contracts within the European Union must therefore be standardised .
Mr President , of course we are all in favour of lower charges when travelling abroad with our mobiles - you would have to be insane to be against that , but that is only one part of the equation .
When we in this House oblige the operators to lower their roaming charges they have to find the money from elsewhere , and that will usually mean raising the charges for those who do not travel .
This is , in other words , a tax on non-travellers for the benefit of travellers .
There will be teenagers in council estates in my constituency who are now facing higher charges so that a number of businesspeople , MEPs and Commissioners can talk more cheaply when abroad .
I have to say we were not disinterested parties .
All of us involved in this vote stand to gain very substantially from the kind of regulations that we have been pushing through in this field over the last year .
If you want to understand how power has shifted in Europe , you need only read this report .
' Who whom ? ' , asked Lenin in perhaps the pithiest statement of political philosophy ever uttered .
Who has the power , and over whom does he wield it ?
Well , there can no longer be much doubt over who has the power : we do - we Eurocrats .
( LV ) Mr President , thank you very much for giving me the floor .
I voted for this report because I think that what has been done in the sphere of mobile communications by the European Parliament is extremely important .
When I remember my first days of working in Brussels , one minute talking on the phone cost three euros or more ; now , thanks to these regulations , we are paying these limited amounts , and that has benefitted the European public as a whole .
I would also like to point out that these roaming tariffs have been very unclear .
This applies in particular to texts .
While we have obtained big savings on voice calls , at times firms have made too much of a profit on texts , and this , again , was not in the interests of citizens .
I think that through this directive and regulation we have made a huge advance in the defence of consumer interests , and also nowadays , now that data transmission is so very important that people receive data on their mobile phones , the fact that these tariffs have been reduced constitutes a major achievement by the European Parliament .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Skinner on this report .
He has done an excellent job .
It has been a huge undertaking but he has really delivered on this very complex piece of legislation .
I would also like to congratulate the European institutions and Member States , who have brought us this successful conclusion of Solvency II .
It is a good example of how Europe must work together towards financial recovery .
Burdens will be shared , as will solutions .
This European approved response is a good example of a closer relationship on financial cooperation .
We have to work to make sure that there is never again a banking crisis like the one we are going through at the moment .
I did notice with great interest the Commission 's approval of a mortgage support scheme for UK homeowners .
This scheme will allow householders who are unable to meet their mortgage repayments to defer all their principal and up to 70 % of their interest payments for a period of two years .
We should carefully follow the progress of this scheme and learn from and implement any effective measures that would ease the burden we carry .
I think this is something that all Member States can look at , but I also think that financial institutions in Member States themselves could make it easier for people to move to interest-only mortgages if they found themselves in difficulty .
The financial institutions , considering the support that they have from Member State governments , could do a lot to help people who are under stress because of the recession .
Mr President , before I start on my explanation of vote , I would just like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Kamall , who has just made his 100th speech in plenary .
Some will be surprised that it has taken this long !
But it is good to have him in the centurion club .
I voted for the Hökmark report for all sorts of reasons .
Mainly because , well , who could be against nuclear safety ?
And , I guess , if you are going to talk about nuclear safety and how we provide energy for the future , we would want it to be provided as safely as possible and disposed of as safely as possible .
But , equally , I voted for this mainly because I want there to be more nuclear power provided in the future - more in the UK - because I am sick to death of seeing windmills and wind turbines pop up across beautiful parts of the European countryside , which add nothing to any of our national grids - in fact they cause extra harm to the national grids - and do not provide renewable energy : they just provide a slightly alternative energy for a short period of time .
I am all for nuclear safety and all for nuclear energy .
Mr President , the crass proposal by the Commission , in its original proposition , that they should control recreational fishing and require returns and licensing and everything else that goes with such bureaucracy , was one of the those proposals which , quite rightly , stirred huge opposition , not just in that sector , but amongst those who take an interest in matters pertaining to fishing and to EU bureaucracy .
I am therefore glad that , today , Amendment 48 has been approved .
This at least goes some way to restoring the proper discretion of the Member State as to whether to take any steps in relation to the licensing and the recording of recreational fishing , leaving it to Member States to judge whether there is any impact - when in most Member States there is not - on the product of fish take from recreational fishing .
So I am glad that the Commission has been rebuffed on this proposition and that what started out as bad has been somewhat ameliorated .
Mr President , after 10 years in this Parliament I did not think anything could surprise me any more , but I was shocked by the fatuity of the proposal of extending the common fisheries policy to recreational sea anglers , requiring them to log every catch and count it against their national quota .
The proposal has not been deleted , although it has been substantially bettered largely thanks to a long and gruelling war of attrition fought in committee by four gritty and patriotic Scots representing the main parties of that country : Mesdames Attwooll and Stihler , and Messieurs Stevenson and Hudghton .
I also want to pay tribute to Northern Ireland 's best friend in the European Parliament , Jim Allister , who is a great champion of the interests of both communities and traditions in his province .
The problem here was enforcement .
The problem was that people were not enforcing existing law .
Our instinct in this Parliament is always to legislate , rather than use the legal arsenal already at our disposal .
I wish that we would apply - more widely than just in the field of fisheries - the principle that the best thing is not always to pass a new law until you have completely exhausted the legal powers that you already have .
Mr President , the vote today on the Romeva report should , I hope , reassure European anglers that their concerns have been recognised .
Amendments 7 and 11 passed without opposition ; Amendment 48 passed by 608 votes to 37 ; Amendment 49 passed by 580 votes to 54 ; Amendment 50 was widely supported ; Amendment 2 passed as it was part of a block vote with Amendments 7 and 11 ; Amendment 92 fell and Amendment 93 also fell , which was what the angling community were asking for .
The next step will really be how the Council will deal with the rewording of Article 47 .
Will they take on board Parliament 's rewording or will they take a different approach ?
It is a shame no one from the Council is here to answer that question .
But today 's launch of the green paper on reform of the common fisheries policy gives us all an opportunity to change the common fisheries policy , and I hope Members will take the opportunity to circulate the green paper to as many constituents as possible to make their voice heard .
Mr President , thank you very much .
It feels quite a milestone - sorry , was that millstone or milestone ? - to have reached .
This report has an interesting title : ' The conservation of fisheries resources through technical measures ' .
Because I really have to say , if we really want the best technical measure to conserve fishing stocks , it is not to be found in the common fisheries policy .
The results are there : the common fisheries policy has been a failure when it comes to conserving fishing stocks .
It is time - and long overdue - that we look at results around the world that have worked .
Let us look at the example of Iceland , where they have come up with property-based solutions and rights that can be handed down .
Let us look at the example of New Zealand , where rights to fishing grounds have been handed on from generation to generation .
In both cases it shows that , if you trust the market , you trust the rule of law and you trust property rights , more often than not that will find a better solution than some Soviet-style centrally planned scheme , such as the common fisheries policy , which has proved a disaster .
It is time to have faith in the market .
( MT ) A quick note to explain our group 's vote , that of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on my report on a common immigration policy .
There were two votes , one on an alternative motion and the other on the report proper .
We voted in favour of the former , so that we would be able to remove a paragraph that was entered by the socialist block in this Chamber that provides for the immigrants ' right to vote .
This is something we do not agree with , and we also voted against it at committee level .
However , it is unfortunate that this motion did not go through because , had this been the case , the paragraph would have been taken out .
Instead , we voted in favour of the report as a whole because we believe that this is a good report that contains the European Parliament 's comprehensive programme in the area of a common policy on immigration .

( FR ) Mr President , the principles , actions and tools of a European immigration policy : that is the vast subject-matter of Mr Busuttil 's report .

The principles ?
The European Union will supposedly need an extra 60 million non-European immigrants by 2050 , despite its millions of existing unemployed and poor citizens , its mass redundancies , and its business closures .
The actions ?
Giving more rights to immigrant populations , including in particular the right to vote , and providing unlimited access to Europe 's territory and labour market .
The tools ?
So-called ' positive ' discrimination or the recognition of informal qualifications , whatever they may be , whereas Europeans are required to have duly certified qualifications ; the recognition of a new category of migrant , environmental migrants ; and the obligation for European citizens to adapt to their inevitable submersion , as orchestrated and planned by the Eurocrats , with the complicity of this Parliament .
Instead of all this , we must , as a matter of urgency , reverse these migratory flows , reinstate the internal borders , implement a real family-focused policy to increase the European population , and impose national and European preference in all areas .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have many reservations about this report , the first of which , as was said a short time ago , concerns a provision that seems baffling at a time when Europe is facing the problem of the wages guarantee fund or indeed the redundancies of millions of workers .
Providing for 60 million new immigrants to come and work in Europe is in my view an outrageous measure .
I would also like to point out , however , that while we are discussing how to regulate and organise the future of immigration , tragedies are taking place - avoided , thank God , by Italy 's sense of humanity and Mr Maroni 's good governance - such as what might have happened in the case of the Turkish ship Pinar .
What is Europe to do ?
In 600 cases - as Mr Maroni rightly stated - Malta , despite being funded by the European Union , has failed in its duty to take in those who travelled from the coast of North Africa and landed on their shores .
In all these cases Italy has had to intervene , although our reception centre at Lampedusa is by now well beyond its capacity , as we all know .
So , Europe , intervene , lay down some definite rules !
We are asking for a substantial increase in funding for our country to enable us to address this challenge properly .
Europe must wake up and regulate immigration flows seriously : we cannot go on like this !
( LV ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
I wanted to express my opinion on the report by the Committee on Fisheries - the report by Mr Visser - on fisheries conservation issues .
Mr President , for my country - Latvia - fisheries are extremely important , because we have 550 km of coastline .
Since Latvia is represented in Europe by eight MEPs , we cannot be on all the committees , but these issues are very important both for our economy and for traditional ways of life .
The current regulation , which this report also regulates , is not sufficient to protect coastal fishing .
I understand that overfishing is a serious problem , but because of excessive regulation our coastal fishing is under threat , and in fact our fishermen are being driven away from our Baltic coast .
I think that the European Parliament 's next task should be to see that those states that directly border the sea can both preserve their traditional way of life and also , in practical terms , be engaged in fishing , since nowadays it often happens that our fishing villages are forced to buy products from large companies , fishing in distant oceans .
Hundreds , even thousands , of coastal residents are losing their jobs , although for centuries this has been their main livelihood . Thank you very much .
Written explanations of vote
I voted for this recommendation as accession to the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe Regulation No 61 on uniform provisions for the approval of commercial vehicles with regard to their external projections forward of the cab 's rear panel ( Revised Agreement ) is an aim of common trade policy in accordance with Article 113 of the Treaty to remove technical barriers to trade in motor vehicles between the contracting parties .
Involvement by the Community will add weight to the harmonisation activities conducted according to this Agreement and will therefore permit easier access to third-country markets .
This involvement must result in the establishment of consistency between the instruments referred to as ' regulations ' adopted under the Revised Agreement and Community legislation in this area .
The adoption of a regulation of this type actually means adaptation to technical progress .
in writing . - ( IT ) I am voting in favour .
The European Commission has always paid great attention to ensuring the individual rights of mobile citizens , above all as regards those advantages relating to the sphere of social security .
The free movement of citizens within the Community is one of their fundamental freedoms and encourages the development of the internal economy of the Member States .
That is why the Commission seeks to intensify its efforts so that EU citizens and their families can truly enjoy the rights guaranteed under current European law .
While in certain sectors national legislation reserves better treatment for the Community population and their families than is required by current European legislation , no Member State has in fact correctly ratified all the directives issued on the subject .
The often ongoing breach of the fundamental rights of EU citizens to free movement on European territory is evident , above all in relation to the following situations : the right of entry and of residence for family members that are citizens of third countries , and the lack of assistance following accidents at work .
We hope that the Commission will continue its technical cooperation with the Member States , which has led to various points being identified for debate and further clarification , especially as regards abuses .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report because it sends a strong signal to the next Parliament that the issue of illegal logging and deforestation must be dealt with more effectively .
This proposal is long overdue .
It is estimated that approximately 20 % -40 % of global industrial wood production comes from illegal sources , and up to 20 % of this finds its way into the EU every year .
This suppresses timber prices , strips natural resources and tax revenues , and increases the poverty of indigenous people all over the world .
The long-term effects are even more serious , since deforestation , of which illegal logging is a major cause , accounts for nearly a fifth of global greenhouse gas emissions .
The actual amendments in the Lucas report say that it is an offence to have or sell illegal timber only if you have been negligent , reckless or deliberate - it does not penalise companies which have fulfilled their ' due diligence ' obligations .
So there is no absolute need to guarantee legality placed on the companies .
I voted for the resolution on the obligations of operators who place timber and timber products on the market , because illegal logging is an increasingly serious problem with very worrying environmental implications , such as loss of biodiversity , deforestation and forest degradation .
In addition , it is responsible for nearly 20 % of carbon emissions worldwide .
As a major consumer of timber and timber products , the European Union has an obligation to take effective action against deforestation and illegal logging , which must clearly include ceasing to provide a market for illegal timber products .
We need to adopt legislation against illegal logging so that consumers know that products have been legally sourced , so that companies complying with these rules will not be put at a disadvantage , and so that companies opting for illegal timber products will no longer find a market .
in writing . - I welcome Caroline Lucas 's report laying down certain obligations on operators who place timber and timber products on the market .
I was the draftsman for the opinion of the International Trade Committee which was adopted unanimously in committee .
For us , the best way to stop the trade in illegal timber was to strengthen requirements and obligations and enhance the legal means to prosecute possession and sales by operators placing illegal timber and timber products on the EU market as a deterrent .
We need to work together with major consuming countries such as the US , China , Russia and Japan to tackle this problem and to set up a global alert system and register of illegal logging and countries of concern using Interpol , an appropriate UN body utilising the latest satellite technology systems .
I chose to abstain from voting on the proposal for a regulation laying down the obligations of operators who place timber and timber products on the market .
While I do think it is vitally important to step up the control of timber imports at the borders of the single market , I feel that the report proposes too onerous and bureaucratic a system , which will penalise our own European forestry sectors .
Rather than imposing a complicated and costly product labelling system that would be very detrimental to the sector and to timber as a material , we should increase the checks and target the supply chain that is placing the goods on the European market , in order to combat illegal logging .
The main objective of the regulation must be to implement a new common culture of control and responsibility rather than to impose a bureaucratic and costly process for checking each product .
Given the problems faced by the sector , we should not penalise timber more than other materials and energy sources with overly binding rules for placing it on the market .
in writing . - I stress that this regulation is a much awaited and needed regulation .
Illegal logging is a problem that needs to be tackled effectively , not only for climate reasons but for environmental and social aspects as well .
Still , I had to vote against this today .
The report from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety ( ENVI ) has lost its focus and has expanded the scope and duties beyond the original purpose .
We need to ensure that , once the timber products are imported and cleared at the single market borders , they are presumably legal and thus there is no need to introduce additional disproportionate bureaucratic and financial burden on all operators within the EU .
But the ENVI report provides for costly labelling , additional sustainability requirements , extends the definition of legality out of reach and places the burden of due diligence on all operators within the internal market .
This regulation should combat illegal logging at the borders as was the original aim .
But to affect all the operators in the internal market , the ones who are not using or distributing any illegally harvested timber , hence potentially impacting their competitiveness on the global markets , is certainly not the aim of this regulation and therefore cannot be supported .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which sets rules for operators placing timber on the EU market for the first time .
Operators will be required to follow a ' due diligence ' system so that all timber is harvested in accordance with relevant regional , national and international law .
I am pleased that operators will also have to comply with sustainability criteria and laws on indigenous peoples .
It is essential that there is independent third party verification of compliance , and I am glad that this report highlights this .
in writing . - Efforts must be taken to halt the trade in illegally harvested timber and timber products being placed on the EU market , in the interests of effective competition , sustainable development and protecting global biodiversity and the environment .
The due diligence system proposed by the Commission ( which is already practised to high standards in the UK ) , includes measures and procedures which will enable operators to track the timber and timber products , to have access to information concerning compliance with the applicable legislation and to manage the risk of placing illegal timber and products on the EU market .
This action will also provide consumers with the certainty that by buying timber and timber products they do not contribute to the problem of illegal logging and associated trade .
While we support this proposal in principle , we do not support the reinforcement of requirements to all operators as proposed by the rapporteur , which we believe introduce disproportionate bureaucratic and financial burdens on all operators within the EU .
The Commission 's proposal provides for flexible due diligence based on risk assessment and the analysis of evidence and is a far more effective and practical approach .
in writing . ? - ( LT ) Oil is the most important source of energy in the European Union and the economy is very dependent on its constant , reliable and accessible supply .
Given our great and ever increasing dependency on the importation of oil , security of oil supply is especially important .
Oil demand within the EU will continue to increase until 2030 , although only at a rate of 0.25 % per year .
In 2030 oil will still be the main primary source of energy in the EU and will constitute approximately 35 % of all energy consumed .
Given that oil supply and processing capacities cannot currently satisfy the growing demand , the situation in the market will remain tense .
These factors must be taken into consideration when developing a united and real European energy policy .
Part of this policy must be the EU 's ability to react to any possible sudden supply crisis .
Reserves are an important factor , softening the blows of unexpected supply problems , as without oil some , or even all , sectors of the economy would grind to a halt .
In this respect the possession of reserves is a matter of basic national security .
We voted for this report because we believe it is important to maintain minimum stocks of crude oil and / or petroleum products .
The maintenance of minimum stocks is an issue of extreme economic and social importance for each country , including for its security .
As a result , any kind of speculation involving these stocks must be prohibited , contrary to what has been happening .
Their ownership and administration must be in public hands , in order to protect the interests of EU Member States .
However , we do not agree with the powers that this proposal for a directive gives to the European Commission , particularly the possibility for Commission departments to carry out ' checks on emergency stocks and dedicated stocks ' in Member States .
Countries must create stocks of these products , but the administration of these stocks and the definition of their minimum or maximum levels is a sovereign matter .
We also disagree with any attempt to use the creation of these stocks as yet another justification , albeit mitigated , for a policy of interference , as might be inferred from the creation of ' a favourable climate of investment for the purpose of prospecting for , and tapping into , oil reserves inside and outside the European Union ' .
in writing . - Whilst we favour cooperation between Member States on these issues , we believe this matter should remain one of subsidiarity and not subject to EU action .
This initiative forms part of the global strategy to protect critical infrastructures .
The EU 's economy and the security and well-being of its citizens depend on the existence and smooth running of a series of infrastructures which provide essential services , such as health services , telecommunications , energy and transport networks , financial services , supply of food and water , and so on .
While some Member States already have robust protection measures and structures in place , in other Member States the situation is still very precarious .
It is therefore vital to have a better and more efficient exchange of information and good practices , which will only be possible by setting up this information and communication system .
This system will strengthen dialogue and increase the information available on shared threats and vulnerabilities , as well as facilitate cooperation and coordination between Member States .
At the same time , it will encourage the development of appropriate measures and strategies to mitigate risks and promote adequate protection , and it will also increase the security of citizens .
I also support the inclusion of a three-year review clause , which will allow the necessary improvements to be made , particularly the possibility of including a rapid alert system functionality .
I voted for the proposal for a Critical Infrastructure Warning Information Network ( CIWIN ) .
Some of the Member States ' infrastructures consist of physical and information technology facilities , services and assets which , if disrupted , could have a very serious impact on health , security and economic or social well-being .
Transport systems , telecommunications and energy are sectors crucial to the development of Member States and they are also increasingly interconnected , with some Member States relying on others .
For this reason , it is extremely important for the development of the European Union that there is a unique system for accessing and sharing information among the different authorities on the protection of critical infrastructures , exchange of good practices and also a rapid alert system .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Commission proposal on which the report has been drafted creates an information and warning network between the Member States for their public and private infrastructures which are characterised as being ' critical ' .
This network is a first step towards allowing private persons , in other words monopoly companies whose installations will be characterised as critical infrastructures , to acquire competence in security matters , which today is the responsibility of the state alone .
It paves the way for working-class demonstrations which affect any ' critical ' infrastructures , including private installations ( for example strikes in critical sectors , such as energy , telecommunications and so forth , walkouts from factories , companies and so forth , picket lines , demonstrations and so forth ) to be characterised as ' terrorist action ' .
It undermines the defence and sovereignty of the Member States , it abolishes the division between their internal and external security and gives the EU a direct role and involvement in it .
Combating the ' terror threat ' has been used yet again as the pretext needed by the EU to complete its reactionary institutional framework , which essentially works against the working-class and grassroots movement and safeguards the power of capital by undermining the sovereign rights of the Member States still further .
Today the EU adopted Mr Romagnoli 's report on creating a Critical Infrastructure Warning Information Network in the EU , which was not discussed during the plenary session .
I think that the protection of the EU 's citizens is of the highest priority in this institution and citizens must know about it .
The creation of this information network will make it possible , based on the exchange of experience and good practice between EU countries , to achieve a better understanding of and higher standards for protecting critical sites and activities which are crucially important to countries and their population .
I would like to mention that , as shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I am pleased with the unanimous adoption by all the political groups in Parliament of the requirement stipulated for Member States ' compulsory participation in the new system , which guarantees the importance of this initiative from a European perspective .
I also express my confidence that even after the first few years of the system 's successful operation , the European Commission will take the necessary measures to build on this system with additional functions , enabling the rapid distribution of urgent information about threats which have arisen affecting critical infrastructure sites in any region of the EU .
We will then end up with a complete information system which will provide greater security and protection for Europe 's citizens .
in writing . - ( IT ) I am voting in favour .
One of the most debated points of the policies discussed by the European Union is that concerning the implementation of a common policy for the protection of public figures .
The concept of the ' public figure ' is clearly very wide , but today we have come to a common definition in which it is understood to mean a person in an official or non-official position who could be threatened due to his or her contribution to the public debate .
Notable cases include the former member of the Dutch Parliament , Hirshi Ali , who was threatened in February 2008 following her valuable speech on the extremely topical subject of Islamic radicalisation in Europe , and the well-known British-Indian novelist , Salman Rushdie , persecuted because of his controversial views on Islam .
It is thus desirable that anyone dedicated to broadening the public debate in a positive way should have the right to be protected when visiting a state in which he or she may be subject to threats or attack ; above all in cases such as Salman Rushdie 's , where a death sentence has already been pronounced by a third country .
Protection of public figures remains the responsibility of the hosting state , in accordance with the legal provisions in force in that country .
In 2002 , the European Network for the Protection of Public Figures was set up to improve the communication and consultation between Member States in this area .
The present initiative aims to extend the definition of ' public figure ' , as laid down in Article 2 of Council Decision 2002 / 956 / JHA , in order to cover any person , regardless of whether or not they hold an official position , who is deemed to be under threat due to their contribution to or impact on the public debate .
This Dutch proposal arose following an incident in 2008 , when a former member of the Dutch Parliament was subject to threats to her physical integrity following her speech on Islamic radicalisation during a seminar in the European Parliament .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I support this initiative , which aims to extend the protection of human rights and , in particular , to promote the right to freedom of expression .
The Member States cooperate in the area of the protection of public figures within the legal provisions in force in the country concerned as well as in accordance with international agreements .
The Council Decision under discussion ( 2002 / 956 / JHA ) establishes protection of public figures as defined in the national legislation of a Member State or pursuant to the regulations of an international or supranational organisation or institution .
Protection of public figures is the responsibility of the hosting state .
In view of threats which have been made against public figures in recent years , I fully support the decision which has been taken to amend the already existing Council Decision on a European Network for the Protection of Public Figures .
The main purpose of this is to broaden Article 2 by defining a ' public figure ' as a person holding an official or non-official position who is deemed to be under threat due to his / her contribution to or impact on public debate .
I think that this decision will increase the safety of public figures and will have a beneficial effect on the development of democracy .
in writing . - ( SV ) Having cotton production in the European Union is not an end in itself .
The Union must view the world cotton market as a whole and give EU consumers the opportunity to buy cotton as cheaply as possible without the consideration of where it has been produced , provided it has been produced under certain ethical and environmentally sound conditions .
I am strongly opposed to this report .
I would observe , once again , that it is fortunate that the European Parliament does not have powers of co-decision on EU agricultural policy .
Otherwise , the EU would fall into the trap of protectionism and of heavy subsidies to all of the various groups within the agricultural industry .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour .
The Alpine region is one of the most important and affluent territories within the European Community .
It extends across eight states , which have already , on 4 April 1998 , signed common agreements concerning the protection and conservation of this region and a common transport management policy .
Indeed , as regards transport , the ' Protocol on the Implementation of the Alpine Convention in the field of Transport ' was enacted on 24-26 May 2000 , with the principal aim of providing a legal framework for sustainable mobility in the Alps .
Although this protocol has yet to be accepted by all eight Alpine Convention states , we will do our utmost to ensure that it is ratified shortly by the other states of the region so that this ratification of the ' Transport Protocol ' becomes one of the European Commission 's main priorities .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report is actually a report of the activities of the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions .
However , because , in a couple of places , it refers to and extols the Treaty of Lisbon and expresses hopes that it will soon be ratified , I have chosen to vote against the report as a whole .
I believe that the Treaty of Lisbon has , in principle , been rejected , as the citizens of a Member State have voted against it in a referendum .
Moreover , there are a number of other Member States in which the majority of voters would certainly have voted against the Treaty of Lisbon had they been given the chance .
I cannot support the ignorance shown by the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions in the wordings in this report .
I wish to express my opposition to paragraph 17 of this report , which is yet another incarnation of the campaign against Strasbourg 's being the seat of the European Parliament .
I should like to point out the following in this connection :
Firstly , the choice of Strasbourg was , from the start , a highly symbolic decision linked to the history of Europe .
The intention was to highlight the aim of a European process , as a force for peace and for the bringing together of the nations .
It is because I believe that this aim is still relevant that I am arguing for the symbol of Strasbourg to be safeguarded .
Secondly , I would repeat my desire to see a Europe emerge that supports the diversity of the cultures that characterise the nations it comprises .
Why not have a significant European institution in Warsaw , another one in Barcelona , and another one still in Stockholm , in addition to the Commission in Brussels and Parliament in Strasbourg ?
Unless the sole aim is to have a business-driven Europe , nothing justifies centralising everything in one place , which is inevitably far from the peoples of Europe .
Those are the reasons why I oppose paragraph 17 of the McGuinness report , which is otherwise problem-free .
I voted for the motion for a resolution on gender mainstreaming in the work of committees and delegations .
This own-initiative report indicates the progress made in committees and delegations and reiterates the need to adopt and apply a gender mainstreaming strategy .
The call for gender equality is not an attack against men .
It is for society as a whole , thereby benefiting both women and men , and also families .
Gender mainstreaming involves the reorganisation , improvement , development and assessment of policies to ensure that an equal-opportunity approach is incorporated into all policies at all levels and at all stages by those normally involved in policy-making .
It is therefore necessary to adopt and apply a gender mainstreaming strategy incorporating specific targets in all Community policies which fall within the purview of parliamentary committees and delegations .
in writing . - Hundreds of thousands of my constituents across Yorkshire and Humberside stand to save money on their gas and electricity bills as a result of this legislation .
The measures will combine increased energy efficiency with lower costs .
Although full unbundling has not yet been achieved , this legislation will move towards a network where companies are not allowed to own both the generation of electricity and its distribution , thereby enabling them to overcharge consumers .
In particular , I welcome the fact that it will also give customers the right to change their gas and electricity supplies within three weeks free of charge , and gives a right to compensation in cases where people are given inaccurate or delayed bills .
Energy-efficient SmartMeters will also be introduced .
These new rules amount to a bill of rights for gas and electricity users .
For too long companies have been able to force consumers to pay over the odds for their gas and electricity .
My constituents will see the benefit of this legislation in cuts to their bills .
in writing . - ( ES ) We in the Spanish socialist delegation have argued for the model of ownership unbundling of vertically integrated companies both in gas and in electricity , because we believe that separating supply / generation companies from transport companies gives a real choice to European consumers and stimulates the investment that is needed in this sector , meaning that energy will be able to reach all of the EU territory without interruptions .
However , I voted for the internal market gas and electricity package because :
( 1 ) consumers ' interests have been placed at the heart of the revision of the legislative package ;
( 2 ) we have included the concept of energy poverty and have called on the Member States to include steps to tackle energy poverty in the national energy action plans and not only to make sure that the most vulnerable customers receive the energy they need , but also to ban the disconnection of these customers at critical times ; and
( 3 ) since ownership unbundling will be a reality within a few years through the anti-trust proceedings taken by the Directorate General for Competition , we have placed the emphasis on institutional architecture , strengthening the responsibilities of the new European agency and the independence of the national regulatory bodies .
in writing . - The greatest failing of the single market is the failure to establish a single market in energy .
National energy policies have led Europe to a dead end with an extreme dependence on expensive imported fossil fuels .
There is neither a European energy grid nor a strategic energy storage policy .
As a matter of urgency we must diversify our energy supply , reduce consumption , encourage low-carbon energy and establish a stable competitive internal market .
For these reasons I support these reports while being concerned that the struggle to find a compromise acceptable to all may blunt the effectiveness of this legislation , so effective monitoring of implementation is vital .
I support the increased provisions for consumer rights and welcome the recognition of energy poverty as a serious social problem .
I remain uneasy about the non-binding nature of the EU Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators .
Ultimately we can only secure a single energy market if we have a European regulator with real powers .
I congratulate Parliament on pushing the Member States to go further than they wanted to go .
This is another example of Parliament guaranteeing the victory of the broader European cause over national self-interest and protectionism .
The third energy package must gradually develop the energy market , which until very recently was based on a monopoly system .
The movement towards liberalisation requires genuine and sustained competition and highlights the importance of a stronger Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators , with clearly independent powers .
The Agency 's main objective will be to help the regulatory authorities carry out , at Community level , the tasks performed by the Member States and , if necessary , coordinate their action .
The Agency will also supervise the internal markets in electricity and natural gas , thus contributing to all the efforts made to enhance energy security .
I would highlight the vital role of this Agency in the future of energy policy in Europe , which we want to be characterised by more competitive and diverse conditions , far removed from the monopolies of the past , together with conditions of increased security and better efficiency , to the benefit of consumers .
These are the reasons which led me to vote for this report .
I welcome the adoption of this report , which forms an integral part of the energy package adopted today , because , in my view , it represents another important step towards improving the quality of life of European citizens .
The possibility of better interconnections between electricity networks and the existence of strong and capable regulators guaranteeing market transparency and transnational cooperation are vitally important factors in ensuring that end users can enjoy a truly fair and competitive service .
Responsibility sharing and cooperation between Member States in both the electricity and natural gas markets form the cornerstone for the existence of a genuine European energy market , which aims to be fair , dynamic and sustainable .
in writing . - ( SV ) I wholeheartedly support the idea of opening up the internal market for gas to competition .
However , it is wrong to stipulate that Member States should take concrete measures to assist the wider use of biogas and gas from biomass .
This is a matter for each Member State to decide on .
I have therefore voted against the proposal tabled by the committee .
The third energy package fills many of the structural gaps from the past .
We cannot forget the discrimination perpetrated against new energy suppliers or the lack of transparency in prices and choice of supplier .
With this package , we can finally hope to complete the liberalisation of the internal energy market within the EU .
The adoption of this third package , and this proposal in particular , will lead to more competitive , more sustained and securer European energy markets .
It is expected that consumer rights will be at the centre of the process of opening up the markets due to the agreement reached , which covers the issues of separation of ownership and independence of the national regulatory authorities , and also the conditions for clarifying responsibilities between national authorities , the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators and the European Network of Transmission System Operators .
I voted for this report in the expectation that the market will become more transparent for consumers , who will have access to detailed information and the possibility of changing energy supplier free of charge .
I am voting in favour of Mr David 's report on interoperability solutions for European public administrations ( ISA ) , the aim of which is to support cooperation among European public administrations .
This programme facilitates effective and efficient cross-border and cross-sector electronic interaction among European administrations , thus enabling them to provide electronic public services that can help them to carry out their activities and to implement Community policies for citizens and businesses .
This will facilitate the free and unimpeded movement , establishment and employment of citizens in Member States in order to provide better , more efficient and more easily accessible services to citizens and public administrations .
I believe it is appropriate to encourage international cooperation , and so the ISA programme should also be open to participation by countries in the European Economic Area and the candidate countries .
I also agree that cooperation with other third countries and with international organisations or bodies should be encouraged .
The participation of candidate countries in the ISA programme is a very important step in preparing their public administration for all the tasks and working methods stemming from EU membership .
I believe that the possibility of using the pre-accession funds for that purpose should be studied in depth .
in writing . - I could not support today 's reports , which basically back the European Commission 's drive to liberalise the electricity and gas markets .
Our own experience in Ireland has shown how liberalisation and resulting privatisation have not provided solutions to any problems in the energy sector .
Energy prices in Ireland have risen , affecting ordinary families and workers the most over the last few years .
During this time of recession , the EU 's drive to impose liberalisation in essential sectors of the economy makes less sense than ever .
The Commission and the EU must learn to stop trying the same old , failed , neo-liberal policies .
I regret that the ' energy package ' has won so much support among MEPs today .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour .
The environmental and health implications of the use of pesticides have been the subject of debate at European level , and the European Parliament has adopted directives on the authorisation and sale of pesticides .
This measure sets out essential requirements for safety and the protection of health to which machinery for pesticide application placed on the internal market must conform in order to enjoy free circulation within the Community .
In addition to protecting consumers , the legislation is also aimed at safeguarding the health and safety of workers .
The costs incurred by manufacturers are likely to be passed on to users through price rises .
However , the consequent average annual reduction in the consumption of pesticides will enable users to make savings that will compensate for any increase in prices .
The proposed directive achieves the objective of guaranteeing a common level of environmental protection , while at the same time avoiding a fragmented legislative framework at Community level , which could generate inflated costs for businesses intending to operate outside their national borders .
in writing . - In the context of amending Directive 2006 / 42 / EC of 17 May 2006 on machinery with regard to machinery for pesticide application , we would like to stress that since the European Parliament adopted the machinery directive in 2006 , we are stressing that the European Commission should revise the tractor Directive in order to secure a coherent approach .
In our opinion , tractors do not fall under the scope of the definition of machinery as laid down in the machinery directive .
The existing tractors directive could and should therefore be replaced by a less complex regulation .
It is an acknowledged fact that using pesticides poses a threat to both human health and the environment .
The purpose of the ' Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides ' is to reduce the risks to human health and the environment posed by the use of pesticides .
Harmonisation of the environmental protection requirements and conformity assessment procedures for machinery for pesticide application is a prerequisite to achieving the same level of environmental protection throughout the EU , but also to ensuring fair competition between manufacturers and facilitating the free movement of these products within the Community .
The correct design and construction of this machinery play a significant role in reducing the adverse impact of pesticides on human health and the environment .
Assuming that a pesticide sprayer has an average service life of 12 to 15 years , it is estimated that approximately 125 000 to 250 000 new sprayers are purchased in the Community every year .
Thanks to their greater efficiency , sprayers which comply with the new environmental requirements use less pesticide , thereby reducing the time spent on mixing , loading , spraying and cleaning activities , not to mention the savings this generates for users , which will compensate for any increase in the price of certain types of spraying equipment .
This is why I voted in favour of this report .
The Directive of the European Parliament on machinery for pesticide application , amending Directive 2006 / 42 / EC of 17 May 2006 on machinery , introduces a very important amendment to legislation .
It is intended to harmonise standards on environmental protection and human health in the European Union .
At the same time , harmonisation of legislation will enable cross-border movements of machines within the EU on an equal basis , and this will in turn increase competitiveness in the European market .
The directive will impose on Member States a requirement to conduct regular inspections of equipment used professionally for pesticide application , and also a requirement to establish a system for regular maintenance and periodical inspection of equipment .
As a result the directive will reduce the use of pesticides ( thanks to which their adverse effects on the environment will be reduced ) and will have a beneficial effect on the health of consumers and of citizens who have direct contact with pesticides during their work .
in writing . ( LT ) As road transport emits almost 25 % of all CO2 , the EU 's greatest task is to reduce the intensity of energy use by the means of transport and the amount of carbon compounds which these emit into the atmosphere .
Tyres account for 20-30 % of all fuel consumption by the means of transport , so greater tyre stability should be considered part of an integrated method , aimed at reducing the fuel used by road transport and the amount of pollutants they emit .
In the list of purposive actions , presented in the Action Plan for Energy Efficiency , which plans to reduce use by 20 % by 2020 , it is also underlined that one of the possible means to achieve this goal is labelling of tyres .
I welcome this report , in the belief that it will prove to be yet another instrument improving the information provided to consumers , thus contributing to a more transparent market in which an informed and conscious choice can be made between products , based on simple standards that are , however , scientifically and technologically justified .
In my view , this report represents another step towards a sustainable Europe in energy terms , allowing consumers to choose tyres which reduce the fuel consumption of their vehicles .
Moreover , the possibility of choosing a tyre according to its specific performance is another tool enabling consumers to protect themselves and equip their vehicles in a manner appropriate to their style of driving and the environmental conditions where they drive .
I would also highlight the salutary and technologically oriented competition that this system will bring to the tyre market , meaning that technological developments in the various brands can be compared - and understood - by consumers in a clear and objective manner .
I voted for the resolution on labelling of tyres with respect to fuel efficiency .
With almost 25 % of total CO2 emissions coming from road transport , reducing vehicles ' energy intensity is a major challenge for the EU .
Creating a labelling system that will ensure that appropriate information is supplied on fuel efficiency and grip , among other characteristics , will allow consumers to make informed choices when purchasing tyres .
As tyres account for 20 % to 30 % of vehicles ' total fuel consumption , enhanced sustainability of tyres should be seen as part of the integrated approach to reduce fuel consumption and , as a result , emissions of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere .
This report is a reasonable compromise that should enable end users to make an informed decision when buying their tyres , especially where fuel efficiency , wet grip and external rolling noise are concerned .
I welcome the increased flexibility concerning the date of entry into force of this regulation , as it should give producers more room for manoeuvre , in order to prevent the destruction of tyre stocks .
The latter would have been contrary to the environmental objectives laid down .
The most sensitive points in relation to tyres were without doubt mandatory moulding into or onto each sidewall , energy performance , wet grip index and noise emissions .
This demand would have forced our tyre producers to replace all their ranges of moulds at an exorbitant cost .
I am of the view that such a demand would further jeopardise our tyre industry , which is already suffering greatly from the consequences of the economic crisis .
in writing . - ( SV ) There are very good reasons to strive for improved energy efficiency and lower emissions from our vehicles .
A harmonised labelling system for vehicle tyres in the EU is problematic , however .
Previous experience of labelling , in particular , gives cause for careful consideration .
Take the labelling system for household products , for example .
The unwillingness of the industry to continually raise the requirements for a certain class of energy labelling , for refrigerators for example , has resulted in a labelling system that is currently hopelessly complicated and difficult to understand .
Something that politicians hoped would encourage continued development and give consumers much needed guidance has instead helped to stem the development of better products and made it more difficult for consumers to make the right choices .
I believe that the EU can play an important role in the work of reducing the impact of vehicles on the environment .
However , unlike the Commission and the committee , I would advocate an increase in the minimum requirements for those tyre manufacturers who wish to sell their products on the internal market , rather than detailed regulation .
Politicians in the EU should create sustainable and beneficial frameworks for society and companies rather than involving themselves in controlling every detail .
Since the Commission and the committee responsible do not seem to share my view , I have chosen to vote against the report .
in writing . - I welcome this report as a necessary adjunct to the type approval for the general safety of motor vehicles legislation approved earlier this year , which is mainly concerned with environmental and safety standards for tyres .
We need tyres to be safer , more fuel efficient and quieter .
Traffic noise , of which tyre noise is an important component , is a major cause of ill health .
Reducing fuel consumption will be of great benefit to the consumer at a time of increasing austerity but it will also reduce CO2 emissions and contribute to the EU 's ambitious goals in climate change reduction .
With the labelling process consumers will be able to make an informed choice when buying tyres but also when deciding on which car to buy .
We must monitor , though , how effective the labels are .
We must ensure that consumers really do understand them , otherwise the whole exercise will be meaningless .
in writing . ( LT ) I agree that the regulation of voice call prices should be continued .
When Regulation ( EC ) No 717 / 2007 was adopted , the price of calls between networks did not fall markedly , but remained near the upper limit set by the regulation .
I think the regulation 's area of application must be extended to include SMS .
As a result of the unduly high prices which consumers have to pay , it seems that , unfortunately , at the moment the regulation of wholesale and retail SMS prices is necessary , and I am therefore voting for this regulation .
In principle I disagree with the legislator intervening in the market and setting prices .
I believe that the market should define its own prices in accordance with the basic principles of healthy competition .
That is precisely what is lacking in terms of roaming and what justifies the European Parliament 's intervention in setting maximum prices below which telecommunications operators are now obliged to compete .
I voted for this regulation not being limited solely to calls made or received , but also covering SMS and data roaming .
An EU that promotes freedom of movement of its citizens is not consistent with market rules that end or are limited when a border is crossed .
At the moment , the overwhelming majority of people are still somewhat reluctant to use mobile telephones when they are abroad due to the fear of the roaming bill .
I voted for this regulation precisely to ensure lower charges for roaming customers , while at the same strengthening the rules on transparency of pricing .
This is a concrete example of how the EU affects our day-to-day lives .
From now on , when returning from holiday or a business trip abroad , European citizens will remember that their lower mobile telephone bill is due to the EU .
in writing . - ( EL ) The EU is promoting faster capitalist restructurings in the field of mobile telecommunications services by extending the application of the regulation in question to all services provided by mobile telephone companies .
The directive strengthens the position of the European monopolies in relation to their international competitors .
It extends the period of validity of the regulation in order to facilitate company takeovers and mergers , which will safeguard bigger profits for capital .
The application of the directive strengthened monopoly companies .
The supposed upper limit on roaming prices is circumvented by using minimum charging period methods , thereby increasing the price charged for the services provided and the companies ' profits , as the competent auditing authorities admit .
The planned price division between wholesale and other mobile telephone services , such as SMS and voicemail , will be of no benefit to consumers , but will increase the profits of capital even more .
We are radically opposed to the liberalisation and privatisation of the telecommunications markets , which result in falling standards of services and grassroots assets being sold off .
We call on the workers to express their universal opposition to the EU and its anti-grassroots policy and to change the balance of power at political level through the forthcoming elections .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Commission wants the current price regulation for roaming to be extended to cover not only voice calls but also SMS traffic and data roaming .
The European Parliament recommends a more restricted form of regulation and points out that the price regulation should be temporary and in the long term the market should eliminate the high roaming charges .
I have voted in favour of the European Parliament 's position , as it is slightly more market-liberal than the Commission 's proposal .
I have voted against the legislative resolution , as the price regulation will , de facto , lead in the wrong direction in the long term .
Mobile phones are now part of everyday life , and large sections of the population never go anywhere without them .
Whether they are used for business or private purposes is of secondary importance .
At all events , all kinds of communication , be they telephone calls , text or multimedia messages , Internet communication or surfing , incur costs that operators charge to customers .
It is understandable that these costs are higher in a foreign network - not the operator 's home network , that is - but , since the advent of international mobile telephony , we have seen excessive abuse of these roaming costs time and again .
In some cases , consumers have had to accept outrageous bills that have not been backed up by any universally applicable calculation .
In the form of this initiative , which not only makes it easier for individual citizens to navigate the tariff jungle but also standardises the costs , the Union is finally doing something for the benefit of the people of Europe for once .
It is for that reason that I have voted in favour of this report .
I have voted for this report because the new regulation introduces preventive mechanisms and mechanisms for guaranteeing the transparency of prices for roaming data services so that citizens / customers have a better understanding of the charging method used , allowing them to control their costs and avoid any ' bill shock ' .
The setting of limits for roaming voice and SMS services , the adoption of measures guaranteeing transparency and the preventive mechanism introduced for wholesale tariffs for data services still give operators a free rein to compete on the market and differentiate their offerings within the limits imposed .
As a result , new small businesses are offered the chance to compete with the excessive wholesale tariffs of the major operators .
Current billing practices applied to roaming voice calls charged on the basis of 60-second units generate a hidden cost for consumers , adding , compared to a typical Eurotariff bill for roaming services , roughly 24 % to the bill for outgoing calls and 19 % for incoming calls .
The regulation must offer a sufficient level of protection to consumers , allowing them to use roaming data services in a convenient manner and without placing unreasonable burdens on telecommunication operators .
Completing the internal market is one of the EU 's fundamental objectives and that is why our joint efforts to achieve the best possible competition conditions in various economic sectors are so important .
The globalisation of trade , business and communications is all part of this .
As a result , this report on the mobile communications market is vital .
The outcome of an agreement at first reading , so that the regulation can enter into force in July 2009 , is a victory for Parliament .
This report not only lays down the conditions for improved transparency and consumer protection , but also for competition that is fairer and clearer for all , from industry to consumers .
I therefore voted for this report .
in writing . - ( SV ) I have today chosen to abstain from the vote on the Roaming II Regulation , which proposes regulation of the prices for mobile telephone services abroad .
The proposal , which was a compromise arrived at by the large groups , contained many good ideas , including more information for customers to enable them to avoid huge telephone bills after a stay abroad .
The reason for my abstention is not complicated .
I do not believe that politicians in the EU should set prices on the free market .
The whole point of a market economy is that prices are determined by supply and demand , not by whatever politicians in Brussels consider to be ' fair ' .
We already have price regulation in place as a result of the Roaming I Regulation .
The result has been that operators cluster around this price ceiling , which does not benefit consumers .
Our task as politicians is to ensure that there is good competition on the internal market .
I agree that this is not the case with regard to roaming services , but instead of Soviet-style price regulation , it would have been better to have measures promoting competition , for example a prohibition on the large operators using price discrimination against smaller operators who want access to foreign networks .
The high prices of roaming services in the European Community are a problem which both hinders the process of European integration and restricts the freedom of movement of the European Union 's citizens .
During today 's vote I endorsed the draft legislative resolution of the European Parliament amending Regulation ( EC ) No 717 / 2007 and Directive 2002 / 21 / EC , which from 1 July 2009 to 2011 will gradually reduce the maximum cost of using roaming within the EU .
The maximum price for outgoing and incoming connections will be reduced each year by 4 cents , and in 2011 will amount to EUR 0.35 and EUR 0.11 per minute respectively .
In addition , from 1 July 2009 operators will have to charge on a per second basis , and sending a text message will not cost more than EUR 0.11 .
The cost of data transmission will also be reduced , to EUR 0.50 per megabyte in 2011 .
I definitely endorse the report .
It is another step towards a social Europe , where first place is given to people , their freedom , their liberty and the betterment of their standard of living .
The Third and Sixth Directives ( 78 / 855 / EEC and 82 / 891 / EEC ) concerning mergers and divisions of public limited liability companies currently contain a list of detailed requirements concerning reporting which must be met by companies which are merging or dividing .
This involves significant costs .
The means provided for in the directives for sending information to shareholders were laid down 30 years ago , and do not take into account the technological possibilities of today .
This generates unnecessary costs which have to be borne by the companies .
In this context we should welcome the motion of the Commission on reducing the administrative burden as regards reporting and documentation requirements in the case of mergers and divisions .
Special support should be given to efforts aimed at adapting the provisions of both directives to the widest possible extent in the areas of eliminating duplication of requirements for experts ' reports , disclosure of draft terms of mergers , and adaptation of the provisions of the Third and Sixth Directives to those of the Second Directive with respect to creditors ' protection .
It would also seem justified to introduce an obligation for companies to publish full information about themselves on their Internet sites and to include a link to these sites on a central electronic platform , which is shortly to be given final confirmation by the Commission .
This requirement will undoubtedly contribute to increased transparency , especially with the introduction of an additional obligation to keep the published data up to date .
The solutions proposed above are intended to make the everyday functioning of European companies easier .
However , a real reduction of administrative burdens will depend on the way in which these solutions are implemented by Member States , companies , and the shareholders themselves .
in writing . - British Conservatives have been unable to approve discharge of the 2007 European budget , European Council section .
For the 14th consecutive year the European Court of Auditors has only been able to give a qualified statement of assurance for the accounts of the European Union .
We note the auditors ' remarks that around 80 per cent of the transactions of the EU are carried out by agencies working within the Member States under joint management agreements .
The auditors consistently report that levels of control and scrutiny of the use of EU funds within the Member States is inadequate .
In order to address this ongoing problem , the Council entered into an interinstitutional agreement in 2006 , which obliged them to produce certification for those transactions for which they are responsible .
We are dismayed to note that , to date , the majority of the Member States have not satisfactorily delivered on their obligation and therefore , despite the traditional ' gentleman 's agreement ' between Parliament and Council , we will not grant discharge until such time as the Member States fulfil their obligations under the interinstitutional agreement .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution , which examines the trading relationship between the EU and Turkmenistan .
According to very detailed reports from Human Rights Watch , Amnesty International and the Open Society Institute , Turkmenistan is one of the lowest ranking countries in the world for many basic freedoms , including freedom of the press , freedom of expression and freedom of association .
I am pleased that this resolution highlights that , although the minor changes brought in by President Berdymukhamedov are welcome , the EU expects substantial improvements in human rights in Turkmenistan .
in writing . - I voted against this Interim Agreement with Turkmenistan despite my admiration of the work of the rapporteur , Mr Caspary .
I had the opportunity to visit the country with a delegation from the Committee on Foreign Affairs a couple of years ago when it was led by Turkmenbashi and his book the Ruhnama .
Since then the situation has improved marginally , but Amnesty International , amongst other NGOs , still exposes the serious problems and abuses of human rights in that country .
The improvements have not gone far enough for me to be happy at this stage to vote in favour of the agreement .
in writing . - I voted against this Report which wanted to give Parliament 's approval ( assent ) to an Interim Trade Agreement between the EU and Turkmenistan .
The European Parliament last year demanded that Turkmenistan must reach five human rights benchmarks before it would give its assent to this Agreement .
These benchmarks are : allowing the Red Cross to work freely in the country ; realigning the education system with international standards ; releasing all political prisoners and prisoners of conscience ; abolishing government impediments to travelling abroad ; and , lastly , allowing free access to independent NGOs and allowing the UN human rights bodies to examine progress across the country .
I am convinced that Turkmenistan has not reached any of these benchmarks , and I am therefore very disappointed that assent was given for this Interim Trade Agreement to be concluded .
in writing . - I would like to thank Mr Caspary for all the work he has done in the Committee on International Trade on this particular legislation aimed at improving EU 's relationship with Turkmenistan .
The EU 's trade and commercial agreements with this country , unchanged for 20 years already , needed to be updated especially at such times of worldwide great financial exposure .
Not only will there be commercial and economic benefits out of this new interim agreement with Turkmenistan , but we expect to see an improvement of the regional security on all aspects : from a better promotion of human rights and democracy to better results in the fight against drug and human trafficking and to a sustained participation of Turkmenistan in the reconstruction of Afghanistan by offering support to the activities of EU Member States in this country .
Not least important , better relations with Turkmenistan will be a step further into strengthening energy security for Europe .
I joined my colleagues in supporting the legislation proposed by Mr Caspary .
We will further on have to take all measures to ensure that this country will play their part in this joint effort in order to facilitate its success .
Relations between the European Communities and Turkmenistan are currently governed by the Agreement on Trade and Commercial and Economic Cooperation concluded between the European Communities and the USSR in 1989 .
There can be no doubt that the level of economic development and especially the protection of human rights in Turkmenistan are not satisfactory .
Turkmenistan has not met a series of humanitarian requirements ( including the fact that the Red Cross is still not allowed to work in Turkmenistan ) .
I think that initialling the Interim Trade Agreement between the European Community and Turkmenistan , and at the same time clearly stating the condition of a time limit of five years for the introduction of democratic principles and of human rights standards similar to those of the EU , will provide motivation and will be a sign of good will on the part of the Community .
Initialling the agreement may help to improve the lives of the citizens of Turkmenistan and also to bring about economic reforms .
Signing the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement can be considered only if there is a visible improvement in the area of respect for democratic principles and human rights .
in writing . - I would like to use this opportunity to explain one of the many reasons why I voted today to support closer trading links between the EU and Turkmenistan .
The EU 's common external energy security policy , which British Conservatives fully support , acknowledges the importance of new trans-Caspian pipeline routes for supplying Europe with oil and gas .
These trans-Caspian routes should be fully integrated with the ' southern corridor ' pipelines including Nabucco , Southstream and Whitestream .
Reducing our dependence on Russia 's energy supplies is crucial to our collective energy security and foreign policy .
For that reason we should be proactive and committed to building a partnership with Turkmenistan by supporting the interim trade agreement that helps to stimulate domestic reform and human rights improvements in that country
in writing . - Nuclear energy is a reality in Europe .
It is a reality that we in Ireland are not comfortable with , but we accept the right of all countries to choose their own energy mix , and the fact that our neighbours utilise nuclear power means that we cannot afford to ignore the issue .
Just last week there was a serious safety breach in Sellafield nuclear plant , and the storage facility for nuclear materials at Sellafield - the B30 pond - is arguably one of the most serious problems facing the nuclear industry in Europe .
The B30 pond is home to serious amounts of nuclear materials that have not been adequately treated for decades .
Therefore , I support the proposal for an EU nuclear safety framework that will reinforce the independence of national regulators and ensure a high level of transparency on the safety of nuclear installations .
I supported the amendments proposed to this report , which will further strengthen safety provisions and requirements .
Even if we do not have nuclear plants in Ireland , our citizens could be affected by safety breaches elsewhere , and the EU must ensure that our citizens are protected to the highest level .
We must accept the fact that nuclear power is being generated and will be generated in Europe .
We are not comfortable with this in Ireland , but we respect the right of each Member State to choose its own energy sources .
As long as there are nuclear power stations in our neighbouring countries , we cannot ignore the issue .
There was a security breach in Sellafield last week and Sellafield 's storage facility for nuclear waste - which is called ' pond B30 ' - is one of the biggest problems for the nuclear sector in Europe .
There are massive amounts of untreated nuclear waste being stored in pond B30 .
As such , I fully support the proposal relating to the Community Framework for Nuclear Safety which will ensure that there will be a high level and transparent standard of safety in place for nuclear power stations .
I voted for the amendments which were aimed at strengthening this proposal .
Although we do not have any nuclear power stations in Ireland , problems with safety in power stations in other European countries could affect the people of Ireland .
It is up to the European Union to ensure that the citizens of our countries are fully protected in relation to this issue .
in writing . - As someone who has reservations regarding the long-term safety of nuclear power stations I am not entirely happy with this report .
I accept that those who work in the industry are dedicated professionals .
I accept accidents are few and far between .
Yet the problem is the consequences when there is an accident are potentially so extreme .
We cannot forget the nuclear accident in the Urals revealed by Roy Medvedev , the Three Mile Island accident that involved the events of the film The China Syndrome that went on release only days before the accident , nor the Tokaimura accident in Japan , nor finally Chernobyl , whose consequences live with us all today but most tragically have been visited on the people and children living in the immediate vicinity or born to parents who were there .
Nuclear energy will have a vital role to play in the future of energy in our societies .
As a result , and given the plans for future facilities in Europe , it is essential to lay down a Community framework for nuclear safety .
Mr Hökmark 's report will ensure that the best and safest conditions are established at future nuclear facilities in Europe .
A clear framework with independent and strong national regulators will be created , together with a system for issuing licences for nuclear facilities and a system for inspecting and checking these facilities .
The future importance of nuclear energy demands excellence in the conditions for its implementation and in the conditions for the exchange of essential information , so that uniform safety conditions of the highest quality can be established .
I therefore voted for this report .
The Austrian People 's Party ( ÖVP ) delegation supports the creation of an independent supervisory authority for nuclear power plants with the legally binding capacity to disconnect dangerous nuclear power plants from the network .
in writing . - ( SV ) We chose to vote against this report on a control system within the common fisheries policy .
Of course , we welcome proposals for increased measures to ensure that the rules are followed , but we are critical of the emphasis given to controlling recreational fishing .
It is unreasonable to regulate recreational fishing when , in actual fact , it is industrial fishing that is responsible for problems such as overfishing in our seas .
We regret the broad rejection by a majority in Parliament of our proposed amendment , which , in accordance with the provisions enshrined in the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic - in other words , those on national sovereignty - and as part of the struggle to ensure that these provisions are respected , stated that this proposal for a regulation should respect and not threaten the competence and responsibility of Member States with regard to monitoring compliance with the rules of the common fisheries policy .
We regret the broad rejection by a majority in Parliament of our proposed amendments , which would have prevented the European Commission from being able to independently carry out inspections without prior warning in the exclusive economic zones ( EEZ ) and territories of the Member States , and from being able , at its discretion , to prohibit fishing activities and suspend or cancel payments of the Community financial assistance for a Member State , and which also prevented a Member State from being able to inspect its fishing vessels in the EEZ of any other Member State , without the latter 's authorisation .
This proposal for a regulation - which will continue to be negotiated by the European institutions - if adopted as it currently stands , will represent yet another attack on national sovereignty , by incorporating requirements with regard to equipment and procedures that have been highlighted as completely inappropriate to Portuguese fisheries .
That is why we voted against .
In 2008 , 165 trawlers were scrapped .
In 2009 , it has already been announced that 225 will go .
The fisheries sector in France is suffering greatly because the French Government and Brussels have decided to sacrifice French fishermen for the sake of European economic and trade policy .
Thus , Norway , a country outside the European Union , but which has negotiated gas-related economic agreements with the latter , awards itself alone 80 % of the cod quota , a figure amounting to 500 000 tonnes per year .
France , for its part , has access to only 9 000 tonnes per year , of which only 700 tonnes come from the English Channel and the North Sea .
How , under these circumstances , can one fail to feel disgust at witnessing the eradication of French fishermen ?
Why are Brussels and the French Government thus striving to plot the destruction of an entire sector of our economy ?
Euro-globalist interests and the dogma of free trade are why .
It is not the EUR 4 million envelope promised by the minister for agriculture and fisheries , intended as financial compensation linked to the stopping of boats that have reached their quota of fish , that will solve this problem .
There is an urgent , crucial need to free French fishermen from these discriminating and destructive European quotas .
in writing . - ( SV ) The European Parliament has today voted in favour of including sports and recreational fisheries in the common fisheries policy .
In so doing , the EU has begun to regulate one of our most popular leisure activities .
The proposal is preposterous .
Firstly , the fishing waters belong to the individual countries , not to Brussels .
Secondly , the activities of recreational fishermen do not affect stocks to any great extent .
Thirdly , this legislation will be impossible to comply with .
You only need to look at Sweden , which has 11 500 km of coastline .
Do the EU 's bureaucrats and the Members of this House believe that it will actually be possible to monitor what is happening at all times and in all places ?
A law that is impossible to implement is a particularly bad law .
On the other hand , I am not particularly surprised by the proposal .
The EU is like a steam engine that has started to roll along the way towards its goal of becoming a fully-fledged federal state .
It is large , heavy and very difficult to stop once it starts rolling .
Anyone who gets in its way will be mown down .
Today is a dark day for those of us who want pithy and effective European cooperation , but above all it is a very dark day for recreational fishermen in all Member States .
in writing . - ( IT ) The aim of this proposal for a regulation , namely to guarantee a Community control system for ensuring compliance with the rules of the Common Fisheries Policy through a European Agency , is certainly commendable and addresses the numerous demands made over the years by Parliament and the European Commission .
The regulation also suggests - albeit timidly - implementing and applying the aforesaid rules in a uniform manner in the 27 Member States .
Although I endorse the overall spirit of the text ( maintaining a culture of respect for the rules in order to ensure that the Common Fisheries Policy is properly applied ) , I feel that on this occasion the specific characteristics of Mediterranean fishing have unfortunately not been taken into account .
Just one example of this is the requirement to install a satellite-based vessel monitoring system ( VMS ) on vessels more than 10 meters long .
This may be all very well for the robust North Sea fishing boats , but not for those of the Mediterranean , which are small , often without a cabin , and are used for ' small-scale fishing ' .
This also poses the problem of the substantial costs to be borne , which could , however , be overcome if the Community were to provide 80 % co-financing , as appropriately suggested in Amendment 20 .
in writing . - I will be supporting this report because we have accepted Amendments 48 and 49 and rejected Amendment 93 in regard to recreational fishing .
To include recreational fishing in a Member State fishing quota is for me unacceptable .
If we are seriously saying that recreational fishing is destroying our fish stocks , then in my mind they are missing a fundamental issue as far as dwindling fish stocks are concerned .
That issue is overfishing by industrial fishing concerns in their factory fishing vessels .
They are the ones who we require to be compliant with the CFP and not recreational fishermen pursuing their hobby .
in writing . - The Common Fisheries Policy is deeply flawed , and has been extremely detrimental to the British economy , and to the environment .
Whilst we acknowledge the need for new innovation to improve the situation , most such innovation and best practice has clearly originated with Member States , and the fishermen themselves .
We have therefore voted against this report , which gives increased competence to the Commission .
in writing . - The common fisheries policy is deeply flawed , and has been extremely detrimental to the British economy and to the environment .
Whilst I acknowledge the need for new innovation to improve the situation , most such innovation and best practice has clearly originated with Member States , and with the fishermen themselves .
I have therefore voted against this report , which gives increased competence to the Commission .
in writing . - On behalf of myself and my colleague , Louis Grech , I would like to say that although we voted in favour of the report we would like to stress the following points :
we support a common immigration policy ;
we believe that in the national interest the Immigration Pact was not satisfactory ;
we note disappointment because the report does not make a direct and clear reference to mandatory / compulsory burden sharing ;
we note that any cooperation is appreciated ; but the EU cannot interfere in what type of bilateral agreements are reached between a country of origin and a transit country ;
we do not agree with voting rights for illegal immigrants because of Malta 's demographic situation ;
we do not agree with a uniform Schengen Visa system instead of national systems if this increases bureaucracy and the system becomes less flexible .
I welcome the adoption of the Busuttil report , even though I admit that I do not support all of the points raised in it , especially the favourable reception given to the conclusion of the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum : my group voted in favour of the removal of this reference in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , but we were in the minority on this issue ; the same was true with regard to the increased role of FRONTEX in return operations .

However , in light of the end result , I voted in favour of this report in order to speak out strongly in favour of the opening up of legal paths to immigration .
I therefore support : the recognition of the need for the work of migrants within the EU ; the need for increased consultation with representatives of civil society ; freedom of movement within the EU following a period of five years ' residence ; respect for human dignity and the application of the most favourable measures in the context of the application of the Return Directive ; and , finally , and most importantly , the right to vote in local elections , a point to which the European right was fiercely opposed .
in writing . - British Conservatives voted against this report on the basis that we do not accept the need for a common EU immigration policy and that the UK must retain absolute control over its national borders .
in writing . - ( NL ) I have voted against this report , as it contains a number of elements that are unacceptable .
For starters , it is assumed that the EU will need 60 million new immigrants by 2050 .
Given the current problems with mass immigration , this is a crazy proposal .
It is also suggested that the blue card should not be restricted to highly-qualified employees .
We might as well open the floodgates fully , then .
A common approach on immigration in the EU is imperative .
A fragmented and incoherent approach cannot be allowed in a common area without internal borders , because any immigration action or policy implemented by one Member State necessarily has consequences for all the other Member States .
I therefore support the establishment of a common European immigration policy founded on a high level of political and operational solidarity , mutual trust and shared responsibility .
The adoption of the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum was a huge step in this direction , resulting in an immigration policy that is more coherent , controlled and linked to the needs of the labour market in European countries , and also to the resources available in terms of housing , health and education .
Its aim is also to firmly combat illegal immigration .
The excellent report presented by Mr Busuttil respects this approach .
Its only problem lies in an amendment tabled by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , which threatens the firmness of our fight against illegal immigration , as there can be no doubt that any immigrant legally residing in the territory of a Member State will have the right to vote , in accordance with the conditions laid down .
For this reason , I support the alternative resolution tabled by the rapporteur who , once again , has tried to achieve a compromise that is acceptable to everyone .
I voted for the resolution on a common immigration policy for Europe , as immigration is one of the foremost challenges that Europe is currently facing .
In tackling this problem of immigration , we can adopt policies that transform it into an opportunity .
Immigration is a common concern in the EU countries , which is why the latter must act in concert to find an appropriate response to this problem .
This report seeks to cover all the dimensions of immigration , supporting the establishment of a common European immigration policy founded on a high level of political and operational solidarity .
Furthermore , it also includes measures allowing migrants to participate in the civic and political life of the society in which they live , particularly in political parties and trade unions , and giving them the opportunity to vote in local elections .
A report with 91 articles must clearly include some aspects with which we agree .
However , this report , despite trying to ' sweeten the pill ' , is profoundly negative , which is obviously why we reject it .
It ' strongly supports the establishment of a common European immigration policy ' , welcoming the ' institutional implications of the Lisbon Treaty , in particular the extension of co-decision and qualified majority voting to all immigration policies ' , and ' the adoption of the European Pact on Immigration ' ; in other words , an inhumane security-based immigration policy which criminalises , exploits and selects immigrants .
If there were any doubts about the EU 's aims , then this report dispels them : migration ' continues to be necessary in order to address Europe 's ... labour market ... needs ' ( nearly ' 60 million migrant workers by 2050 ' ) .
That is why ' Immigration Profiles ' must be developed - ' with labour market needs being a central aspect of these profiles ' - and why there is a need ' to increase the attractiveness of the EU for highly qualified workers ' , particularly through the ' Blue Card ' ; in other words , an inhumane vision of immigrants , which sees them purely as labour to be exploited .
More than a common policy , what we need is a different policy which defends the rights of immigrants and combats the fundamental causes of immigration .
I voted for adoption of the Busuttil report .
It is an important report , because migration is one of the most significant challenges facing the European Union .
We should be ready to admit that we are not fully able to take advantage of the good aspects of migration or to prevent those situations which cannot in any sense be called beneficial .
An additional difficulty is that migration manifests itself differently in different Member States , and the differences in this respect are great .
For some countries migration is a huge social , financial and political problem .
For others it is a minor phenomenon which does not generate much interest .
This is why , among other things , it is so difficult to establish and introduce a uniform migration policy .
We should also be aware that for many people remaining in Europe is a matter of life or death - literally .
By sending them back to their country of origin we may in fact be sentencing them to death .
Therefore the tools of immigration policy should be flexible , so that they can be adapted to the individual cases of specific people . Thank you very much .
A common immigration policy based on facilitating the opening up of legal immigration channels cannot receive our support .
The policy should be the polar opposite of this .
This report is based , once again , on the dangerous recommendations of the Commission that appear in the latter 's Green Paper of 11 January 2005 devoted to economic migration .
It is a report that puts the number of migrant workers that the EU will supposedly need by 2050 at 60 million and that accordingly stresses the need to open up channels for legal migration .
How can one fail to find it obscene that , in the midst of an economic , financial and social crisis , we are being recommended to open up our markets further to foreign workers , at a time when our national jobs are under threat and unemployment is raging ?
In the midst of a crisis , what is needed , instead , is to apply economic and social protectionist measures and to reserve jobs , but social aid too , for nationals .
To conclude , this report is based on the false assumption that , by opening the floodgates for legal immigration , illegal immigration will fall considerably or disappear altogether .
We know that no such thing will happen and that , on the contrary , legal immigration is the forerunner of full-scale immigration .
The right of asylum is to become a vehicle for mass immigration on an unprecedented scale .
Europe 's doors would be opened wide to the developing world .
If the multicultural visionaries have their way , the concept of the family will be extended to mean that whole tribes can immigrate without any difficulty .
In addition , the possibility of pre-expulsion detention is to be limited , asylum seekers are to be given access to the labour market and basic provision for them is to be extended .
This would put even more pressure on the domestic labour market - particularly during the economic crisis - and taxpayers would be required to dig deep into their pockets .
For these reasons , there is no option but to reject this report .
in writing . - ( EL ) The report on the common immigration policy takes a positive view of the monopoly-friendly immigration policy of the EU and the European Parliament 's contribution to it .
At the same time , it proposes that measures be taken for the next stage , at the expense of immigrants and in an even more reactionary direction .
The report adopts the basic principle of EU immigration policy as a tool to serve the needs of the labour market , which means the profitability of the European monopolies .
For that purpose , it prejudges the application of a ' carrot and stick ' policy towards immigrants .
Thus , on the one hand , it welcomes the unacceptable Pact on Immigration and Asylum and calls for the reinforcement of FRONTEX and stronger intelligence gathering and repressive measures against immigrants who are of no use to European capital .
On the other hand , it welcomes the attraction and legalisation of ' highly skilled ' immigrants and the cyclical and temporary immigration needed by capital and proposes measures to integrate legal immigrants , so that they are directly available to their employers .
The only response to this reactionary policy is to integrate immigrants into the working-class movement and for immigrants and local workers to fight side by side against the anti-grassroots and anti-immigration policy of the EU and capital and claim their rights and the wealth which they produce .
in writing . ( LT ) Now is the right time for the TEN-T policy , based on fifteen years of experience , to properly reflect its goals and measures .
We must reconsider projects and measures , put more emphasis on EU coordination and aim for more binding commitments from Member States , when implementing priority projects to which they have agreed .
TEN-T priority projects and maps are largely made up of large and expensive national transport infrastructure projects , and some of the earlier 30 TEN-T projects were physically impossible to implement , whereas other projects , especially following EU enlargement , became particularly important , but did not make it on to the list .
The current economic crisis may once again encourage us to follow this logic when investing in transport infrastructure .
However , we need considered projects and investments in the EU 's transport infrastructure , in order to develop it further over the next 10-20 years .
Decisions on transport infrastructure projects should be based on correct assessments of expenditure and benefit , stability and European cross-border added value .
The report sets out the guidelines ' for the development of the trans-European transport network ' ( TEN-T ) .
This currently involves 30 priority projects ' inspired mainly by national interests ' - what other interests should be taken into account , those of multinationals ? - which will receive almost EUR 5.3 billion in Community cofinancing .
This report fits within the vision of ' trans-European transport networks ' based on the expansion of the internal market and an increase in capitalist competition and concentration .
It therefore ' emphasises the need to incorporate ... the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy ' and defends the adaptation of the TEN-T to ' changing market conditions ' , in line ' with the following criteria : economic viability , enhanced competitiveness , promotion of the single market ' , and developed through ' public / private partnerships ' ( for example by allocating ' a percentage of toll revenue from road infrastructure to funding TEN-T projects ' ) .
Just one month from the end of the current legislative term , the majority of this House cannot resist asking the European Commission ' to propose - by the end of its mandate - a legislative initiative concerning the opening of the rail domestic passenger markets as from 1 January 2012 ' .
Finally , to satisfy the interests of the large economic and financial groups in terms of expanding their control towards Eastern Europe , it underlines that links between Western and Eastern Europe are a priority .
The development and expansion of the Trans-European Transport Network are an absolute must for consolidating the internal market and promoting the European Union 's cohesion .
This is the reason why I voted for option ' C ' proposed by the rapporteur , Eva Lichtenberger .
This approach will allow all the types of financial resources available in the future to be used for transport and infrastructure , even though it does not offer entirely the means to guarantee effective implementation , bearing in mind the numerous divergent national interests .
Any other alternative , including the option proposed by the alternative motion from the PPE-DE Group , might have made it impossible for Member States to use the Cohesion Funds , as part of the Cohesion Policy , for transport infrastructure projects other than the priority TEN-T projects and , by implication , this could have deprived Romania of the opportunity to use the Cohesion Funds for the transport sector , funds which Romania is greatly in need of .
This report assesses the implementation of the 30 TEN-T priority projects in which delays are having a major impact on the future of the European sustainable transport policy .
Despite the difficulties , it is vital to remain committed to the changes needed to establish intermodal connections , particularly for citizens and freight .
The various current challenges must be taken into account , ranging from security to regional issues , social , economic and financial habits , and the environment .
The need for an integrated and more coherent approach to the transport network should therefore be underlined .
The importance of cross-border links to progress in the European transport network is clear , which is why we support improved interconnections between all modes of transport , in particular those which have found it more difficult to transform and develop , such as rail or maritime transport .
Better links must be established with sea ports and airports , and proper implementation of trans-European network projects will certainly contribute to this objective .
The report reflects some of these concerns , but the order of priorities that I consider appropriate is not maintained throughout the whole text .
I therefore voted against .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Earthquake in the Abruzzo Region of Italy ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the earthquake in the Abruzzo region of Italy .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission sends its condolences to all families who have lost their loved ones in the recent earthquake in Italy .
The Commission has been in close contact with the Italian civil protection authorities since the first hours after the earthquake .
Member States started offering their help through the Community Civil Protection Mechanism at a very early stage of the disaster .
While this earthquake was very powerful and brought a lot of destruction , national resources were able to cope with the immediate disaster response .
However , on 10 April Italy made a request for technical experts who could support the country in analysing the stability of buildings damaged by the earthquake .
A team of eight national and Commission experts was selected .
The team was despatched to the site of the earthquake on 18 April .
In addition to the assessment of the stability of the buildings , the team will propose solutions with regard to damaged buildings .
The Commission is currently cooperating with the Italian authorities in order to identify options for other EU support .
Possibilities may include the EU Solidarity Fund and the reprogramming of the Structural and Rural Development Funds .
This earthquake is a tragic reminder that natural disasters are a continual threat for all Member States .
Over the last decade earthquakes , heat waves , forest fires , floods and storms have killed many people in Europe and destroyed costly infrastructure and precious natural spaces .
The Member States and the Community need to combine their strength to prevent disasters and their impacts and to ensure a rapid and effective European response to major disasters .
Experience has shown that an integrated and multi-hazard approach should be taken to develop effective measures in both in prevention and in direct response to disasters , as outlined in the Commission communication of March 2008 on reinforcing the Union 's disaster-response capacity .
Furthermore , in February 2009 the Commission adopted a Community approach on the prevention of natural and man-made disasters that represents the state of the art and paves a way for future Commission initiatives .
It suggests improving the consistency of existing prevention instruments and complementing them , thus reinforcing the added value of EU action .
The Commission would welcome feedback from the European Parliament on the approach proposed in this important communication .
Furthermore , thanks to the preparatory action on an EU rapid response capability introduced by the European Parliament in the 2008 and 2009 budgets , the Commission is currently testing , with the Member States , ways to improve the overall immediate response capacity of the EU .
Together , these initiatives are contributing to shaping a genuine European disaster management policy for all types of disaster .
Thank you , Mr Kallas .
May I take this opportunity to welcome Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Tajani , and so that I am not reproached for being careless or insensitive , I would remind you that we have already observed a minute 's silence , yesterday , in commemoration of the victims of this disaster .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , between 2002 and 2007 earthquakes were the fourth most frequent natural disaster in the European Union .
After this latest and sadly most serious tragedy in the Abruzzo region , we must join together to face these terrible events , common to many states of the Union .
To date , we have the European Solidarity Fund and the Community Mechanism for Civil Protection : two instruments that are very important yet still insufficient for an area , like Europe , that is at risk from earthquakes .
In the case of the Abruzzo earthquakes , an application is being processed for access to the Solidarity Fund for the reconstruction of the areas destroyed .
The figure could amount to EUR 500 million , as Commission Vice-President Antonio Tajani told the press .
It has not yet been possible to quantify the extent of this earthquake and the damage caused : the Abruzzo region is in need of urgent and substantial intervention , which the Italian Government has been managing in a prompt and thorough manner from just a few minutes after the earthquake .
This action does however require European coordination , while respecting national and local competences .
On 14 November 2007 , Parliament itself unanimously adopted a resolution on the regional impact of earthquakes , concerning prevention and the management of the damage caused by tragic events of this kind .
This document should serve as the starting point for a coordinated European policy in this matter , as stated in the written question by Mr Vakalis , co-signed by 50 or so Members of this House .
We therefore hope that the European Commission will take on the ideas expressed in this resolution and apply them to create a European agenda for the prevention and management of earthquakes .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my condolences once again , on behalf of the members of the Italian parliament and all the members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , to the families of the victims , to the Abruzzo region and its citizens and to Italy .
I would also like to say that our Group , which from the outset has been close to the people so tragically hit , will be sending a delegation to the Abruzzo region , led by our chairman , Mr Schulz .

The numbers are frightening : it is true , as Mr Albertini said , there is no final count as yet , but we can nonetheless say that there have been around 300 deaths .
It is a tragedy : 50 000 evacuees , thousands of houses destroyed , hundreds of public buildings devastated , including schools , and a prestigious cultural , architectural and artistic heritage in ruins .
As the President of the Italian Republic , Giorgio Napolitano , said , the response to the events was immediate and effective .
This response came from the state , but also from non-state actors ; from the world , from volunteers , from communities in Italy and elsewhere , from the provinces , from the regions , from the Red Cross and from the fire service : a truly extraordinary display of solidarity .
Perhaps the Italian Government - in fact never mind the ' perhaps ' - the Italian Government would have done well to take up the suggestion to amalgamate the referendum with the European elections and administrative elections , in order to save some hundreds of millions that could have been spent helping those affected by the earthquake .
There are certain responses Europe must make : firstly , it must activate the Solidarity Fund ; we spoke to Vice-President Tajani about this just hours after the tragic events .
Secondly , it must re-programme the Structural Funds , and thirdly , Commissioners , it must utilise the unused funds from the previous and new programming periods .
Fourthly , it must amend the rules on the Cohesion Policy and the Structural Funds as regards the possibility of reinstating under Objective I , that is to say in the disadvantaged , underdeveloped regions , those regions which , due to exceptionally serious natural events , have seen their GDP , or wealth , drop below 75 % of the Community average .
So then , we do not want an ad hoc law for the Abruzzo region , but a law applicable to any region that may find itself in this position .
Fifthly , we must investigate with the Commission the possibility of tax breaks for the economic activities and construction work which should , we all hope , pick up again in the Abruzzo region .
Finally , I call for the implementation of the directive on building materials , which was recently updated and improved by Parliament .
To conclude , a tragedy such as this does not require rhetoric , rather it requires effective , tangible responses , as well as a close eye to ensure that the earthquake rubble does not become the site for further profiteering and illicit practices that line the pockets of the big criminal groups .
We must be vigilant and give our best efforts : we must all work so that , with our help , our friends in the Abruzzo region can smile again .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a terrible tragedy in my country has hit the important central region of the Abruzzo and the city of Aquila .
It has been a disaster that has affected human lives , including young lives ; it has struck houses , our homes ; churches , our places of worship ; monuments , our culture ; companies , our workplaces ; universities , our centres of learning ; and has left great devastation in its wake .
We have all rallied round these people and we can now say this : firstly , that they have responded with great dignity , despite being so intimately and so practically affected , losing their most valuable possessions such as their homes - and , as we know , the home is central to Italian culture - yet these people have reacted with dignity and want to start living again , rebuilding what they had , their own communities , within the places that represent that community and in keeping with tradition and continuity .
I am reminded of the importance of the university and of small and medium-sized enterprises for that region , which is at present suffering from severe economic hardship and lack of recovery .
I should also say that there has been an extraordinary mobilisation on the part of the institutions : the government , Parliament , all the opposition forces , as well as the majority who , with great wisdom and responsibility , regard the work to be done in a spirit of unanimity : local institutions , volunteers , civil protection , the thousands upon thousands of young people and adults who went to Abruzzo and who represent social groups , associations and the Catholic community ; everyone has made a contribution .

Even those who did not travel there have done something : economically , culturally , our country 's entire cultural , social and economic spheres are being mobilised , which is very important .
It will , however , be important to remember this , as Mr Pitella said , when it comes to reconstruction , because in addition to these positive aspects of the tragedy , the structural weakness of our building methods has come to light , and I believe that here , alongside calls for justice , there should be a commitment to identifying liabilities and to reconstruction .
A word about Europe , Mr President : when disaster struck , Europe was there , as it will be in the future through the funds and other actions that have been mentioned .
I would wish for there to be a visible presence , too , so that Europe is recognised not only in the money that arrives , but also in the faces and in the institutions .
I propose that a joint delegation from this Parliament visit the region , without pomp , without publicity , but in order to say that Europe is made up of institutions and people , and that these institutions and people want to support and go on supporting Aquila , the Abruzzo and my country , also , which has been so severely damaged .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to thank the Community institutions for the support they have shown for Italy and the people hit by the earthquake .
These have been difficult days , further aggravated by the weather conditions of the last 48 hours .
But after the grief and destruction comes the time for practical proposals and reconstruction , the time to restore a future for the Abruzzo region .
We are asking the European institutions to do their bit ; in fact the Commission has already given its guarantee through Vice-President Tajani , who was very prompt to assure us of his commitment in the immediate aftermath of the disaster .
As the Commission itself today confirmed , first of all we must verify all available financial resources , guarantee the swift activation of the European Solidarity Fund for natural disasters , and then look at the possibility of making full use of and reprogramming the European Social Fund and other Community programmes to support employment and businesses .
However , we are calling in particular for the possibility of introducing extraordinary legislative measures , tax breaks , incentives and aid possibly as an exception to current de minimis provisions .
These would be measures authorised by the European Union and valid for two or three years , that is to say for the time needed until the end of the emergency and reconstruction .
On these subjects and on these objectives , as today 's debate has also shown , we are all in agreement , there are no divisions .
I too would like to conclude with heartfelt thoughts for the victims , their families and the people affected , but I am especially proud , as an Italian woman from that area , to extend special thanks once more for the efforts made by the institutions , all the political parties and above all the rescue teams , civil protection and the Red Cross .
I also thank all the voluntary organisations and individual citizens who did what they could and made a personal contribution or gave money to express their solidarity and provide real help ; they are a truly outstanding example of efficiency and humanity .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance joins with all the Members who have spoken before me in expressing our condolences , our strong sense of solidarity and our support for those who have suffered as a result of this great tragedy , this disaster , this natural event , which was , however , caused by a whole host of things , and I do hope that the European Union , in a visible way , will be able to make a positive contribution to this situation .
There is one thing that cannot be denied : the impact of this earthquake could have been much less severe , the tragedy should not have been this great , because it is clear that a whole series of buildings and houses have collapsed and they should not have done .
There has been negligence , there has been fraud and there has been deception , and we must establish who is liable , because this , too , is an essential part of reconstruction , which is also the moral reconstruction of the Abruzzo , its people and our country as a whole .
Reconstruction should be an opportunity for huge innovation in sustainable development for those people who have shown us all that they not only have great dignity , but also great courage and an overwhelming desire to start afresh .
At this point , the least demagogical , most practical approach that will allow Europe to take swift action to support the emergency efforts and reconstruction in the Abruzzo is to review the region 's 2007-2013 operative programme , that is to say the Structural Funds .
The Abruzzo operative programme currently provides for EUR 140 million in European cofinancing , for a total programme cost of EUR 345 million , with the difference made up by national cofinancing .
We are well aware that one of the problems we must face is that of Italy 's organisation in cofinancing the funds that the European Union is sure to grant , and on this point we Members must be extremely vigilant .
As I was saying , first and foremost , we must ask for the other European funds already planned for the Abruzzo , such as the Social Fund , to be reviewed and redirected towards measures and priorities that serve reconstruction .
In this context , the Abruzzo operative programme could involve a reallocation of structural fund resources earmarked for other Italian regions that are now more competitive .
We know that the European Commission is willing to evaluate grants , and this same mechanism can be used for other Member States .
Following this , the Italian authorities , primarily the government , with the cooperation of all local bodies concerned , must move quickly to calculate the cost of the direct damage sustained , in order to meet the deadline of 15 June 2009 for submitting an application for funds within the framework of the European Solidarity Fund .
The amount of support granted will depend on the damage sustained , but will not in any case be more than a few million euros .
This fund exists precisely in order to provide fast , effective and flexible economic assistance , therefore it is important that the Italian authorities quantify this damage , otherwise it will be difficult to get funding .
The national authorities also need to get to work on the loan application to the European Investment Bank , so that adequate sums can be granted for fast and sustainable reconstruction in this region .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first comes grief for so many innocent victims , then a commitment to rescue efforts , overcoming the emergency and reconstruction , in which Italy gives of its best .
European assistance in this is important , but we also need a European framework to help to prevent these disasters , which often have more than just natural causes ; we therefore need a prevention framework , a natural disaster warning system on which to build a civil protection and prevention network .
In addition to this , we need a land policy that provides guaranteed standards on land use that respect its balance , as well as safe building standards .
The Abruzzo earthquake also involves this , and , without wishing to be controversial , we must investigate all the liabilities , so that we can avoid a repetition of these serious events , and above all we must focus on land reclamation rather than on new demolition works .
For this reason also it is vitally important that the Soil Framework Directive be adopted , which will provide structural support for appropriate management of European land , and European funds should be reformulated in line with prudent land policy , thereby creating a healthy environment and good jobs .
( DE ) Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , our Italian fellow Members have rightly viewed this debate as a very important one for their country and requested the floor , yet it is also a debate for all Europeans .
After all , we are a European community .
We are pleased to have the opportunities presented by the Solidarity Fund , and we should like its use to be as targeted as possible - including by the Italian Government and the regional bodies .
We wish to express once more our condolences to the numerous victims , and we hope that Europe is able to help bring relief as soon as possible .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would simply like to draw attention to the sympathetic response to this tragic event throughout Italy and also in Europe .
When things like this happen , they allow us to observe the cohesion of the country and the Community , which can only nourish the hope of general solidarity and peace , including inner peace , that we enjoy within Europe .
I would also say that we must undoubtedly , openly and urgently tackle those responsible for the poor construction work that caused neighbouring buildings to react differently .
Finally , on the sidelines there has been some dispute over the predictability of earthquakes ; I will not go into it now , but simply say that studies on radon indicate that earthquakes are preceded by an increase in this gas .
I therefore think , as is right for any scientific research , that Europe can and should use all its structures to encourage further studies on this , because , as is the nature of science , it may yet contribute to the purely hypothetical possibility of predicting such devastating events .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , there is no doubt that there is a strong feeling of solidarity in all Member States , and in the Commission as well , concerning this terrible earthquake .
There are mechanisms for providing help , and the Commission services acted immediately .
Everything must be done in close collaboration with the Italian authorities .
Last year we had the huge disaster of the forest fires in Greece and before that we had forest fires in Portugal and the floods in Germany and the Czech Republic .
In all these cases the European Union expressed solidarity and helped as much as it could .
It will do so in this case as well .
First of all , we are awaiting calculations of the scale of the damage and then we can decide how best to use the Solidarity Fund .
The Commission itself cannot launch Solidarity Fund money ; this can only be done after receiving the request from the Member State and after the calculation of the scale of the damage .
Many Members raised the question of the reprogramming of the Structural Funds , and DG REGIO is discussing this .
My colleague Danuta Hübner will visit the area soon and discuss concrete possibilities .
We are in permanent contact with the civil protection department in Rome to help , and also to help prepare the Solidarity Fund application , so there is no doubt that the Commission will do whatever it can to help the victims of this disaster .
Concerning safe building standards , these standards exist but the question is how closely these standards are followed in Member States .
The standards definitely exist : they exist in directives and they exist in national legislation as well .
Our civil protection mechanism , at the heart of which is a monitoring and information centre working 24 hours a day , will collaborate with Member States in disaster prevention and also in addressing the consequences of disasters .
Once more on behalf of the Commission I express our condolences .
We will do whatever is possible to help people in this disaster area .
To conclude this debate , on a personal note and also on behalf of the Bureau of the European Parliament , I take this opportunity to express my condolences and sympathy once again for the victims and the families affected , and of course to pledge every possible support for the people of the region so badly hit .
The debate is closed .
2007 discharge : EU general budget - Council ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Søndergaard , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2007 , Section II - Council ( C6-0417 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , on a point of order first , because I just want to be very sure that the Council has been invited for this item .
As we are going to discuss the problem of the Council , it would be very bad if the Council was not invited for this item .
I just want the President to guarantee that the Council has been invited .
Mr Søndergaard , I can confirm on behalf of the Presidency that the Council was indeed invited to attend the debate on this item .
Despite this , it is with the Presidency 's sincere regret and on behalf of Parliament as a whole that I note the Council 's absence ; I believe this was also the case this morning , when the President of Parliament welcomed the Council but received no reply whatsoever .
Although I regret this , I can do nothing to remedy the situation and we are thus obliged to hold the debate as planned .
I therefore invite you to take the floor again as rapporteur , to introduce the debate on this report and on this item .
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that I very much regret the fact that we are going to conduct this debate in the absence of the Council - the very Council whose budget we are about to discuss .
It is absurd , of course , that the Council should simply choose to ignore this debate in this way , given that the Committee on Budgetary Control has voted by a very large majority to recommend that Parliament postpone its discharge decision for the Council 's 2007 budget .
Why have we done this ?
Is it because we suspect some fraud or irregularity ?
The answer is ' no ' , because we have no indication or information which points in that direction .
So why , then , have we done it ?
We have proposed that the grant of the Council 's discharge be postponed , because our committee has not yet received any official reply from the Council regarding a series of ambiguities in the budget .
These ambiguities may well , in fact , be the result of misunderstandings , but the Council has declined to clear up these misunderstandings .
Naturally , it could have done so by replying to our questions .
In accordance with paragraph 42 of the Interinstitutional Agreement , no operational appropriations for the Common Foreign and Security Policy may appear in the Council 's budget .
As representatives of the European taxpayer , we have the task of ensuring compliance with this agreement .
However , in order to do so , we must be given the chance not only to ask questions about the Council 's budget , but also to obtain answers to those questions .
In the annex to the report we have listed a number of questions , some of which are actually quite straightforward , and it should not be difficult to provide an answer to them .
For example : how many accounts outside the budget did the Council have in 2007 ?
What funds did they cover and what were they spent on ?
Another question is : can the Council offer any explanation as to how its own internal auditor could have come to the conclusion that there were shortcomings in the control and verification of invoices ?
Yet another one : is there any explanation as to why it has been necessary to transfer substantial amounts from the translation budget line to the travel budget line , year after year ?
Despite repeated calls from me , as rapporteur , and from the committee as a whole , the Council has to date given no official reply to these questions .
That causes great difficulties , of course , not only for the committee , but for the whole of Parliament , as well , because how can we grant discharge for a budget , in other words accountably claim to our electorate that this budget is correct , without knowing what lies behind the figures ?
That would be absurd .
We on the Committee on Budgetary Control are nice people .
This is why we are giving the Council one more chance to answer our questions .
We , therefore , recommend to Parliament that it postpone granting discharge for the Council 's budget .
This will allow the issue to be raised again in November and give the Council a few more months to consider whether or not transparency is better than secrecy .
I hope that with today 's debate and tomorrow 's vote we will send a clear message that we do not want to be a rubber stamp for the forces of darkness .
We want openness , we want transparency and we want a full insight into how taxpayers ' money is being spent .
That is what we want today and that is what we want after the elections in June .
Mr President , I read in the applicable financial regulation that the Secretary-General and High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , assisted by the Deputy Secretary-General , shall have full responsibility for administering the appropriations entered in Section II - Council - of the budget and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are properly managed .
Where is Javier Solana ?
Where is the Deputy Secretary-General , since he is not at this debate ?
This is despite the fact that the only piece of information that we have , namely the report by the internal auditor , says that there is a B account , an off-budget account at the Council .
Pursuant to the financial regulation , it is not the Czech Presidency or the French Presidency but Javier Solana who is responsible for the Council , together with his deputy .
What is this off-budget account ?
The auditor says that this section should be eliminated .
We would like to know what it has been used for , and why .


We would like to know why , of the EUR 650 million administered by Mr Solana , and for which he is responsible , EUR 13 million was transferred from interpretation to travel expenses in 2006 , but in 2007 the allocation for travel expenses was not increased .
The same thing is happening again , and we do not know what so much travel means , and where these funds are going to end .
We are angry , because there is only one exception to the democratic scrutiny exercised by this Parliament over all the accounts funded by taxpayers in the European Union : the accounts kept by the Council .
Those are not audited .
We , the Members of this Parliament , have not even been able to obtain a single official meeting with the Council to discuss the accounts .
They have refused to give us papers .
They have refused to give us documents .
They understand that we have no jurisdiction to scrutinise the Council ; this was all very well when the Council carried out solely administrative duties , but now the Common Foreign and Security Policy represents operational expenditure , and we do not understand why this should be exempt from democratic scrutiny .
Here , therefore , I would like to say that the attitude adopted by the Secretary-General , Mr Solana , is unacceptable and that therefore , on this occasion this Parliament is going to propose that the Council 's accounts not be approved , as happened 10 years ago when Mr Elles said that he was refusing to approve the Commission 's accounts , triggering the resignation of the Santer Commission .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , the decision that we are about to take is a very important one .
The Socialist Group is in favour of postponement for four reasons of principle .
The first is the credibility and the role of our own Parliament .
It is very important to say , from the outset , what Parliament can and cannot do .
What it can and must do is control democratically the accounts of the Council , too , notwithstanding the gentlemen 's agreement that has been put in place .
The second reason is interinstitutional equilibrium .
It is important that we do not do something that we cannot do as a Parliament , but it is also very important to say that it is our right to have a view , to have an opinion on the Council 's accounts , when these accounts are operational and where these operational accounts must be accounted for .
This is the democratic principle and this is what we are about to do .
So we are not saying we want to do something else .
We are saying we want to do our duty .
The third reason is the respect and the preparation for the Lisbon Treaty .
You know very well , colleagues , that , with the Lisbon Treaty , the common external policy acquires much more depth and much more momentum .
It is a much more important common policy and we cannot from the outset say that Parliament will not have a bearing on that policy at all .
We must have the opportunity now to say what the role of Parliament is .
The last - and probably the most important - point is transparency vis-à-vis the citizens .
Our role as a Parliament is accountability vis-à-vis the citizens .
We cannot , and we must not , say to the citizens that the big common policies , like the external and defence policy , will lie outside the democratic control of our Parliament .
So for those four important reasons of principle , we believe that we must vote in favour of postponement .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , first of all I wish to thank Mr Søndergaard for his excellent report .
The report on the Council 's discharge is very long and thorough .
It is also based on references to documents and the EU Treaty .
The most problematic issue is transparency .
The Council 's budget only partly concerns administration , as a large share of the funds go on operations , such as the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
The Council is fairly unwilling to discuss the implementation of the budget with the Committee on Budgetary Control , and it is not keen to hand over the documents requested either .
The European Parliament , together with the Council , is the authority responsible for the EU 's budget .
Its task is also to oversee the use of funds and the budget 's general implementation .
As far as I can see , it is this very lack of cooperation that has forced the Committee on Budgetary Control to propose that discharge should be postponed , and not so much the way funds have presumably been administered .
The situation is an awkward one because good levels of cooperation between Parliament and the Council are the lifeblood of fruitful European policy .
That is why my group will make its final decision regarding its position this evening .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Thank you , Mr Søndergaard , your report is a gem , covering , as it does , all the pertinent points .
I should , however , like to ask the President and this Parliament 's Bureau to take note of the Council 's absence and not to leave it at that .
We should not let them run rings around us .
I should like to urge the Bureau to consider sending the Council a very firm letter of protest with the message that this is unacceptable .
Indeed , as things stand at the moment , we refuse to grant an extension .
This is beyond question now .
We cannot grant discharge to the Council .
This is not so much about fraud , as it is about a matter of principle , namely transparency .
EUR 650 million from the European budget is managed by Mr Solana in the area of defence , security and foreign policy , but without any form of monitoring .
This is not acceptable in a democracy .
It has to stop .
Hence the justified demands for an activities report , transparency and clarity .
That is not all , however .
As a rapporteur on VAT fraud , in my report that was approved on 4 December , I clearly asked the Council to answer a number of questions .
We are now four or five months down the line , and this period has been marked by a deafening silence from the Council , while the estimated fraud involved is between EUR 60 and 100 billion annually .
The Council must act .
Coordination is what is needed in the fight against VAT fraud , and as long as there is no willingness to act on their part , I will not grant discharge to the Council .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , I , too , would like to ask the same question , and that is where is the Council in this debate ?
It is , of course , the Council and its budget management that we are to scrutinise .
I find it remarkable that no one from the Council is here at this point to answer our questions .
We in the Committee on Budgetary Control , in particular our draftsman Mr Søndergaard , have put several question marks against the Council of Ministers ' management of its finances .
We have pointed it out on numerous occasions , but have not received any satisfactory answers .
Allow me to give two examples .
In 2006 , the Council spent EUR 12.6 million on travel .
This money was intended to be used for interpretation .
I would like to ask the Council a question , but if the Council cannot answer , perhaps the Commission can : where did the Council travel to in 2006 ?
What do these EUR 12 million represent ?
The Council also has confidential accounts , so-called comptes hors budget .
The internal auditor has urged the Council to abolish these accounts , but without success .
I would like to ask why this has not happened .
How many such accounts are there alongside the budget ?
What do these accounts contain ?
Our job as Members of the European Parliament is to scrutinise the Council 's use of budget resources .
This we do because we represent the taxpayers .
The Council 's job is to answer our questions .
We want answers to these questions now !
What happened to these EUR 12 million ?
What do the confidential accounts contain ?
How many confidential accounts are there ?
If we do not receive a satisfactory response - which we have not done as yet - then we will not grant discharge to the Council tomorrow .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , we are facing one of the really important , fundamental questions here .
You could say that , as a representative of a eurosceptic party , I believe that it should always be the Council that dominates European cooperation and that this Parliament should concentrate on the internal market and cross-border environmental issues .
However , there is a third issue that has now come to the fore .
The Council and this Parliament are , in principle , equally responsible for the budget and the uses to which taxpayers ' money is put .
Now what is , in my view , an unprecedented event has occurred in that the Council is keeping the uses to which the money is put a secret .
We therefore have no transparency .
Citizens are not able to say ' I accept that because I know what the money has been used for ' .
Therefore , I would say - and as far as I understand , all the speakers in this Parliament are in agreement for once - that there can be no question of granting discharge to the Council until we know where the money has gone .
( DE ) Mr President , I rise to speak here as a passionate pro-European , and am convinced that we are currently receiving a lesson in what EU democracy should not look like .
The fact that the Council does not deem it in any way necessary to meet Parliament 's very clear criticisms in any acceptable form whatsoever unfortunately shows that all the critics of the EU , and also those who now reject the institution , are right , as we are flagrantly disregarding precisely the fundamental principles on which a democracy should be based .
Treaty after Treaty , we have been allowing the centre of power to remain completely unsupervised in reality and the Council - and this can be proven - to be lazy and incompetent and to operate largely in secret .
I say ' lazy ' because it can be proven that the majority of ministers - that is , those who take the decisions that are really important to Europe behind closed doors - are often not even present , and civil servants take decisions on extremely fundamental issues .
This used to happen in Austria until 1848 , after which the situation improved somewhat .
This is not democracy .
The Council is not even willing to grant access to the agenda items that are being discussed .
Members can work this out themselves minutely , detail by detail , via parliamentary questions - as I have done - and the results are frightful .
These people are simply lazing around .
Those who are , in reality , more important in legislative terms than us MEPs are leaving others to turn up in their place .
It is also claimed that there is now more transparency in the Council when , in actual fact , there has been less transparency in that institution since the 2006 Council Decision .
A single agenda item out of 130 in the most important Council - the External Relations Council - was dealt with in public in 2008 .
Everything else was discussed in camera .
Everything else is less transparent than the Mafia .
Then there is the use of funds .
Where do the many millions of euro go ?
Why is the Council refusing to cooperate on this ?
What is the attitude of the House towards a secret service that is being extended more and more under the leadership of Javier Solana ?
Javier Solana is based in Spain , which admits that there is , of course , an EU secret service .
Where does the money go ?
How corrupt are these people , and how lacking are they in transparency ?
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to say two things on behalf of this committee .
Congratulations to the rapporteur , who asked straightforward questions and received no answers .
Congratulations to this committee , which adopted Mr Søndergaard 's report by an overwhelming majority - 27 : 2 .
The Member States are conspicuous by their absence today even though , as I would remind you , Mr President , we placed this item on this afternoon 's agenda especially to accommodate the Council 's scheduling problems .
The Member States are doing things here that they would not dare do at home .
Now we shall be conducting an election campaign where things are being shifted to Brussels again .
The problems lie in the capital cities , not Brussels .
I should have liked to see the Commission offering us somewhat greater support on this from time to time .
In my view , its behaviour is sometimes rather too cowardly .
When , as the rapporteur says , we have comptes hors budget - in my country we call these ' black accounts ' - this calls to mind Eurostat and similar stories .
This will not work for long .
It was this committee 's job to warn of such a development , and I am proud that it did so by such a large majority .
I believe - and this is a positive message I shall take away with me if the House follows our lead by what I hope will be an equally large majority tomorrow - that we have ensured that control does indeed work .
There is someone to take care of it .
After that , we shall take a look at the consequences .
( PT ) Mr President , I join in congratulating our rapporteur on his work , as also the various political groups , the Commission and our committee in the person of its chairman .
I must say that not only is the existence of slush funds absolutely unacceptable to us , but also that this supposed gentlemen 's agreement , which will be 39 years old , does not , in my view , now have any reason to exist .
We are not nowadays a fan club .
Definitely not .
We are a Europe of citizens .
We have to be accountable to everyone .
Here in the European Parliament , with the reforms that we have just now finished putting into practice , we are absolutely ready , from this next parliamentary term , to answer in full for the management of everything relating to our accounts .
The Council must do the same .
It is highly regrettable that the Council has not taken advantage of the opportunity that it was given to be present here today .
It was precisely for this reason that we chose this time .
We should like to say that this definitely cannot continue and that we will do everything to ensure that the Council is forced to account for the way in which it implements its budget .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from the point of view of the Committee on Budgets , the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Subcommittee on Security and Defence , I should like to introduce another rather different emphasis into this debate .
Some speeches we have heard could give rise to the impression that there is no parliamentary scrutiny of common foreign and security policy , but this is far from the truth .
Excellent cooperation has evolved between the Council and the Subcommittee on Security and Defence , and we are informed of every detail - including the budgetary aspects .
The Committee on Budgetary Control is not involved in this - this is an internal matter for the European Parliament - but the Chairmen of the Committee on Budgets , the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Subcommittee on Security and Defence are regularly informed of budgetary aspects .
Parliamentary scrutiny is taking place here .
Then there are the confidential aspects , for which there is a special committee , which is also informed at regular intervals of all the details of European security and defence policy by Mr Solana personally .
Things may have gone very unsatisfactorily in this regard from the point of view of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I agree that the Council 's absence from this debate is unsatisfactory .
Nevertheless , nonsensical remarks such as those made by Mr Martin give the impression that there is no democratic control of any kind of the important matter of foreign and security policy in the European Union .
There are more important things , for example the issue of the accounts from which Mr Solana 's travel is financed .
There is the issue of the operations in Chad , Congo , Georgia and many other countries .
Dialogue and effective democratic control are a reality here .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to make a personal statement pursuant to Rule 149 , which was Rule 145 in the previous version .
I was mentioned by name ; I was accused of making nonsensical remarks .
I firmly reject this accusation .
The data can all be documented .
It is true that , in many cases , civil servants take the decisions in the important committees of foreign ministers and others - the specialist Councils - because , for whatever reason , ministers have not made the trip .
Sometimes it can be proven that they prefer to attend party conferences .
It is also true - and this might perhaps be pointed out - that a Chairman , whose private dealings should be investigated at long last , has said things here that cannot go unchallenged .
This parliamentary scrutiny does not exist , there are no scrutiny mechanisms whatsoever for the various security systems that have been developed accordingly - intelligence fields , that is .
I shall give the following example in this very connection : the Intelligence Division ( INT ) , with 30 members of staff ...
( The President cut off the speaker and called him to order )
Excuse me , you have the floor in order to answer a personal question , not to give a speech on this , and you have already responded to the personal question .

( DE ) Then I should just like to personally invite Mr von Wogau once more to disclose with whom his law firm does business and from whom it derives its profits , and then we can continue to talk .
I think your words just now are much more serious than what Mr von Wogau said .
He in turn has asked to speak on a personal matter and so I give him the floor .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Martin has just addressed me in a most outrageous way .
Whilst I shall certainly not be giving Mr Martin himself any information about my personal circumstances , I am prepared to provide details of them at any time in the appropriate manner , as what has been intimated here is absolutely unfounded .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by saying that it would have been good if , when he was here in plenary , Mr Klaus had expressed his opinion on the accusations that are already well known .
This would undoubtedly have helped show the separation of powers , which works very well at European level , in its true light .
Secondly , I should like to raise an objection to the comparison of the Council with the Mafia .
This is something that simply cannot be said in a proper democracy .
Moreover , I believe that the national courts of auditors were indeed given the opportunity to work together rather more intensively with the European Court of Justice .
Particularly with regard to the Council , national-level scrutiny by national parliaments is also a very important exercise , of course , one that should be performed regularly .
Secondly , it is also vital , of course , that the European Court of Auditors analyse these exercises in detail and provide the necessary documentation .
I believe that the very transparency we are calling for here is also justified by the Treaty of Lisbon and that , therefore , we must press hard for this Treaty to be brought to a favourable conclusion as quickly as possible .
Mr President , I should like to pick up briefly on what Mr von Wogau said .
Mr von Wogau , you may have a body that holds very interesting discussions on future projects .
However , discharge is not the responsibility of three Chairmen or a diverse body , but instead of the Committee on Budgetary Control and then of plenary .
If you can tell us what is happening with the Council 's off-budget accounts , then please go ahead .
I am convinced that you do not know , and we do not know either .
Yet , by granting discharge , we take full responsibility for what the Council has or has not done .
This is not a kindergarten ; if we do not know what they have done , we cannot take responsibility for it , otherwise we make ourselves a laughing stock the world over .
Anyone wishing to do that tomorrow is welcome to , but my recommendation is not to grant discharge and to opt for postponement .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is in our interests to find a solution to this dispute , but this will be possible only if the Council makes a move .
We have complied with procedures , we have sent rapporteurs , and the four coordinators have written letters and asked questions .
No replies were forthcoming , with just a reference made to a gentlemen 's agreement - which certainly never applied to discharge , only ever to the budget meeting .
Even then , it applied only to the administrative part .
This gentlemen 's agreement has never applied to the operational part ; indeed , at the time the agreement was made , there was no operational part .
The Council must offer us a solution to this ; it has time to come up with one , and we would urge it to do so .
I am a little ashamed on its behalf on account of the members of the public up there , as this is the negative side , the arrogant side of Europe .
We no longer live in a monarchy , and it is time that , in this regard , the Council joined us on the path of democracy - of greater democracy - which , incidentally , it always helps push through in the Treaties , too .
We would urge the Council to stop making this House a laughing stock , and the Council should also stop making itself a laughing stock .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , as symbolic as it may be in this institutional triangle , we are all the same witnessing with astonishment today an essential act of the European Parliament - the discharge - taking place , and one key participant is missing .
Indeed , I am thinking , ladies and gentlemen , of the visitors who are witnessing this scene in which some speakers are saying that extra-budgetary accounts exist , which cannot be made public - meaning that they cannot be dealt with transparently - and in which the Council is not here to testify where necessary to difficulties or to other circumstances .
I believe that as MEPs we cannot accept this state of affairs , this deplorable absence of the Council , and we can only protest and in particular approve the suggestion made by the chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , namely to postpone this discharge , because , otherwise , Parliament would make a fool of itself by validating accounts that it does not know about and has not had the opportunity to inspect .
Frankly , Mr President , the Council needs to pull itself together and be able to provide the information needed in relation to transparency so that it can prevent the Eurosceptics from seizing upon this issue in order to say that we are not transparent and that we are committing errors , especially where democracy is concerned .
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Mr President , first of all I would like to express my satisfaction with the unanimity of the views which we have heard here today and I hope that they will have some impact on the Council .
I fully endorse what the Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mr Bösch , said to Mr von Wogau , and I would also like to put one more thing to Mr von Wogau : Why should Parliament grant discharge , when it is being denied information ?
Certainly , if this were a matter for some other body , there would be no reason for us to get involved .
May I point out , however , that if we do grant discharge , we will be taking on a degree of responsibility .
Granting discharge means taking on a degree of responsibility and we can only shoulder that responsibility if we are given information .
It may well be that this information has been made available to some other quarters in Parliament , but why should the Committee on Budgetary Control be denied access to it , when it is supposed to be dealing with this matter ?
I also think that Mr Staes made a valid point in proposing that we ask the Bureau to lodge a protest with the Council , especially because there are unsigned documents being circulated which appear to originate with the Council , with partial answers from the Council to the questions we have raised .
It is totally unacceptable , of course , to have a situation where unsigned documents which claim to answer our questions are being handed out to the press , when the Council is not attending this debate to present its views .
Therefore , I think it would certainly be a good thing if we went along with the proposal for the Bureau to register a note of protest with the Council .
Finally , I would like to thank the committee for the excellent work it has done .
Much attention has been paid ...
Ah , the Council has arrived !
Very good .
( Applause )
Perhaps we can start the discussion all over again !
I will give the President the opportunity to start the whole discussion again so we can have the questions to the Council .
So I will propose that to the President .
The Council is , of course , welcome , but they have come for the next debate .
( Protests )
However , I will make sure that the Presidency-in-Office understands the concerns of Parliament , as expressed in the last debate about the budgetary discharge .
I am sure the Minister will take that message back to Prague .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Common rules for access to the international market for coach and bus services ( recast ) - Common rules concerning the conditions to be complied with to pursue the occupation of road transport operator - Common rules for access to the international road haulage market ( recast ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the recommendation for second reading from the Committee on Transport and Tourism on the common position of the Council with a view to the adoption of the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules for access to the international market for coach and bus services ( recast ) ( 11786 / 1 / 2008 - C6-0016 / 2009 - ( Rapporteur : Mathieu Grosch ) ,
the recommendation for second reading from the Committee on Transport and Tourism on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing common rules concerning the conditions to be complied with to pursue the occupation of road transport operator and repealing Council Directive 96 / 26 / EC ( 11783 / 1 / 2008 - C6-0015 / 2009 - ( Rapporteur : Silvia-Adriana Ţicău ) , and
the recommendation for second reading from the Committee on Transport and Tourism on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules for access to the international road haulage market ( recast ) ( 11788 / 1 / 2008 - C6-0014 / 2009 - ( Rapporteur : Mathieu Grosch ) .
Mr President , I assume that this is a joint debate on the three reports forming part of the road package .
I should like to thank the Council , and also the Commission staff .
The work we have done over the last two years has produced good results .
Road and freight transport within the European area accounts for approximately 75 % of transport and employs two million people .
Certain new rules were called for in view of the market opening for 25 countries that is planned for May 2009 .
The Commission proposals were along the same lines .
As regards the report by my colleague Mrs Ţicău - whom , along with all the rapporteurs on the road package , I also wish to thank for the constructive cooperation - it is important that clear guidelines are being laid down on this for transport operators .
They must prove their reliability throughout Europe , and must also have a sound financial structure .
Transport managers should be able to demonstrate either many years ' experience or a high level of training .
Serious offences can jeopardise this reliability , which also means that Member States will be called upon to continue to perform checks and punish offences even after the entry into force of this regulation .
This is often lacking in the transport sector as a whole .
More than half of Parliament 's amendments have been accepted .
I shall not go into all of them today , but I should like to highlight one result of the unofficial trialogue that is very important to me , namely the combating of ' letterbox companies ' .
These lead to distortions of competition and weaken national undertakings .
Preventing this form of establishment means preventing social and fiscal dumping , which was also a subject in itself in the road package .
On the subject of market access for buses , coaches and lorries - buses and coaches in particular - this regulation mostly revolved around the ' 12-day rule ' , as agreement was reached very quickly on the other points .
The reintroduction of the possibility of taking a weekly rest period after 12 days does not compromise safety .
The daily driving and rest periods must be observed , and on such journeys drivers will never exceed the permitted daily driving time .
In addition , these 12-day trips help European integration and , for many people , are a very economical way of going on holiday .
The discussion on market access was one of the most intense for freight transport , and here Parliament did not obtain everything it wanted .
Yet we did reach a compromise , and it was a good one .
It seems to me that , particularly for cabotage - three operations in seven days - this compromise is a good starting point .
The ultimate aim is to regulate services in third countries and , in the medium term , the cabotage market should be opened .
We are awaiting proposals from the Commission on this , as cabotage should also serve to avoid unladen journeys .
Nor do we want to interpret the imposition of temporary restrictions on this as protectionism , however .
At this particular moment , with social and tax harmonisation in the transport sector completely failing to take effect , it was a very good idea to limit it in order to avoid unfair competition .
Yet we should not wait two years before applying this regulation .
Six months for cabotage and the 12-day rule should suffice .
I should also like a clear answer from the Commission as to whether countries that have already opened their cabotage markets pursuant to Article 306 of the Treaty will be prevented from continuing to do so under this regulation .
I hope that the Commission will make a clear statement today on the further opening of cabotage markets and on Article 306 .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would prefer to use five minutes to start with and leave one minute for my conclusions .
The draft regulation sets out the conditions in terms of location , character , financial situation and professional competence which a person must fulfil to be able to perform the occupation of a road transport operator .
The regulation which we are discussing has also established the terms under which a company can employ a transport manager , has reinforced authorisation and monitoring procedures , has provided regulations for electronic registers and the protection of electronic data , has dealt with the issue of penalties for non-compliance with the regulation and has set up a system of mutual recognition of diplomas and prior rights .
At first reading , which ended with a plenary session vote in May last year , Parliament insisted that the transport manager have a proper contractual link to the company and imposed an upper limit on the number of vehicles one manager could manage .
Amendments were also introduced to tighten the requirements for the company to have a fixed location .
The company 's good reputation may be lost as a result of its involvement in human or drugs trafficking .
Parliament has drawn up a list of serious infringements leading to exclusion from the profession in conjunction with removing provisions on minor infringements .
Insurance has been accepted as proof of financial standing and the quick ratio of assets to debts has been dropped .
A compulsory written examination in the country of residence has been retained as a requirement to practice this occupation , with the possibility of an exemption for 10 years ' continuous practical experience .
Finally , previous rights have been rescinded and the Commission has been asked to report on the likely impact of extending the regulation to commercial transport using vehicles with the appropriate design and equipment , intended to carry up to nine persons including the driver .
The Common Position has adopted in whole or in substance 70 of Parliament 's 113 amendments .
These include amendments on minor infringements , the definition of the link between companies and transport managers , the right of appeal of those subject to decisions on operating as a transport manager , mutual recognition of certificates , prior rights , the exchange of information between the competent authorities , as well as drugs and human trafficking as grounds for exclusion from the profession .
Concerning the registers , both Parliament and the Council agree on a stepwise approach .
In fact , the Commission will define the data structure for national electronic registers by the end of 2009 , but the two institutions have proposed different timetables for implementation , with the Council requesting a longer period of time .
There have also been other issues where the Council 's initial stance was different to that of Parliament , but after long , fruitful negotiations , an acceptable compromise was reached for both institutions .
As a result , Parliament has accepted a more flexible timetable for implementing and interconnecting national electronic registers ( 31 December 2012 ) .
It has been agreed that major infringements will only be incorporated in national electronic registers after 2015 , the limit on the period of validity for authorisation to perform the occupation of road transport operator will be removed , the examination will be retained in the Member State of residence , the structure of the electronic registers will include a public and a confidential section , the references in the regulation 's content to restricting licences for accessing the road transport market will be removed , where virtually all the references to the licences for accessing the road transport market are only contained in Mr Grosch 's two regulations .
I await fellow Members ' comments with interest . Thank you .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , in today 's debate I am standing in for my government colleague , the Transport Minister Petr Bendl , who has unexpectedly had to remain in Prague .
I would like to thank you for offering me the opportunity to address you ahead of tomorrow 's vote on the road transport package .
The Czech Presidency considers the finalisation of this collection of legal regulations to be highly important .
The package is important because of the need for a clear and harmonised approach on the current system of cabotage instead of different approaches in the various Member States and also access to the market for transport operators .
With the help and support of the rapporteurs the Presidency has achieved a successful result concerning this important collection of legal regulations .
I know that everyone has been working hard towards this result and that everyone has had to make certain compromises .
Everyone demonstrated a constructive approach in negotiations in order to achieve second-reading approval .
The main items arising from our discussions can be summarised as follows : a more detailed specification of cabotage rules , the possibility for drivers engaged in single occasional international passenger transport services to work for 12 consecutive days and tighter controls on transport companies .
Now the road transport sector will have a set of simplified rules and control mechanisms for cabotage as well as unified and enforceable provisions on access to transport markets .
There will also be clear rules preventing abuse and helping to ensure fair competition , greater efficiency and better controls in this sector .
The compromise on cabotage will make a significant contribution to a more transparent , more efficient and safer road haulage market .
It will contribute to further improvements in the road haulage market while at the same time creating a fairer and more transparent framework for the entire road haulage sector .
It will reduce numbers of journeys by empty vehicles on EU roads thereby contributing to lower CO2 emissions .
The compromise also assumes that Member States will use appropriate safety mechanisms for preventing violations caused by cabotage on the road haulage market .
The new rules on cabotage will come into force six months after the regulation is published in the Official Journal .
In 2013 the European Commission will also consider the option of further steps relating to opening up the road haulage market and liberalising cabotage .
I firmly believe that the new legal framework for transporting goods and passengers in the EU will make a significant contribution to rapid and sustainable economic recovery .
I would like to thank Parliament for its work on securing agreement in the negotiations over this package , and I would especially like to thank the rapporteur Silvia-Adriana Ţicău and the rapporteur Mathieu Grosch , whose hard work and determination have helped to secure a successful result .

Mr President , Mr Svoboda , honourable Members , the Commission cannot fail to be delighted with the compromise reached on the road package , since it enables us to conclude the legislative procedure at a time when the transport industry needs to have simple and effective rules and be set free from pointless red tape .
I have to say that the decision we are taking will also help to make our roads safer , because I believe that whenever we take action in the sector of transport and especially road transport , we must always keep sight of our goal to halve the number of casualties on EU roads .
The rules that Parliament is adopting do , I think , help to achieve this objective .
We are also happy because this is another signal the European institutions are sending to citizens on the eve of the elections , and because the legislative procedure can be concluded at second reading , just two years after three major and complex legislative proposals were tabled .
They have perhaps made for difficult debate , but at the end of the day institutional and common sense has prevailed , as has the political will to meet the demands of citizens and the transport sector in general .
I would like to take a quick look at the reports we are debating , in order to give some answers to the questions asked by the rapporteurs .
I will begin with access to the international market for coach or bus transport services : it is true that cabotage represents a very limited section of the transport business as a whole , but , politically , it is a highly sensitive area .
If used in a way that complements international transport , cabotage also contributes towards a better use of capacity and a reduction in unladen journeys , meaning a reduction in the number of heavy goods vehicles on the road - and you will be aware of how many road accidents involve large vehicles .
This regulation will clarify the rules on cabotage , which will be applicable - and I refer here particularly to Mr Grosch 's comment - in a uniform and non-bureaucratic fashion throughout the EU , without affecting existing cooperation between Member States under Article 306 of the Treaty .
Furthermore , cumbersome national procedures still in force will be abolished , in order to enable transport firms to make the best use of the possibilities of cabotage .
The Commission will keep a close eye on the evolution of the road transport market and will publish a report in 2013 .
If deemed appropriate in that report and if the conditions for fair competition have been better harmonised , the Commission will propose that the cabotage market be opened up further .
The Commission has made a statement to this effect , which will be sent to the Parliament Secretariat for inclusion in the reports of this debate .
This statement will also be published in the Official Journal , alongside the legislative proposal .
I now come to Mrs Ţicău 's work on common rules concerning the conditions to be complied with to pursue the occupation of road transport operator .
The Commission welcomes the introduction of a new 12-day rule .
This is a tailor-made measure that takes account of the very particular conditions of certain types of passenger transport that allow for a longer period than six days , but do not normally require a large number of driving hours , for example school trips , skiing holidays and certain excursions .
The new legislation also stipulates extremely rigorous measures so that road safety is not threatened , I can assure you .
There are currently 100 different types of Community licences in force in the EU , which often makes for difficult and lengthy checks .
Under the new legislation , there will be just one type and one standard format of Community licence used throughout the Union .
I now come to the third text in question : access to the international road haulage market .
In an increasingly open market , we need to harmonise the conditions imposed on the companies that compete in this market .
That is the purpose of the new regulation , which replaces a directive and at the same time tightens up the conditions that companies must meet .
Each firm will have to appoint a transport manager to be responsible for the efficient running of the business as a whole .
In addition , in order to avoid ' dummy companies ' , further guarantees must be supplied as regards companies ' registered offices .
Further still , a new electronic register will be compiled in order to step up information sharing between national authorities and to make controls more intelligent and efficient .
This , too , helps to ensure road safety .
Finally , transport businesses are today receiving a very clear message from legislators concerning the more serious failings that lead to licences being withdrawn , for example the repeated cases of tachograph tampering .
This is unfortunately a practice that takes place in all EU countries , but the tampering not only constitutes a breach of the rules , it also threatens the safety of those who travel on Europe 's roads , as it is clear that tired drivers are not able to respond quickly should problems arise .
That is why I said at the beginning of my speech that the laws about to be passed by this House make a serious and important contribution to our joint battle , as Commission and Parliament , to reduce drastically the number of road traffic casualties .
I would therefore like to thank you for your willingness to adopt these laws so quickly .
Let me repeat , this is a strong signal we are giving to European citizens , demonstrating once again that Parliament - and I say this not least because I served in this House for 15 years - has shown great efficiency and seriousness , for which I am grateful .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Council and the Commission for their constructive cooperation with our Parliament 's rapporteur .
As Commission Vice-President Tajani himself said , this is a very good example of how a good result can be achieved in a short space of time even on difficult dossiers .
However , I cannot hide the fact that we are not overly happy with the cabotage regime .
As the President-in-Office of the Council - and you , too , Vice-President - mentioned , it is intrinsically better , on environmental and economic grounds , to avoid unladen journeys in Europe .
Therefore , it would be better if the cabotage restriction could be lifted altogether sooner rather than later .
As an interim step , we are accepting three cabotage operations in seven days , but we are awaiting your report most eagerly , and hoping it will state that 2014 will mark the end of this restriction .
After all , it is a trifling area for the transport sector , but one that wastes money and has adverse effects on the environment .
Therefore , I hope that you will present a proper proposal in 2013 , as a cabotage restriction is absurd in a European internal market of 27 countries .
I should also like to thank the Council and the Commission for supporting us in the end on the reintroduction of the 12-day rule for buses and coaches .
This is very important for the bus and coach industry , which , in many countries , consists of small and medium-sized enterprises , as the introduction of two drivers on such trips - which are mostly for senior citizens - has caused problems for SMEs .
We are pleased that this expires in six months ' time .
It must be understood that there are many people , particularly older people , who do not like flying but would still like to travel as tourists in Europe and perhaps enjoy the sun in places such as Italy or Spain , hence the importance of our reintroducing the 12-day rule for buses and coaches and making it affordable and thus possible for senior citizens to travel .
This is a great success for us , for bus and coach companies and for passengers , and so I am much obliged to the Council and the Commission .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank both rapporteurs for their work on this difficult dossier .
It is clear that this package , and in particular the issue of lifting cabotage restrictions , has divided opinion along national lines , but I think what we have before us now is an agreement that we can support .
I had serious concerns about full cabotage delivered in one move without any levelling-up of social costs , or indeed running costs , for individual hauliers .
Such a move , I believe , would have had a detrimental effect on the road haulage business , not only in my own country but in other Member States as well .
Therefore the compromise introducing temporary cabotage is not only sensible , it is a solution that will be workable , allowing three domestic journeys after one international one .
Temporary cabotage also allows us to end the environmental nonsense of HGVs travelling hundreds of kilometres empty , without distorting domestic markets .
Finally , I am also happy to support the new enforcement measures that have been introduced via the Ţicău report .
This has to go hand in hand with further market opening , and will allow Member States to practise tough and efficient enforcement measures .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) For years , emotions have run high when it comes to the phenomenon of cabotage .
Current legislation , as has already been pointed out , is said to be too vague due to the term ' temporary ' that has been used .
For various Member States this is the perfect excuse to further protect their own market , which is what we have noticed .
To create clarity once and for all , the Commission has asserted that it will bring forward a proposal to solve all these issues .
I have high hopes for this .
Strikingly enough , though , the Commission has proposed to impose firm restraints on the scope for cabotage .
This is striking because the existing rules have all this time been considered an intermediate step towards complete freedom .
In 2009 , we were supposed to be moving towards complete freedom , according to both the Commission and the Council .
I consider the agreement that is now before us and on which we will be voting tomorrow a huge disappointment .
Instead of more freedom , hauliers are faced with more restrictions .
Of course we do need a European approach .
I too could not agree more .
The sector should not have to put up with all kinds of national outpourings a day longer .
This agreement , however , Mr President , is completely at odds with the principles and objectives of the internal market .
The arguments in favour cited , such as traffic safety , the environment and a reduction in the administrative burden , hold no water whatsoever .
There will not be an actual free market , Mr Tajani , and this whilst every restriction leads to more transport movement .
It is anything but workable , Mr Simpson .
Working on the principle that something is better than nothing is not an option for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
It does not work in this case .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
Commissioner , I would certainly like to thank both rapporteurs and all those others who have been involved in finding a compromise , but I would like to say that there are both positive and negative aspects to what we have accomplished .
For example , it is a good thing that we have managed , on passenger transport , to reduce the obstacles to transport in districts near borders , where there is an intensive flow of cross-border transport .
At the moment , however , when in difficult economic circumstances solidarity is needed , protectionist tendencies can be seen in relation to national markets , and thanks to the concept of ' temporary ' use , restrictions still serve as an excuse for many Member States to carry on protecting their domestic markets .
Unfortunately , Member States will be able to make use of a safeguard clause that gives them the opportunity to use serious difficulties observed on the national transport market as grounds for approaching the Commission and passing protective measures .
In addition , it should be noted with regret that they will also be able to do this after 2014 , which was in the European Parliament 's original position .
I would like to make a similar point about international coach transport too .
The provision stating that in the event that international transport poses a threat to the viability of the provision of similar services a Member State may suspend or cancel the transport operator 's licence is , in my view , unacceptable in the operation of the single market . Thank you .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , the common position of the Council of the European Union , like the Commission 's initial proposal for a regulation , liberalises the national passenger and freight road transport markets and grants international Community transport companies access to the internal markets of the Member States .
In fact , it hands international and domestic road transport over to the large monopolies on a plate .
The proposals contained in the European Parliament reports move in an even more reactionary direction .
They call for the immediate and full liberalisation of the markets and the removal of all barriers , restrictions and controls .
The workers now understand from bitter experience the painful consequences that the charge by monopoly business groups into road transport will have on their lives .
The liberalisation of the internal freight and passenger road transport markets steps up the exploitation of working drivers , who will be forced to drive without breaks and without any measures for their rest and safety , sweeps away their wage , labour and insurance rights , increases the risks to road safety and imposes the concentration of transport among international monopolies , which reap huge profits , with disastrous consequences for the self-employed and small businesses trading in this sector .
It results in increased freight charges , a lower standard of service and higher risks to passenger security .
That is why we voted against the common positions and the recommendations by the European Parliament .
The working class movement is against capitalist restructurings and calls for the creation of a single public-sector transport market based on the criterion of satisfying modern grassroots requirements .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Had I predicted around 1980 that the end for the cabotage restrictions would still not be in sight by 2009 , there is no doubt that my audience would have had a good laugh at my expense .
After all , restrictions of cabotage are , by definition , blatant violations of the rules of the European internal market .
Now , in 2009 , we are once again faced with the prospect of going home empty-handed at second reading .
Needless to say , I will be supporting the amendments by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , but as the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is deliberately refusing to stand firm on this , it is delivering the future of the road haulage sector a fatal blow .
I am pleased to see that the 12-day rule has been retained in the proposals , but not that this has been done at the expense of ending cabotage restrictions .
If Amendments 17 and 18 are not adopted , I will be voting against the end result .
I refuse to put my name to a proposal that is detrimental to the environment , puts the haulage sector at a disadvantage and is very disrespectful of the workings of the European internal market .
( NL ) I should like to start by saying that the good news in the proposal we are now discussing is that the 12-day rule for bus transport has been abolished .
As far as cabotage is concerned , however , the proposal is downright disappointing .
After all , back at the start of the 1990s , and even in the 1980s , it was agreed that this restriction of the free transport of goods would be temporary in nature .
That is why we , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , but also Members of other groups , had submitted proposals at first reading to lift the restrictions by 2014 .
In recent months , though , it has become apparent that the Member States have been thwarting this proposal , despite the efforts Mr Grosch has made as a rapporteur to have a date on the table after all .
The thwarting has been fierce , which is very bad news .
Protectionism in times of crisis is the worst news for Europe , for , as Mr Tajani rightly pointed out , it is a waste of money and bad for the environment .
That is why the Dutch Christian Democrats ( CDA ) will be voting against this proposal , even though we are aware that it is the Member States that are blocking this measure and there is nothing we can do about it , unfortunately .
The content of this proposal is both wrong and unenforceable .
The legislation is therefore not just bad in times of crisis , it is also symbolic .
I should therefore like to encourage the Commissioner not to leave matters at that , and to take the initiative once more , the right of initiative he has in the next few years to abolish this restriction of cabotage yet .
He will be supported by the Christian Democrats in so doing .

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I should like to pay tribute to the sense of compromise shown by our two rapporteurs , Mr Grosch and Mrs Ţicău , since this is a difficult subject in the sense that , yes , we do want the single market , but the public and company directors do not understand that having the single market at times means that some of them will have to fail , that the economy will have to go into recession and that jobs will have to go .
In the public 's eyes , it is only worth having the single market if it puts them in a win-win situation .
However , we know only too well today that , on issues such as cabotage , social conditions in the various countries are such that , were it to be systematised , we could , as things stand , see a number of workers from countries with high levels of pay ejected , ousted from the market by countries with low levels of pay .
I therefore believe that the position adopted is ultimately the right one .
Cabotage should be liberalised , but it is still too soon to do so suddenly and indiscriminately .
Thus , having the notion of consecutive cabotage , with an adjustment that refers us to a rendez-vous clause for a report by the Commission on the social repercussions , and , above all , not having an automatic and indiscriminate date for liberalisation , suits us very well .
That is why we shall vote in favour of this report , while calling on the Commission to be attentive and while expressing the wish for liberalisation ultimately to take place , but not to give rise to unfair competition or social dumping , which do so much damage to Europe 's reputation and which , in a country such as mine and no doubt in that of Mrs Wortmann-Kool , prompted the sudden rejection of the European Constitutional Treaty by citizens fearing the loss of their social position .
Thus , I am grateful to the two rapporteurs .

( NL ) I should like to thank Mr Grosch and Mrs Ţicău for the work they have done , and I think that Mrs Ţicău is right to be strict about access to the market in her report .
If you run a transport company , you have to observe a number of rules and , as Mr Grosch has already stated , PO box companies have to go , as they are the cause of a lot of the abuse that goes on .
That is Mrs Ţicău 's report , then .
So why can we not give the companies to which strict rules apply a European market to work on ?
Moving on to Mr Grosch 's report , I would have liked to have seen a clarification , not a restriction .
As such , the majority of our group cannot endorse the compromise Mr Grosch has struck .
We are actually taking a step backwards , in that we are once again restricting the scope of hauliers within the European market .
There is no prospect of an opening up in 2014 , as per Parliament 's request .
The Council disagrees , but I think this is one concession too many .
We are , in actual fact , arranging empty journeys for lorries - something which , in this day and age , simply should not be done .
I doubt whether those Member States that have now opened up their cabotage markets to each other are still able to do so under this regulation , should they wish to do this on a bilateral basis .
I also wonder how Member States that claim that monitoring is difficult will now manage , because it is not that much easier .
It is the same in all the countries , but it is difficult to monitor and I should like to see if the police authorities are up to this .
If the cost of wages and social dumping are the reason , why do I not get to see documents in which the French authorities reprimand French customers for using too many Belgian lorry drivers ?
They are more expensive than the French .
Why do I then hear stories of Belgian lorry drivers who , for relatively minor offences , are kept under arrest in the United Kingdom ?
For there , too , drivers are cheaper than in Belgium .
So , if social abuse is supposed to be a reason , it is certainly not the case here .
The upshot , in my view , is that we will be taking a step backwards in relation to the internal market .
Tomorrow , we will be approving intelligent transport systems , which means that we are saying that communications technology and information technology lead to more effective freight transport .
We then say , though , that we will be restricting this for political reasons .
This is very unfortunate and I will therefore oppose the agreement which Parliament will , unfortunately , be approving by a majority .
Mr President , another package of reports to keep EU committees busy , more pollution into a sea of unnecessary regulations .
Winston Churchill said if you have 10 000 regulations you destroy all respect for the law .
English respect is destroyed .
A BBC poll shows 55 % want to leave the EU and 84 % want the UK to keep its powers .
President Pöttering confirmed the EU makes 75 % of the law .
In 35 years , that is more law than England has made since King Richard III in 1485 .
So , here we are , making legislation to correct legislation .
Where will it all end ?
The UK will leave the EU , be good neighbours and watch you in your sea of regulations from across the English Channel , watching the EU die a death by a thousand self-inflicted truck directives .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the road transport package comprises three mutually complementary issues that have an important impact on the freight and passenger transport markets .
It will benefit carriers , drivers and users , particularly in the current economic climate .
At the same time , it will improve safety on our roads , increase transport efficiency and benefit environmental sustainability .
I welcome the choice of the form of a regulation to achieve our ambitious aims .
Bans on cabotage operations result in unladen journeys , which we cannot and do not want to afford , either financially or from an energy or environmental point of view .
On the other hand , unrestricted opening of the freight transport market would lead to distortions as a result of unfair competition - which is why this is being tackled gradually .
Cabotage is permitted provided that it does not become a permanent or continuous activity in a Member State in which the transport operator is not resident .
Unfortunately , this initial step does not yet represent the full opening of domestic road transport markets , but it does leave this possibility open .
Unladen journeys are already being reduced and the environment protected .
With regard to access to the cross-border passenger transport market , the main objective is bureaucracy reduction , in the interests of simple , fast procedures for the authorisation of cross-border regular services .
Documents are to be harmonised and checks simplified .
I very much welcome the introduction of the revised 12-day rule for organised cross-border coach journeys .
This will benefit holidaymakers and bus and coach companies alike , without compromising safety .
It is citizen-focused politics .
In future , authorisation to pursue the occupation of road transport operator will be subject to specific , transparent conditions .
This will increase the status of the profession , ensure the recognition of professional qualifications and help combat dumping practices .
The increase in safety and reliability will be palpable .

( NL ) First of all , I should , of course , like to thank the rapporteurs , Mr Grosch and Mrs Ţicău , for the work they have done and for the fact that they eventually managed to thrash out a compromise on the package , one that should not last for more than a few years at the most , as it is merely a transitional measure , in my view .
With regard to road transport , there are two important points I should like to make .
The first one is , indeed , access to the profession .
This has , in my view , been structured in such a way as to ensure that guarantees are in place from those who want to be active in the sector .
Cabotage is clearly subject to some controversy .
This is a good transitional measure that was necessary in order to define more clearly what is possible .
In the past , it was stated in rather vague terms that cabotage is possible on a temporary basis .
This has now been clarified as three times over a seven-day period .
It is indeed logical that everything should be thrown open , but the time is not yet right , in my view .
The compromise that is now before us , namely that we review the social situation in the European Union in a few years ' time and take further measures as necessary strikes me as a very reasonable proposal .
This opening up of the market should go hand in hand with a levelling of the social bar .
Meanwhile , it should be possible for a number of countries , or groups of countries , such as the Benelux countries , for example , to agree with each other that things stay the same so that open cabotage remains possible .
As long as salary and working conditions are more or less the same , I personally do not have any problem with this , but this is clearly not the case yet across the board , and that is why this intermediate step is necessary .
Mr President , when we leave this place this evening , most of us will take a black car .
These are quality cars and quality drivers , and we know that those drivers are very professional .
It is a known quality .
They meet the criteria .
Although I partly agree with the English gentleman a while ago when he complained about too much legislation - sometimes it is true that we do produce too much legislation - I still regret that EU access to professional rules was not extended to taxis , because we all use taxis in the various Member States and their quality differs a great deal .
When you take a taxi , reliability is very important , as is quality : knowing what to expect .
It is also a question of safety .
You are very often alone in the car in strange surroundings .
The taxi is also , for many of us , the first contact we have in a new country , so it would make sense for the drivers to meet certain European criteria .
It also means that , if they were professional , well educated and knew where they were going , we would not have to be afraid of overcharging .
There are countries like Germany , Sweden , Slovenia and Finland where the national rules are very stringent on this issue and the taxi profession works well .
London taxis are also known for their quality .
We should share these best practices .
But , in the mean time , while we are waiting for this legislation on criteria for the taxi profession , maybe we should legislate for us to give good tips to those drivers who take us home in the evenings .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for the various contributions put forward during this debate .
I would like to assure you that the Council is fully determined to strengthen and complete the single market .
The Presidency therefore believes that , precisely for this reason , an adjustment is required in existing Community legal regulations .
The Presidency also fully shares the aim of boosting the competitiveness of the road haulage sector in the EU by rationalising and simplifying the existing legal framework and thereby helping to curtail market violations .
However , opening up domestic transport markets fully would expose our transport operators to unfair competition and would impair the functioning of the market because there are still significant fiscal and social differences between the Member States .
This must be avoided , particularly in a time of economic crisis when the economy as a whole requires a careful and considered assessment of the best methods for stimulation and recovery .
It is clear that by 2013 at the latest the Commission will assess the situation on the market again with a view to further liberalisation .
This compromise version represents a fair and balanced way to combine the various interests .
Our common aim is to make road transport more efficient and sustainable .
These legal regulations will make a significant contribution towards reducing breaches of economic competition rules and improving compliance with legal regulations in the social area as well as road transport safety regulations on the part of road transport operators .
It will also bring about a significant reduction in the administrative burden both for road transport operators and for supervisory bodies .
It should also provide the sector with a legal and administrative framework aimed at deriving further benefits from the common market .
I firmly believe that this important collection of legal regulations will support and facilitate road transport and will help stimulate economic recovery .
I would like to thank you once more for the excellent cooperation which has made it possible for us to reach a joint compromise on achieving these objectives .
Mr President , honourable Members , I believe that what Parliament is about to adopt is a good compromise , reconciling the Council 's demands , the demands of the majority of MEPs and the European Commission 's proposals .
Obviously , when a compromise is needed , each must take a step back so that others can do the same , and I therefore think that Mr El Khadraoui 's words were wise : we have done the best we could under the circumstances .
As I said in my earlier speech , as far as cabotage is concerned , the Commission intends to assess the situation and see if it might be possible to reach an agreement - it will depend on how things stand - it may be that we can open the sector further and so take the direction many Members have called for , but we must of course gauge the situation at the time .
To repeat , I believe that this is a good compromise , and I would like to address Mr Sterckx , who has the courtesy and good will not just to criticise , but then also to listen to the reply , unlike many Members , who have made criticisms and then are unfortunately unable to listen to the Commission 's comments in response to what they have said .
I would like to reassure Mr Sterckx , who is rightly concerned about the existence of prior agreements concerning his country of origin and the other Benelux countries .
It is my belief , however , that this legislation , as it is to be adopted , will not - as I said earlier - have any negative repercussions for existing agreements .
They will remain in force , because the new legislation will broaden the situation but will not affect , and therefore not prejudice , bilateral or trilateral agreements that already exist .
Thus I believe I can reassure Mr Sterckx that as I see it , which I believe is the correct and effective interpretation , there will be no negative repercussions for the agreements that chiefly - I repeat - concern Benelux .

I also wanted to reassure Mr Blokland and Mrs Wortmann-Kool about the concerns they voiced : we do not intend to stop here , we are looking - I repeat - to see how the situation develops , in 2013 we will prepare a report to assess the state of the art , how things have evolved , and if it is possible , if we deem it necessary , we will again propose to Parliament and the Council a possible extension of the situation and further liberalisation of the cabotage system .
We are very aware though , that many EU countries hold a different view , and so in order to obtain approval from the Council it has been necessary to take a step back on other matters .
Nonetheless , I would say again that I think it is a very good thing that we have reached an agreement relatively quickly , an agreement that - I would also reassure Mr Jarzembowski - could always be improved ; every law can be improved , but too often the best is the enemy of the good .

I believe we are doing the right thing and I do not think it necessary to leave the European Union when we talk about these subjects , as Mr Nattrass suggests , because I think that good rules are useful to the European Union .
Even an authoritative British newspaper , the Financial Times , has speculated that Great Britain will re-think the need for stricter rules ; certainly , during the crisis Europe has withstood the economic and financial crisis better than other regions , precisely because it has based its economic system on clear rules .
I believe , perhaps because I was born in Rome , that the history of Roman law and the Napoleonic Code has demonstrated the importance of having rules that guarantee society 's development .
I do not know which side of Hadrian 's Wall Mr Nattrass was born on , but judging by his speech I would say he was born on the far side of the wall , and his ancestors therefore had no way of knowing Roman law .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to thank you again for your cooperation , and the Council for its work , and express my thanks once more in this House to the Commission staff of the Directorate General that I have the honour to lead , because without their valuable contribution it would not have been possible to reach a compromise that I believe to be positive for all EU citizens .
Mr Sterckx , do you wish to speak on a point of order ?
( NL ) Mr President , I just wanted to let the Commissioner know that Mrs HennisPlasschaert is no longer here , as she had to attend another meeting .
I am the listening ear on behalf of everyone in our group who is involved in this subject .
I simply wanted to inform you of the fact that she did not simply disappear .
Thank you , Mr Sterckx .
I believe that was not a point of order , but a matter of courtesy .
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking the Commission for its very clear answers .
I would emphasise that the restriction on cabotage is a transitional arrangement , that the study is being carried out and that , depending on the result , market opening will also be in prospect .
Another very important aspect is that Article 306 applies here - including , quite clearly , to the Benelux countries , Mr Sterckx , which means that your request is superfluous and we no longer need to support it .
The other thing I want to say here concerns cabotage itself .
Following the remarks I have heard here , I think that this compromise is actually even better than I had thought , for the simple reason - and this I address particularly to my fellow Members from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and my fellow Member from the Dutch Christian Democratic Appeal ( CDA ) - that creating a transitional arrangement does not mean that we wish to throttle the internal market - if I may use that expression - or businesses .
If we bear in mind today that certain businesses use state-of-the-art vehicles but pay their drivers EUR 400 per month , whilst other businesses pay EUR 1 500 a month , it strikes me as more than reasonable to say that the social bar needs to be raised somewhat .
If there is money available to meet vehicle requirements , there is also money to meet wage requirements .
This bar must be raised , and only then can the market be opened .
In my view , it is a faulty understanding of an open market to say we should open it and see where we go from there .
My last comment is that the funny thing is always that those very countries - for example the United Kingdom - who block any kind of harmonisation , particularly in the area of taxation , are today saying that there is a lack of harmonisation and so we should just let the market evolve .
Some say they want to see restrictions , whilst others say we have far too many restrictions .
If we want to convince the European public , we cannot say that the market should be opened and everything else will sort itself out .
Instead , environmental , social and tax legislation must be sorted out in this House together with the Council and the Commission .
Then we shall be credible .
Thank you very much , Mr Grosch , for a speech that has already received the support evidenced by the applause of your fellow Members .

Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Grosch , the shadow rapporteur , with whom I worked , along with the technical staff from the Committee on Transport and Tourism and the European Socialists Group , as well as my colleagues in the Commission and the Commission 's staff , not to mention yourself , Commissioner , and the Presidency of the European Council which I have enjoyed very close cooperation with .
I would like to remind you that in June 2007 the European Commission proposed amending the regulation on access to the road transport business .
The proposals for the amendment have come about from the experience gained following the application of European Commission Directive 96 / 26 .
This has resulted in some of the legislative provisions being reworded with the aim of ensuring more consistent application , by using a legal act in the form of a regulation .
Here we are now roughly two years later , having a final vote on this document which has a direct impact on approximately 800 000 European enterprises and around 4.5 million jobs .

Our common objectives are as follows : to improve road safety , reduce bureaucracy , simplify procedures and provide predictability and certainty for road transport operators .
I hope that this compromise which we have reached will develop the road transport market .
I thank fellow Members once again for their cooperation .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Rights of passengers when travelling by sea and inland waterway - Rights of passengers in bus and coach transport ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
the report by Mr Teychenné , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the rights of passengers when travelling by sea and inland waterway and amending Regulation ( EC ) No 2006 / 2004 on cooperation between national authorities responsible for the enforcement of consumer protection laws - C6-0476 / 2008 - , and
the report by Mr Albertini , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport and amending Regulation ( EC ) No 2006 / 2004 on cooperation between national authorities responsible for the enforcement of consumer protection laws - C6-0469 / 2008 - .

Mr President , Mr Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , the two principles that have guided my work since the start of this process have been ensuring that all modes of transport are on a more equal footing with regard to passengers ' rights - which is an objective that the Commission and the European Parliament have set themselves - and ensuring that these rights are clearly enshrined in this text .
In the latter instance , special attention was paid to people with restricted mobility , since the maritime transport sector was in fact lagging behind somewhat where these people were concerned .
The general spirit of the text is that people should be able to travel in Europe without being subjected to the whims of the companies concerned , and should be able to demand a minimum level of service and a minimum level of information and , lastly , that persons with restricted mobility should be able to benefit from the same quality of rights as other European citizens without their being penalised twice over .
The content of the version adopted in committee on 31 March would appear to be acceptable to everyone .
This is , firstly , because the rights of persons with restricted mobility are being increased .
Should this text be adopted , it will no longer be possible to refuse persons transport on the grounds of their disability , except , of course , for reasons linked to boarding conditions , to respect for their dignity and to the technical elements of the vessel .
Furthermore , assistance must also be provided for persons with restricted mobility , and this , from the time of booking ; today , thanks to the Internet , there is a need for return journeys and official information .
This has therefore been dealt with in the text .
Lastly , information on passengers ' rights must be standardised and provided in accessible formats , as happens today in the rail and the aviation sectors .
When it came to the rights of all passengers , we felt it was important for compensation in case of problems also to be harmonised at a higher level , on the basis of what is being done in the aviation sector .
As a result , passengers subject to delays and cancellations will be able to receive as much as a full refund , with a scale of refunds calculated according to the problems encountered .
Information should be clear and accessible , which is often a problem in the transport sector .
We see it all the time : people not having enough information , not knowing why the boat - in this case , but it could just as well be the train or plane - is not departing , or why there are delays , and we wanted to improve these methods of information provision .
Lastly , complaints management must be better organised .
Indeed , making a complaint when problems arise is a complicated business , and this text is designed to simplify the procedure , both at Member State level and for individual citizens .
The role of the national bodies that will manage complaints has also been addressed , and it has been defined better .
Finally , urban and suburban transport services - I refer in this regard to Mr Albertini 's beloved vaporettos in Italy , in Venice - shall be excluded from this text , since they do not fall within the scope of major transport services .
Moving on now to cruises , and their place in this text : I would remind you that cruises are an extremely important type of holiday today , and that their target group includes both elderly people and disabled people .
This is why cruises are , of course , integrated into this text , not only with reference to the Package Travel Directive on which the text depends and which is a 1991 directive , but also with an assurance that consumers will receive the same level of treatment .
The definition of force majeure - which represents grounds for a possible refusal of transport - is put forward , and , on this issue , we have worked on a consensus amendment , which we have produced jointly .
I would however remind you that in the aviation sector , today , the Court of Justice has often been obliged to take decisions due to cases of force majeure not being defined well enough .
Thus in this text we have tried to address problems linked to maritime transport .
I am referring to tides , winds and storms , which are also par for the course with maritime transport and which had to be considered .
To conclude , the responsibility of ports to provide assistance has also been the subject of debate .
This is a text on passengers ' rights ; it is not a text ...
( The President asked the speaker to conclude )
... and so , with arbitration between the ports and the carriers having been carried out , this is the sum of the text .
I know that Mr Jarzembowski is going to table his amendments , so I shall reply in the two minutes that I have left .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with the approval of the legislation on air and rail transport , Mr Teychenné 's report on transport by sea and inland waterways , and this proposal on the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport , the European Union is completing the legislative framework for all modes of transport .
In drafting this regulation we found ourselves facing the need to strike a balance between two approaches : the first considers the ' level planning field ' for all modes of transport , whereby different modes of transport can compete under the same conditions and with equal opportunities , while at the same time passengers enjoy a high level of protection regardless of the means of transport they have chosen .
The second approach reflects the different characteristics of each mode of transport and considers their particular features , for example , in the case of bus or coach transport we would look at the management of liability for delays , and in the case of road transport we would think about accidents , congestion and so forth , which would not apply to rail transport since it uses a dedicated route .
I would also like to talk about two contrasting points which we have tried , I think successfully , to balance .
The real purpose of this regulation is to strengthen passenger rights , but in road transport the industry is largely made up of small and medium-sized enterprises , which will need time and resources to adapt to the new requirements and , like so many other industrial sectors , are experiencing difficulties due to the economic crisis .
We now come to the amendments before Parliament , and I would like to thank my fellow Members for the important contributions they have made to the text of the regulation and for their excellent cooperation .
The bulk of the work for this first parliamentary reading has already been done by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , leaving the House to deal only with clarification concerning the legal language .
On behalf of my group I have tabled just three additional amendments for tomorrow 's vote .
Let me describe them briefly for you : Amendment 73 is a simple linguistic clarification , and Amendment 82 sets a ceiling for the strict liability set out in Article 6 ( 3 ) of the proposed regulation .
As regards the scope of the text of the amendment passed by the transport committee , all the political groups have agreed on the inclusion of regional transport .
As for urban and suburban transport , two key texts will be put to the vote tomorrow .
As rapporteur I endorse Amendment 80 on the exclusion tout court of local transport , tabled by my group , but I have also indicated my support for Amendment 81 , which gives Member States the power to exempt local transport , provided that they guarantee passengers a similar level of rights to that set out in the regulation .
I believe we have drafted a text that puts us in a good position from which to begin future tripartite discussions with the Council and Commission .
I therefore wish the Czech Presidency and Sweden , the next country to hold the presidency of the European Council , success in their work on passenger rights and , of course , I hope to be able to contribute to the subsequent phases of the adoption of this regulation during the next parliamentary term .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , you will vote tomorrow on draft amendments to the two proposals from the Commission on protecting the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport and also passengers travelling by sea and inland waterway .
These are important legal regulations which are of great interest both to consumers and to the transport sector .
The EU recently adopted regulations of the same type for air and rail transport .
The recently submitted Commission proposals will complete this legal framework .
In practical terms this means greater protection for all travellers , especially disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility , regardless of the means of transport .
Moreover , it will create equal conditions for all areas of transport .
The Czech Presidency of course welcomes these proposals and attaches great importance to them .
I believe we all share the objective adopted by the EU in recent years of reinforcing passenger rights .
In connection with the draft amendments which you voted on in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I would like to mention two aspects in particular .
The first is that you attach great importance to the rights of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility .
We share your views in this area of course , which is highly important if we want to achieve second-reading approval over these two important legal regulations .
The second is that you have aimed for a precise harmonisation of the draft regulations with versions of existing regulations applying to the rights of persons travelling by different forms of transport , and you have proceeded very carefully in adapting the proposals to the specific requirements of bus and coach transport or transport by sea and inland waterway , without abandoning the aim of reinforcing passenger rights .
We fully agree over the need to adapt legal regulations to the specific characteristics of the various forms of transport .
As we all know , it is not possible to apply exactly the same approach to different kinds of transport .
Rail and air transport have their own characteristics and the same applies to bus and coach transport and transport by sea and inland waterway .
There are huge differences even within these individual branches .
Large and small companies operate and journeys can take several days or just a few minutes .
It is therefore necessary to find a solution acceptable to everyone that will ensure the protection of consumers without imposing an unnecessary administrative burden on the sector , and particularly the smaller firms on the market .
This issue is of particular importance in the current economic situation of course .
We therefore appreciate your work on these issues .
It provides an excellent starting point .
At the same time it is also for the most part in line with our opinion on the proposals .
I firmly believe that we will be able to cooperate constructively on legal arrangements which will protect the interests of all concerned and will at the same time take account of the EU objective of improving the process of lawmaking .
In conclusion , I would like particularly to thank the rapporteurs Mr Albertini and Mr Teychenné for their excellent work and carefully drafted report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it always gives me pleasure to recall my many years in this House as an MEP , and this enables me to appreciate all the more the work that the European Parliament has done on this debate .

That is why I would like to thank Mr Teychenné and Mr Albertini for the important contribution they are making to protect the rights of citizens as passengers in all transport sectors , because the need to intervene in the area of bus and coach transport and maritime transport represents an attempt to fill a gap that , as you have all pointed out , exists in European law .
We have many passengers with disabilities and many whose mobility is reduced for other reasons , and so we also have a duty to guarantee free movement , because first and foremost this is a question of freedom within the European Union .
Of course , good law-making is not easy , but today we are taking a big step forward .
I was also pleased to hear what Mr Svoboda had to say .
There are certainly still some doubts about the texts that the Commission and Parliament agree on adopting , but I also noted a general political openness on the part of the Council , which gives me hope for the future .
I am sure that , as was the case for road transport , we will come to a satisfactory compromise that guarantees European citizens the opportunity to travel freely and to be duly protected within the European Union .
So , I think that today we are discussing topics that affect the lives of all citizens , which is why I am persuaded that as far as the bus and coach proposal is concerned , support should be given - and the meeting of the Committee on Transport and Tourism of 30 March showed encouraging signs of this - to the Commission 's approach for the widest possible scope , covering all regular passenger transport services whether international , national , regional , urban or suburban .
This responds to the need to simplify legislation , but also to guarantee equal rights for all passengers without exceptions of principle .
However , Mr Albertini , given the specific nature of this sector , the proposal leaves Member States the option of exempting urban , suburban and regional transport covered by public service contracts if these contracts offer passengers a high level of protection comparable with that laid down by the regulation .
This seems to me to be a reasonable solution that offers the required level of flexibility while safeguarding passengers ' basic rights .
The liability of bus or coach companies vis-à-vis passengers in the event of death or injury represents another essential element of the proposal .
There are too many disparities on this within the Community , which creates serious uncertainties for passengers .
I would like to look at couple of points on this subject in more detail : firstly , this area does not deal with the issue of insurance , but is concerned exclusively with carriers ' liability towards passengers .
Secondly , the bus or coach company is not deemed solely liable for compensation for damages and its right to claim compensation from third parties is not questioned .
Thirdly , this area concerns neither imports nor the procedures set out in the 2005 directive on insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles ; and fourthly , the Commission has not in fact developed a new liability model .
What is being proposed today is a liability scheme that is inspired by other modes of transport , while taking account of the particular features of this sector .
As regards maritime transport , I believe that a single legislative instrument is needed , even if there are differences of opinion on this in both Parliament and the Council .
Allow me to point out a key issue regarding scope : compared with road , rail and air transport , there are far fewer passengers who travel by sea or inland waterways .
Among these , those who use inland waterways represent just a small minority .
In my opinion , it seems neither logical nor realistic to have separate regulations for sea passengers and those who use inland waterways , even less so when one considers that they often use the same kind of vessel .
I think that a single legislative instrument must be the answer .
On 30 March 2009 , alongside the debate on the Teychenné report in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , a public debate was held between ministers within the framework of the EU transport council .
I am pleased to have had the opportunity to observe from this debate a certain amount of dovetailing between the Commission , Member States and Parliament as regards the aim of giving European passengers a new and ambitious regulation as soon as possible .
In this context , the Commission is of course prepared to make any clarifications and improvements to the text that may be required to take account of the particular characteristics of each type of service and thereby provide the industry with the tools to apply the regulation with the necessary flexibility .
Allow me to emphasise again the need to provide the resources to implement the future regulation effectively .
To this end , it is important that the national authorities responsible for its application submit periodic reports on their activities .
Each Member State will be able to organise its own national system as it sees fit , for example by choosing whether to have one or more competent authorities .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( EL ) Mr President , the proposal for a regulation , as amended following input from the European Parliament , strengthens the rights of passengers in maritime transport in a satisfactory manner .
However , I believe that , in the next legislative initiative on this subject , a horizontal approach , a single legal instrument covering all means of transport , would be more correct , given the current need to use combined means of transport .
It would also be systematically preferable in future if separate proposals were tabled on the rights of passengers , on the one hand , and on persons with reduced mobility on the other .
The reason for this is that the individual arrangements have a different purpose and different addressees .
Finally , I should like to highlight the repeatedly blinkered approach taken by the Commission , although not by Vice-President Tajani , to issues which require broader and multilateral study , such as maritime transport .
Maritime transport on the Mediterranean Sea takes place under different conditions from transport across straits .
Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , President-in-Office of the Council , I wish to say to the previous speaker that we have the Greek islands and Greek ferry companies in view at all times : he need have no worries on that score .

I can say that my group and I are pleased that , for the first time , we are to have statutory , citizen-focused passenger rights in the event of delays and cancellations also in maritime and inland waterway transport and regional bus and coach transport .
We should like to thank the two rapporteurs , Mr Albertini and Mr Teychenné .
We enjoyed constructive cooperation in the committees , which produced good results .
There are just a few points on which I should like to expand .
I think that 25 % compensation for maritime passengers for two to three hours ' delay is perfectly appropriate , as is 50 % for delays of over three hours - but I would say to Mr Teychenné that 100 % compensation for delays in excess of this is simply excessive .
If we bear in mind that shipping services are provided not only by colossal undertakings but also , particularly in the case of ferry operators , by small and medium-sized enterprises , we must take a reasonable approach to compensation .
As we have already discussed , we must also be careful not to place responsibility with the wrong people or institutions in maritime transport .
All of us in this House are engaged in ensuring that both dossiers provide assistance for passengers with reduced mobility , in particular , but shipowners cannot deal with access difficulties at ports ; ports themselves must do this .
In other words , we must take great care .
As regards the rights of bus and coach passengers , I should like to point out that there are real differences between intercity and urban buses that must be taken into account .
Therefore , my group is of the opinion that we are right to call for reasonable passenger rights in intercity bus and coach transport , but that urban and suburban buses operate under completely different conditions .
These rules are out of place there , and this should be clearly recognised .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I want to congratulate both our rapporteurs .
A couple of years ago I was the rapporteur for access for disabled passengers to aeroplanes .
This legislation is another piece in the jigsaw to make transport as inclusive as possible or , as our colleague Mr Albertini put it , to consolidate passenger rights .
In an age when we are encouraging people to travel by public transport , it is so important that we add coaches and buses , as Mr Albertini has , to this field .
Some Members , not necessarily those here today , have looked for ways to make exemptions to exclude certain sections , but I have always taken as my starting point the desire to include as much as possible in this so we move towards making Europe more of a common market for people .
That is why Amendment 81 is so important .
The Commissioner in his remarks said we need the same rights for all passengers with no exceptions - and then he spoke about the exceptions , for example for regional transport .
I do not think we should exempt regional transport , and I have done some research .
In some of our Member States a regional coach journey can take up to six hours , which is longer than an international coach journey from , say , London to Brussels or Paris .
So I think it should be included .
I think it is right that , where local transport - as Mr Jarzembowski has referred to - is not included , there are public service contracts which mean that the companies will reach the same sort of standards .
I also think we need to persuade the construction industry to build more modern buses with the needs of disabled people more in mind .
Just as we have campaigned for aeroplanes to be more accessible to disabled people , so we need , perhaps , coaches with wider gangways or more accessible toilets , and we need the operating companies to make their coach terminals more accessible and to train their staff in disability and disability awareness issues .
This is a good report .
It is a good collection of reports , which takes us several steps forward , and I congratulate everyone who has been involved .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) I should like to thank the rapporteurs on behalf of our group .
I think we have added another few elements to the rights of passengers .
We have worked hard to get things on the right track for aviation and rail travel .
In fact , I take the view that we gathered a great deal of experience when we compiled these reports , and I am pleased that Mr Albertini has aligned the various elements , so that there is hardly any need , if any , to distinguish between the different modes of transport , but only as and when necessary .
I believe that we are now also improving the quality of services , something that we should always keep in mind .
We have learnt from our mistakes , the tightening of the definition of force majeure being a case in point .
We need to revisit this aspect in aviation , for example , and I am pleased we have done this here for shipping .

As for Mr Albertini 's report , an important question - one which Mr Evans and Mr Jarzembowski have also made reference to - is what is the scope of the regulation now ?
We , as a group , have withdrawn our support for the amendment which we originally submitted together with you , not because we feel it is an inferior amendment , but because the Socialists have found a better way of wording it , as Mr Evans described .
We are , in any event , dropping regional transport from the regulation , but we are leaving open the option to include urban and suburban transport in it , should Member States so wish .
I happen to believe that this approach better corresponds to what we are aiming for , and we will therefore support this proposal put forward by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
Mr President , passenger rights must be put at the heart of transport policy as a whole - particularly here in the European Union .
We have already managed this for rail and air transport , although there is considerable scope for improvement with regard to denied boarding .
As I keep having to say , the problems are far too great .
One group is particularly dependent on clear rules .
In the case of air transport , it has become apparent that the rules are not clear enough .
By now , people with particular needs could write volumes about all the things that have happened to them on journeys .
I myself have received some of their accounts .
It is a disaster .
Therefore , it is not only required by law but also morally imperative for the European Union to put these people on an equal footing .
In the field of bus , coach and maritime transport , for which we are now laying down rules , we may encounter problems assigning responsibilities when it comes to maritime transport and the ports - but this must be given a practice-based solution in future .
My second point is that we should include as much as possible when it comes to bus and coach transport .
If we make too many exceptions , we give operators the opportunity to circumvent the rules .
We cannot continue to put the people who have to contend with particular needs at a disadvantage by allowing these difficulties to continue .
It is our duty to take care of and ultimately also to enforce their right to mobility .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , during this part-session , two questions came up with regard to collective passenger transport .
The first question is : what should the government do , and what should we leave to the market through tendering ?
We have ultimately opted for freedom of choice with regard to urban and regional transport , at my proposal .
New rules on the transport of people by bus should not adversely affect the freedom of lower-level authorities to organise their public transport themselves .
With regard to passenger rights , there have always been two alternatives to choose from .
The focus in the first alternative is on maximum information about the continuation of the journey in other Member States , availability of cross-border transport tickets and good , long-distance connections , so that nasty surprises during the journey can be avoided .
With the other alternative , the focus is on financial compensation paid retrospectively for delays and cancellations of services .
I always champion the former alternative , but the majority in Parliament opt for the latter , especially since this is also the choice that was picked for air travel .
Greater attention to the needs of the disabled is an important reason for endorsing the proposals , even if they do leave something to be desired .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by congratulating the rapporteurs on their substantial presentation and exceptionally cohesive work on the plethora of amendments which were tabled in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
The European Union has been endeavouring , with the decisive contribution of the European Parliament , to improve the rights of passengers in all transport sectors over recent years .
As you will remember , our institutions recently approved provisions on the rights of passengers in air and rail transport .
Today a large step is being made towards strengthening equal rights for passengers on all means of transport , without exclusion and exception , as the Commissioner said .
I would remind you that , after difficult conciliation with the Council , we recently adopted a third package of seven legislative proposals on safety at sea , including compensation for passengers in the event of an accident .
I should like to point out in connection with the Teychenné report that it proposes a cohesive framework for the protection of consumers / passengers which also respects small transport companies and protects their business and competitiveness in the event of accidents due to circumstances beyond their control or in cases where maritime transport is affected by bad weather .
It is also significant that important sectors are covered , such as the rights of persons with disabilities , persons with reduced mobility , in the aim of safeguarding the principle of non-discrimination which governs all our policies .
Similarly , it clearly sets out carriers ' obligations in the event that services are delayed or cancelled , the time limits for delays and the amount payable in compensation .
At the end of this parliamentary term and before the European elections , our work on the rights of passengers is one of our most important achievements for the benefit of European citizens .
Mr President , I would like to thank both rapporteurs for their work in this important area and also the Commissioner for his support .
Passenger rights have always been a priority of the Socialist Group , and this proposal completes the set , following on from passenger rights in aviation and rail transport .
It is vital that we all remember that the users of transport are the most important stakeholders - a fact often forgotten by some transport companies .
Now , for the first time , we will have a set of basic rights for bus , coach and ferry users that will ensure proper liability for cancellation and delays , lost or damaged luggage , as well as death in the event of accidents .
Perhaps more importantly , we will have a series of fundamental rights for people with reduced mobility and special needs that will put an end to the victimisation endured by these people at the hands of transport companies over many years .
No longer will transport operators be able to exclude people with reduced mobility from their vehicles ; no longer will people with reduced mobility have fewer rights than able-bodied people ; no longer should people with reduced mobility be excluded from the public transport network .
Who has delivered this ?
Not a national or regional parliament , but the European Parliament .
It is the European Parliament that has put transport users at the top of our transport priorities .
This is the European Parliament putting people first , and that is something that , as Socialists , we can strongly support .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur and the Commissioner for the work they have accomplished .
The report provides a very balanced clarification of the rights of passengers and of all modes of transport , including in bus and coach transport , and clearly addresses all the relevant issues .
Attention has been given to people with disabilities or reduced mobility ; as Mr Albertini 's report shows , we must be able to provide services that take account of the diverse requirements of such people .
In addition , all the concerns relating to this mode of transport - refunds , compensation , passenger information , strict liability and complaints - have been covered in a clear manner .
Both I and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe have worked willingly with the rapporteur to achieve the clearest possible text , taking account of passengers ' interests on the one hand , and the requirements of the companies that manage and provide these services on the other , who need sufficient time to comply with the rules .
I therefore hope this text will be approved by tomorrow 's vote .
( DE ) Mr President , service-providing enterprises are there for the users of these services and not primarily for the service providers themselves .
In this light , it is important that we lay down the appropriate rules for the users of all means of transportation and ensure that the services they are using are also of suitable quality .
In this context - and here I am only taking up something that is mentioned time and again - it is very important that we look after the rights of persons with reduced mobility in particular .
As I see it , one issue is now almost in perpetual motion in this connection .
Let me tell you , it is not only those with a disabled persons ' identity card who are incapacitated .
Parents - adults with young children - certainly also need support from our rules on all our modes of transport .
I hope that this also gains acceptance in one form or another .
My second point is that even the best rules and safeguards are of no use if the information on them is hidden in the furthermost corner of the transport operator concerned .
The place for information on passenger rights is at the ticket counters themselves , or on board the buses , coaches , aeroplanes and similar modes of transport themselves .
My third and final point is that we had started to lay down rules on air passengers ' rights in the interests of passengers , but were too lenient .
What airlines get up to , particularly in connection with delays , announcing that the last aircraft arrived late and so the next has been delayed , is no longer acceptable .
We should have resolved the matter with high compensation payments at the time , which would have achieved an effect similar to that achieved for denied boarding .
Now , unfortunately , this effect is not being achieved .
It is not force majeure when an aircraft is cancelled because it is half-empty .
There are many tasks for the next Commission in this regard .
Vice-President , if you take on this portfolio again in the next Commission , I would urge a revision of air passengers ' rights .
This is urgently needed .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner Tajani , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Teychenné on the quality of his report .
With regard to the maritime package to be signed tomorrow , in an area in which I was rapporteur for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament on flag State requirements and also on the responsibilities of passenger carriers , I said that , in the European Union , people should come first .
In this Union , it is also essential that passengers come first .
The Teychenné report deserves my full support because it reinforces the regulatory framework not only for bus and coach passengers , but also for passengers in an area dear to me , namely sea and inland waterway passengers .
In particular , it provides for compensation of 25 % of the ticket price in the event of delays between one hour and two hours , 50 % in the event of delays equal to or exceeding two hours and 100 % if the carrier does not provide any alternative transport services or information .
I would point out that this compensation must be paid , in the event of cancellation or serious delays in journeys , within one month of the passenger 's request .
In the case of bus and coach transport , this report recognises the need for additional measures for disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility .
For all passengers , the right to a refund of the current price in the event of cancellation , overbooking or serious delay in the journey of at least two hours will now be a reality .
Mr President , I tabled an amendment on the need for this regulatory framework to be applied in the outermost regions as well .
I am sure that legislation of this quality cannot be called into question by anyone and must be appreciated by all European citizens , including in outlying regions such as the Azores , Madeira , the Canaries and the French overseas departments .
( RO ) Maritime transport is governed by a number of international conventions which must be strictly complied with .
However , it is vitally important to establish a set of minimum rules at Community level in these sensitive areas , particularly with regard to monitoring the enforcement of legislation .
For this reason , the introduction of an independent mechanism for receiving complaints and the creation of a monitoring authority provide a clear benefit for passengers in relation to transport operators .
I think that a balance must be found between the rights of passengers and the obligations of transport operators because neither one group nor the other should slow down the long-term development of the maritime and inland waterway transport sector .
We must also take into account the typical conditions in which transport operates in different maritime regions of Europe as they can have specific features which may actually restrict the possibility of establishing common rules .
In the wider context of the safety and security of maritime transport , I must mention some recent acts of piracy in the Gulf of Aden .
The resurgence of these acts is concerning , especially with European citizens becoming victims during recent weeks , including five Romanians .
I would like to use this opportunity to call on the Commission and Council to make every effort for the EU to strengthen its cooperation with the other states in the Horn of Africa in order to prevent occurrences of piracy and to make transit journeys in the region safer .
( EL ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , we are today in the very fortunate position of being able to state that , with the decision by the European Parliament , passengers ' rights are also protected in sectors which were not covered hitherto .
We are proud of the fact that leaflets are available in airports and railway stations setting out the decisions passed by the European Union in order to protect passengers ' rights .
If the same happens in the other two sectors , European citizens will understand that the European Union is truly useful in securing a better standard of living for them and in protecting their safe travel .
However , we need to remember that the protection achieved by legislation is not the same as that actually enjoyed by citizens , as we have seen from its application to date in the two sectors of air and rail travel .
Those of us who use these means of transport , we MEPs and I personally , who travel between three different borders , can say that it is not applied effectively .
That is why the Commission rightly spoke of a first step which needs to be improved , mainly in terms of the effectiveness of the contribution of the main undertakings responsible for granting rights to passengers .
We should not condemn small undertakings when they face the problem of providing transport services ; I refer here to cabotage , about which I have questioned the Commissioner on other occasions .
If they do not decide to take on the cabotage line , how could they undertake such a service when they will also have to take care of passengers ' rights ?
We therefore need to give citizens the facility to enjoy the main right of transport and then to give them the additional advantages of passenger compensation in the event of delay .
So first the service and then compensation for delayed services .
I am certain that Europe is moving towards a better future .
That is the conclusion .

( DA ) Mr President , if we were to examine how the population views disability , we would find that , nowadays , when it comes to holidays , disabled people prefer to go to the US . Legislation and rules are much better there and they receive much better treatment in the US .
Europe is not the preferred destination amongst our own people .
Our own European compatriots do not want to holiday in Europe if they are disabled .
They travel to the US .
I think that is a clear sign of how immensely important the dossier we are working on here is , as regards a number of points , including tourism .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the progress of the discussion so far means that I will not need the five minutes allotted to me , which is good news I 'm sure .
I note with pleasure that our interests coincide over the question of protecting passenger rights and the future of this sector .
We look forward to close cooperation with the European Parliament , enabling us to achieve a final resolution which will again show citizens the benefits brought by the EU in the area of passenger rights .

Mr President , Mr Svoboda , honourable Members , I believe that citizens following this debate on passenger rights and the new laws we hope to adopt in order to strengthen a system of freedom that characterises the European Union , will realise today that the Commission , Council and Parliament , and their respective staff , are not ivory towers where issues are discussed that have nothing to do with citizens , or else invade their lives in a negative way , but institutions with citizens ' interests at heart , seeking to defend their rights and , I would emphasise , to protect their fundamental freedoms : no one is free unless they can move around freely from one part of the Union to another .
That is why , when I asked for your confidence when my nomination was to be confirmed by Parliament , I stressed that one of my priorities during my term of office as Commissioner for Transport would be to protect passenger rights .
I believe that today we have together sent a positive signal and we have demonstrated through clear evidence that progress can be made and that the European institutions are close to citizens and are on their side .
As has emerged over the course of the debate , there are no differences of substance between the members of the various political groups ; everyone has emphasised , in agreement with the Commission and also the Council , a desire to truly build , as Vice-President Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou said , a Europe of citizens .
That is why I attach great importance to the key step we are taking today and will take with tomorrow 's vote ; of course , such complicated subjects as these , with complex transport systems and different regulation from one country to another , require an in-depth approach , as well as instances of compromise .
Every rule adopted is the product of compromise , of protecting different interests .
I would argue that this time , however , the general interest should prevail , that is to say the protection of citizens ' freedom and the freedom of passengers in all existing transport systems , because it would be inconsistent to protect only those who travel by air or by train , and not those who travel by boat , bus or coach .
Of course , let me repeat , differences of opinion may exist , and there are differences between the Commission and the Council and also among certain Members of this House as regards the regulation of transport by water ; there are those who would prefer separate legislation for river and sea transport .

The Commission has confirmed its position , I think the right thing to do is to have a single form of regulation , but it does not really matter , what matters today is that we grasp the good news of the strong political will of Parliament , Commission and Council to guarantee passengers rights , especially the rights of passengers with reduced mobility .
It is not simply , I was pleased to hear , a question of rights and above all freedoms for people with disabilities ; giving millions of passengers with reduced mobility the opportunity to move around freely within the European Union also means allowing these people to contribute towards the EU 's growth , since the movement of these millions of people brings welfare , develops transport companies and creates opportunities for tourism in all sorts of places .
That is why I am pleased and I would like to thank the two rapporteurs , the Council and , of course , the Commission staff , whom I always thank , since they enable me to present proposals to Parliament and the Council .
This is a particularly warm thank-you , because I believe that today the European institutions as a whole are showing that they pay close attention to the 500 million European citizens , who can sometimes be suspicious of them ; but I think that today those who have followed this debate will change their minds and have confidence in the European institutions , which seek to be ever closer to the people .

Mr President , first of all I should like to refer to the amendments tabled by Mr Jarzembowski , who was telling us just now that we need to be reasonable - I believe that the important thing about this text is that it is in fact reasonable .
Is it reasonable to want to do away with the obligation for carriers to train staff who are in contact with persons with reduced mobility ?
Is it reasonable to abolish compensation for lost equipment , especially wheelchairs for persons with reduced mobility ?
Is it reasonable - and Mr Rack , who was here just now , pointed this out , and I thank him for his speech - to avoid reimbursing passengers , a practice that happens everywhere , and especially in the United States , in particular when departures have been cancelled and when no information , or alternative transport , is provided ?
Therefore those elements in your amendments do not seem reasonable to me , and I was anxious to say so .
For the rest , I believe that there is a consensus .
It was evident from all of the debates .
I should like to thank the Commission , the Council , and all of my fellow Members who have worked on these issues in an excellent frame of mind , because we understood that there was an extremely important issue at stake for the people of Europe .
I therefore believe that , tomorrow - and here I appeal to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats : your amendments are not reasonable - we must vote in favour of this text , and we must send out a strong signal at a time when Europeans sometimes doubt Europe .
As Mr Tajani was saying , we must send a strong message to these 500 million citizens telling them that their needs as Europeans are being taken into account .
That is what I wished to say .


Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , having listened carefully to the debate and to Mr Swoboda and Mr Tajani , as well as my fellow Members , I feel I have all the more reason to extend my thanks for the help and valuable advice I have received in this House .
I do not have time to analyse and comment on the individual suggestions and facets of such a wide-ranging debate , rather , since I must sum up in the few seconds that remain of my speaking time , I will use two adjectives to encapsulate and bring together your thoughts and suggestions .
As far as can be expected with such a complex regulation , you have deemed the work carried out to be reasonable .
This regulation takes account of the aims of extending passenger rights and granting the same conditions of protection for all modes of transport , while at the same time considering the specific nature of a number of smaller carriers that have difficulty in adapting to higher requirements at a time of economic crisis , hence my first adjective is ' reasonable ' .
Then there is an idea of perfectibility , or room for improvement , which has been alluded to by Members who , although sympathetic to the circumstances to which we have adapted , want the area of rights to be further expanded , to cover urban transport and to protect passengers with reduced mobility .
So then , we are on a journey towards perfection ; human affairs are yet to be perfected , and this regulation , which is ' reasonable ' and , I think , well drafted , is also ' perfectible ' .
The rapporteur does not deny Member States the option of enlarging or extending the scheme to include urban transport , and it is already mandatory for regional transport .
The level of coverage has already been outlined , and often approximates that of transnational or national journeys ; and the same goes , of course , for the technologies used and the application of the scheme to people with disabilities .
To conclude , I would like to thank you all again , and I hope that today 's work is not the end of the story , but that we may be able to achieve even greater goals .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
In connection with the report on the rights of passengers when travelling I would like to point out something which does not apply to protecting the interests of consumers but rather to a violation of the principle of free movement of persons within the Schengen zone .
It specifically concerns the movement of persons across the Czech-German border .
Czech citizens are complaining ever more frequently - both to me personally and to regional and local authority representatives in the Czech-German border region - about harassment by the German police when they cross the Czech-German border , either in groups or in private vehicles .
Citizens complain that they are being stopped for no reason by plainclothes policemen , checked and even interrogated about the aim and purpose of their trip to Germany .
The behaviour of the German police is nothing less than harassment and it is in direct conflict with the principle of free movement of persons within the EU .
I would like to emphasise that such cases are becoming more frequent and I call urgently on the EU authorities to put right this unacceptable state of affairs .
( The sitting was suspended at 6.15 p.m. pending Question Time and resumed at 6.30 p.m. )

Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0227 / 2009 ) .
The following questions have been submitted to the Commission .
Part One
Subject : E-Commerce
What further measures is the Commission now taking to ensure the full abolition of barriers imposed on customers by virtue of their country of residence or registration of payment card which prevent them accessing the best prices and range of goods and services , such as music downloads , rail and airline tickets , DVDs and computer games , particularly those sold online , sold anywhere in the EU ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is fully aware of the difficulties faced by consumers who are denied access to web sites or are discriminated against on a geographical basis when seeking to make on-line purchases .
Let me assure you that combating geographical market segmentation , be it the result of state measures or the behaviour of private parties , is a high priority for our policy in the internal market .
Practices such as those mentioned by the honourable Member in her question deprive European citizens of the rights and opportunities offered to them by the single market .
They are completely at odds with the freedom to receive services across borders , which is a fundamental counterpart of the freedom to provide services enshrined in the EEC Treaty .
With the Services Directive we now have a powerful tool to substantially ease problems faced by consumers who face discrimination when they purchase goods and services across borders , including over the Internet .
For the first time in the internal market legislation , the Services Directive explicitly requires Member States to put a stop to discriminatory practices carried out by businesses on the basis of the nationality or the place of residence of consumers .
As you know , the Services Directive has to be implemented by the end of December this year , and , once the non-discrimination clause laid down in Article 20 has been reflected in national legislation , practices such as those mentioned by the honourable Member in her question will be unlawful .
The only exception to this rule will be those cases where businesses can demonstrate that the different treatment applied to different categories of consumers is directly justified by objective reasons and therefore does not constitute discrimination .
The Commission is currently working with Member States to make sure that Article 20 of the Services Directive is implemented on time and is effectively enforced by national authorities and the courts .
In addition , the Commission published a report focusing on the cross-border aspects of e-commerce on 5 March .
This staff working document on cross-border e-commerce is an initiative by my colleague , Commissioner Meglena Kuneva .
The report shows that , overall , e-commerce is developing rather well in the European Union , while cross-border e-commerce lags behind .
There exists a strong potential for cross-border trade in on-line commerce .
However , this potential cross-border trade is failing to materialise in the face of practical and regulatory obstacles that effect both consumers and businesses .
The result is a fragmented on-line internal market .
This has been identified and is being addressed by the market monitoring exercise the Commission has launched to examine the number of supply chains for particular retail markets .
This work should allow the Commission to deepen its analysis of the retail sector in order to identify practices that distort relationships between suppliers and retailers and between retailers and consumers and assess the necessity of further reforms of the relevant national or EU regulations .
This exercise covers five specific sectors , including recreational goods such as music and books sold on-line and off-line , and will lead to a Commission communication foreseen for autumn 2009 .
The effective and forceful implementation of Article 20 of the Services Directive , together with the examination of further remaining issues in the context of the market monitoring exercise , should provide us with a comprehensive response to the problems or barriers emerging in the e-commerce context to the detriment of recipients of services in general and consumers in particular .
This is an important Citizens ' Europe issue , especially in the recession .
Everyone wants and deserves the best deal going , whether they live in Lisbon or London .
Is it not a disgrace that , 50 years after we established the common market , it is still possible , as reported by the British Consumers ' Association 's magazine Which ? , for someone to go on the web site of Renfe , the Spanish rail operator , and to pay 60 % more on the English-language version than on the Spanish-language version ?
Surely that is not all to do with regulatory differences .
Will the Commission also crack down on sheer exploitation ?
Member of the Commission . - I would agree with Baroness Ludford that , 50 years after the foundation of the EC and knowing what the founding principles of the whole operation are , this discrimination can take place .
But the main reason for putting forward the Services Directive was in recognition that we had not successfully achieved in the area of services what we had achieved in the area of goods .
Therefore , when the Services Directive has to be implemented by the end of this year , Article 20 specifies that any different treatment , such as the one outlined by Baroness Ludford , has to be directly justified by objective reasons .
Without going into the specifics of the particular case she mentioned , because that is a transport matter , which would be better for my colleague , Mr Tajani , the only reason discrimination could possibly be justified by objective reasons is that there would clearly be some additional costs .
That would be an objective way of looking at it .
For example , if you ordered something on-line to be delivered to you in Dublin and brought from Strasbourg , clearly there would be some additional postage and packaging costs etc .
That could be an objective reason for saying that the price differential is such and such .
But you cannot discriminate under any other basis .
So hopefully , when the Services Directive is implemented , there will be fewer of these particular cases .
At the moment , in the transport area , you must remember that transport is exempt from the Services Directive .
But my colleague Mr Tajani and his people are considering some particular initiatives in that particular sphere also .
Subject : EU Alzheimer 's strategy
In February the UK announced its National Dementia Strategy , which will provide investment in a network of memory clinics , improve support for people affected by the condition and launch major public awareness campaigns .
Furthermore , in Strasbourg on 5 February Parliament adopted Written Declaration 0080 / 2008 - http : / / www.europarl.europa.eu / sides / getDoc.do ? type = TA & reference = P6-TA-2009-0081 & language = SL " encouraging the recognition of Alzheimer 's as a European public health priority .
What initiatives is the Commission planning in this area , in terms of research , prevention and public awareness raising ?
Will the Commission consider creating a European Alzheimer 's strategy similar to that in the UK , particularly taking into account recommendations from the European Collaboration on Dementia Project which have already been presented to the Commission ?
Member of the Commission . - Alzheimer 's disease has been identified as a priority initiative in the Commission 's legislative and work programme for 2009 following the Council conclusions on Alzheimer 's adopted under the French Presidency , and the Commission is planning a communication on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias , due for adoption later this year .
Furthermore , to stimulate coordinated efficient research in this field , it is foreseen that the communication will be adopted alongside the proposal for a Council recommendation on joint programming for research on neurodegenerative diseases , including Alzheimer 's disease .
This follows on from the communication on joint programming in research that was adopted on 15 July 2008 .
In the field of Alzheimer 's disease there is a need for accurate data , which can only be collected at EU level , to allow for planning and adaptation of health services at Member State level .
Thus far the European Collaboration on Dementia Project has provided accurate , qualitative and quantitative data and analysis of the burden of Alzheimer 's disease in the European Union , which has been published by Alzheimer Europe in the Dementia in Europe Yearbook .
However , the project finished at the end of 2008 and there is now a need to evaluate the options for taking this work forward .
The open method of coordination ( OMC ) in the social field provides a framework for EU Member States to reform their social protection systems on the basis of policy exchanges and mutual learning .
Within the OMC , Member States identify common challenges and agree common objectives for universal access , quality and sustainability in health care and long-term care .
In national strategic reports Member States set out how they will develop their policies to meet the common objectives .
The EU supports Member States ' actions to address common challenges and objectives through the OMC by facilitating dialogue about experiences and the exchange of good practices regarding health care and long-term care .
It also supports the development of innovative good practice through its funding programmes .
The exchange can take place in peer reviews with a limited number of participants focusing on a specific theme , or in conferences with wider discussions .
Following indications in the 2008 national strategic reports and the synthesis in the 2009 joint report , a specific peer review will be held in France next month on ' Alzheimer 's disease and other related diseases : How to cope with crisis situations or caring in the patient 's home ' .
This will be followed by a conference in September under the Swedish Presidency on ' Healthy and dignified ageing ' , including a workshop on coordination of care for persons suffering from Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias .
In addition , the Commission services are considering a possible additional conference to be held in mid-2010 , the specific content of which will depend on the results of the 2009 events and other sources .
Furthermore , the Commission 's disability action plan 2003-2010 contains actions which are also relevant for people with Alzheimer 's , such as promotion of independent living , quality support and care services , accessibility of mainstream goods and services , and assistive solutions .
As the ageing of the population in Europe can be expected to lead to increasing numbers of older people with a severe disability and in need of long-term care , this issue is among the priorities for the follow-up to the current disability action plan .
The Commission is also working together with the Member States , through the disability high-level group , to monitor the implementation of the UN Convention on the rights of persons with disabilities , signed by the European Commission and all the Member States .
The Convention covers a wide range of policy objectives relevant for people with Alzheimer 's , including accessibility , independent living , rehabilitation , social participation and social protection , and is implemented at national and Community level .
Commissioner , with over six million European citizens suffering from dementia and many millions more Europeans having to care for them or being affected by this critical disease , I warmly welcome the Commission 's decision to make this a public health priority .
That was a comprehensive answer .
But could I ask , when you discuss the disability action plan , that you as a Commissioner and as a Commission bear in mind that the effect of Alzheimer 's is a cross-cutting effect across disability , the field of ageing and public health and that you maintain a comprehensive strategy , not just identifying Alzheimer 's but including all the related aspects and that you maintain your priority ?
This is a public health emergency for an ageing population .
But thank you for that comprehensive answer .
Member of the Commission . - I do understand that the honourable Member is satisfied with the comprehensive answer that I gave .
Regarding this disability action plan , it is of course a wider issue but it has certain aspects which are specific to Alzheimer 's disease and which we shall take up in our action in this field .
Subject : Impending recession in south-eastern Europe and implications for the European economy
According to recent analyses by international financial institutes and credit-rating agencies , a major economic decline is to be expected in south-eastern Europe accompanied by the danger of loan default on the part of consumers and undertakings .
This could have extremely serious implications for the economies of the EU Member States , given the major investment by western European undertakings and banks in this area .
Is the Commission in favour of providing support for banks in the countries of south-eastern Europe - under national programmes of action forming part of the European Neighbourhood Policy - in cooperation with these countries and possibly the European Investment Bank ?
How does the Commission intend to deploy available funding , for example the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance ( IPA ) and the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument ( ENPI ) , with a view to reinvigorating local economies and staving off the impending recession ?
Member of the Commission . - The question refers to the Commission view on possible European economic and financial support to countries of eastern and south-eastern Europe hard hit by the global economic crisis .
I am replying on behalf of my colleague , Commissioner Almunia .
The sharp economic downturn in a number of countries in this region can indeed have an adverse impact on the economies of the same European Union Member States , in particular those whose commercial banks have extended , often through their local subsidiary , significant credits to enterprises and households in the countries of the region .
It has first to be noted that economic and financial conditions differ greatly among these countries .
The Commission 's response to the crisis could not , therefore , be formulated globally but has taken into account the situation of each country .
Regarding candidate and potential candidate countries of south-eastern Europe , large amounts of technical assistance supporting structural reforms and institution-building have been programmed for the period 2007-2013 - EUR 9.1 billion , as you know , under the Instrument for Pre-Accession ( IPA ) .
The Commission is also implementing a EUR 150 million crisis response package , financed under this instrument , which aims to leverage in the short term an amount of EUR 500 million in loans from international financial institutions .
The package includes measures ranging from the provision of micro-credit and SME financing to energy efficiency and specific technical assistance for financial sector supervision and financial regulation .
In order to further support the real economy , the Commission , the EIB , the EBRD and the Council of Europe Development Bank have jointly developed an infrastructure initiative that provides technical assistance and cofinancing to priority infrastructure investments in transport , energy , environment and social sectors .
The initiative has been accelerated and implementation is now starting .
It is a first step towards a Western Balkans Investment Framework that will also include investments in other socioeconomic sectors , like SMEs or energy efficiency .
In the countries of eastern Europe covered by the European Neighbourhood Policy - Ukraine , Belarus , Moldova and the three Caucasus countries - the European Union instruments available to deal with the needs of the financial sector are more limited .
Yet here , too , the EU provides substantial technical assistance through the national and regional programmes of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument in support of the joint action plans under the European neighbourhood policy .
In order to further help the real economy , the Neighbourhood Investment Facility has been designed to bring together grants from the ENPI programmes and the European Union Member States with loans from the European public financial institutions .
This instrument has provided EUR 71 million in grants in 2008 , which underpinned large infrastructure projects worth around EUR 2.74 billion .

Let me now say a few words about the support to the commercial banks in the region being provided by specialised financial institutions .
Here the EBRD is the most active and it is mobilising its full panoply of instruments , including equity and short-term debt .
The EIB has no mandate towards direct bank capitalisation in this region and its activity is limited to the sectors of transport , telecommunications , energy and environmental infrastructure .
The mandate does not cover SMEs .
Much of the financial support to the economies of the region is provided by the Bretton Woods institutions , primarily the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
The IMF is making available large amounts of financing in support of comprehensive stabilisation programmes .
The Commission feels that the role of the IMF in fighting the consequences of the crisis is very important .
Finally , a number of pre-accession and neighbourhood countries have requested macroeconomic assistance from the European Union .
The Commission is currently examining how best to support those countries that have also agreed a stabilisation programme with the International Monetary Fund .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you very much for the information you have given me .
I should like to ask you if you believe that these grants of EUR 71 million for our partners in Eastern Europe suffice .
I believe that the Commission communication on the crisis and its impact on Eastern Europe does not pay sufficient attention to this issue .
Also , do you believe that we shall review the objectives , means and priorities of pre-accession assistance , because Serbia has already asked for assistance to deal with urgent requirements directly in its budget .
Member of the Commission . - As I said , when we talk about the real economy and the countries of eastern Europe , the financial possibilities which we have in our hands are truly limited .
That is why we try to leverage as much of the money as we can from other financial institutions .
That is why I mentioned that the money , which actually amounts to EUR 71 million , has also triggered the financing of large infrastructure projects , which are more than EUR 2.5 billion .

So the honest answer would be , I think , that all of us there are in deep trouble , and that certainly one has to keep a close eye on what is happening in this region , because we are highly interconnected with them and many European countries have deep trade relations with this region .
Concerning the possibility of macro-financial assistance , there are many countries among the countries which have the potential to become Member States , which are candidates or potential candidates , which have requested this .
It is true that Serbia requested it .
It is highly likely that Montenegro will also request it .
From the countries of the southern region , practically all but Russia and Azerbaijan have requested it .
The potential for macro-financial assistance is , to be honest , rather limited , and the list of countries asking for this support is quite long .
I think that the major instrument - that is why this discussion was very much one of the topics of the G20 summit - should be channelled via IMF support .
We are very much in favour of this kind of activity and strengthened role or capitalisation of the IMF in this direction , because this is certainly a global problem .
I could also mention that this macro-financial assistance , if it is given to any of these states , should also go through the consultation process via the European Parliament .
Subject : State aid to non-EU European countries
In this time of economic tumult it is imperative that all nations in Europe are on a level playing field and should not have to be concerned about jobs moving to non-EU countries involved in supplying state aid to ailing firms .
If members of the EEC or EFTA such as Switzerland are to reap benefits of increased trade with the EU bloc then it is imperative that they reciprocate by playing by the same rules regarding state aid .
The current procedures for remedies of breach of this are slow and cumbersome and offer no protection to those currently losing their jobs .
How does the Commission plan to tighten up this area of competition law and ensure there is a fast and effective procedure for dealing with complaints ?

Member of the Commission . - Firstly , I would like to mention that it is important to clarify that the EFTA states that are parties to the EEA Agreement - that is , Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein - are subject to strict state aid discipline based on the EU model .
Article 61 of the EEA Agreement is closely modelled on Article 87 of the EC Treaty .
The EFTA Surveillance Authority ( ESA ) is in charge of its implementation .
Under Protocol 26 of the EEA Agreement , it is entrusted with equivalent powers to those of the European Commission in the field of state aid .
Those states must notify any new state aid measure to the ESA and get its approval before putting it into effect .
The ESA may also investigate alleged incompatible aid granted by these EFTA countries .
Switzerland is a different case , because it has not ratified the EEA Agreement .
With Switzerland , the state aid rules are those laid down in the 1972 agreement between the European Economic Community and the Swiss Confederation .
Under Article 23 thereof , state aid which affects trade between the Community and Switzerland and distorts or threatens to distort competition is incompatible with the agreement .
Procedurally , in case of incompatible aid , the affected party can refer the matter to the joint committee established by the agreement and it can take safeguard measures if the granting party fails to put an end to the practice in question .
While remedies for incompatible aid are harder to obtain in Swiss cases , the Commission still endeavours to apply the provisions of the 1972 free trade agreement whenever possible and necessary .
For example , on 13 February 2007 , it took a decision concluding that three Swiss cantonal tax regimes were incompatible with the 1972 agreement , and it is currently negotiating with the Swiss authorities in order to find a satisfactory solution to this issue .
The Commission is aware that provisions on state aid found in existing trade agreements , such as the 1972 agreement with Switzerland , need to be improved and that is why , in line with the conclusions of its 2006 communication ' Global Europe : competing in the world ' , the objective of the Commission is to try and negotiate stronger rules on state aid and better remedies , such as the application of a dispute settlement mechanism , in future free trade agreements .
I thank the Commissioner for her helpful reply .
The Commissioner will be aware that I am speaking of a company called SR Technics , located at Dublin airport , where until recently a little over 1 100 people were employed ; 600 have now lost their jobs .
This was a company with excellent industrial relations , excellent skills , a full order book and a great future .
There is real doubt as to the reasons for the relocation of this company and the suspicion is that either the Swiss Government or one of their Arab friends has brought in aids which are causing these people to lose their jobs in Ireland , in the European Union .
Will the Commissioner investigate this matter and use all her powers to assist ?
These are very reasonable people with a lot of support in the community who understand the difficulties they are facing both from the business community and from the general public .
Member of the Commission . - I am very happy with your question , for you can be of help because we need more information .
So far we do not have the information on this case in the 100 % form that we badly need .
Even then it is not guaranteed that we can be successful but it is worth a try .
To form an opinion on the existence of state aid , not to mention its incompatibility under the 1972 agreement with Switzerland , not only services but also the production or trading of goods should be involved .
So please push those who you are close to so that they give us the information .
In addition , I would invite the persons and undertakings concerned in Ireland to provide any further information they may have on this case to the Commission services , to enable us to take a position .
I must add , and it is open and honest to say so , that under the 1972 agreement the affected party can only ask the party granting the aid to put an end to the measure and , in a decision adopted in 2007 , the Commission concluded that those measures constitute state aid that is incompatible with the 1972 agreement with Switzerland .
Following that decision , the Swiss authorities have entered into a dialogue with the Commission to find an appropriate solution .
The latest technical meeting took place on 13 February 2009 .
So the Swiss authorities have provided some constructive proposals such as the abolition of the tax exemption for management companies .
However , the preferential treatment of holding and mixed companies remains to a large extent .
That is why further discussions are badly needed .
Subject : Discrimination against Polish shipyards in the light of the Commission 's decision to approve state aid for the motor vehicle industry
Having propped up their banks with tens of billions of euros in aid , several Member State governments have now decided to support the motor vehicle industry .
The United Kingdom , Germany , France and Italy wish to provide some tens of billions of euros in aid for the sector , and the Commission has in principle accepted this proposal unreservedly , despite the fact that such funding will distort competition on the market .
Without calling such support into question , I should like to ask why the Commission earlier objected to the state aid granted by the Polish Government to our shipyards .
As a result of the Commission 's stance , two of Poland 's shipyards closed and tens of thousands of people working at the shipyards and for suppliers were made redundant .
In the light of the Commission 's recent approval of aid for the motor vehicle industry , was that decision not discriminatory ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission would like to underline that in the case of the Polish shipyards it applied exactly the same rules as for any other case of restructuring state aid and it treats Poland in the same way as any other Member State .
The difficulties faced by the shipyards had started in the 1990s , to be precise in 1990 , well before the Polish accession to the EU , and were by the way not caused by the current financial and economic crisis .
In 2004 , the Commission started investigating restructuring aid for the Polish shipyards .
The situation of the Polish shipyards cannot therefore be compared with that of other companies which have specific problems linked with the current financial crisis .
The Gdynia and Szczecin yards have benefited from state support for many years at the expense of other shipyards in Europe .
Unfortunately , the aid granted to the Polish shipyards was not spent on investments and the necessary restructuring .
What is more , the yards continued to make losses , were unable to pay taxes and social security obligations and have accumulated significant debts .
For those reasons the Commission had no other option but to adopt final negative decisions for the Gdynia and Szczecin shipyards , ordering recovery of the illegal and incompatible aid granted to the yards .
However , in order to limit the adverse economic and social consequences of these decisions , the Commission authorised Poland to implement the recovery of the illegal aid through a controlled sale of the yards ' assets and subsequent liquidation of the companies .
That should maximise opportunities for viable economic activities to continue at those sites .
It should in particular be noted that , if the sale process is successful and correctly implemented , companies acquiring the shipyard assets will not have to repay the illegal subsidies , even if they choose to continue shipbuilding .
The Commission would also like to point out that Structural Funds , and in particular the European Social Fund and the European Regional Development Fund , could be used to cushion the social consequences of job losses .
Furthermore , the use of the European Globalisation Fund can be considered under certain circumstances and conditions .
( PL ) Commissioner , I understand that you are responsible for watching over the level of state aid given to enterprises , but Polish society has the impression that , unfortunately , Polish shipyards are being treated differently from enterprises in the old EU Member States - that here consent is being given to save jobs , but that in the Polish shipyards consent to save jobs is not forthcoming , and this inequality troubles us greatly .
We insist on equal treatment of enterprises in the old and the new Member States .
I would also like to take this opportunity to ask what doubts the Commission has about the restructurisation programme for the Gdańsk Shipyard .
Member of the Commission . - Those in Poland who are saying what the honourable Member has been referring to are absolutely wrong .
It is not correct , and I can prove it with facts and figures .
And before I answer your reference to the German shipyards ( you were only mentioning the old ones ) , I would like to underline that the shipbuilding industry in other countries - not only in Germany , but also in , for example , Denmark , the UK , the Netherlands or Spain , where the public pocket was not so generous - was considerably downsized or even closed .
We know a couple of examples where shipyards were closed .
And if we speak about equal treatment we need to bear this in mind as well , and not only talk about emotion - and I am not blaming someone for having emotions ; I can imagine it is a very difficult situation , but still it gives the wrong impression to say that there has not been equal treatment .
In any event I can assure you , Mr President , that the Commission applied its rule in the same way to the German and to the Polish shipyards and all the other ones that could be cited here .
The same criteria are applied when assessing the state aid , viability being the most prominent of them , and the German shipyards - let me take that example - were successfully restructured and turned into a viable business , while the Commission considers that the restructuring plans presented by the Polish authorities will not ensure long-term viability .
Finally , Mr President , a parallel should also be made with cases where the Commission has not authorised state aid and has even ordered recovery of illegal state aid in other Member States .
Subject : On-line sale of perfumes , clothing and brand products
Commission Regulation ( EC ) No 2790 / 1999 ( together with the guidelines on vertical restrictions ) sets out arrangements regarding distribution agreements for a number of products including perfumes , clothing and other ' brand products ' .
Under these provisions , the sale ( including the sale on-line ) of numerous brand products is prohibited if the supplier 's market share is less than 30 % .
Does the Commission consider it necessary to continue to apply these outdated rules at the expense of healthy competition in terms of pricing and consumer choice for the sole financial benefit of a number of major groups who are in the comfortable position of deriving the bulk of their revenue from exclusive legal rights regarding these products ?
Member of the Commission . - The current EU competition policy towards vertical agreements is very supportive of Internet sales , and I am sure that you are aware of that , Mr President .
Hence , the guidelines on vertical restraints which provide for an interpretation of Regulation ( EC ) No 2790 / 1999 make it clear that ' every distributor must be free to use the Internet to advertise or to sell products ' .
It is therefore clear that suppliers cannot impose restrictions on the distributors ' use of the Internet - they cannot stop a distributor from having a web site , using whichever languages they prefer on that site , or sending e-mails to individual customers unless those prohibitions are objectively justified .
Even within selective distribution networks , used notably in the luxury sector , and distribution of complex products such as electronics - regardless of the suppliers ' market share - any restriction to on-line sales imposed by the manufacturer on its appointed dealers clearly infringes the competition rules .
However , that does not mean any retailer can sell - on-line or otherwise - the manufacturer 's products to final consumers .
A manufacturer is free to impose criteria on distributors for selling his goods on line in the same way as he is free to do so for sales in brick-and-mortar shops .
Such criteria may assist in building a certain image or providing a certain level of service .
Under the current rules , selective distribution is presumed legal up to 30 % of the supplier 's market share , since it is considered that in the absence of market power it brings more advantages than any possible harm to consumers .
The Commission is currently examining the way Regulation ( EC ) No 2790 / 1999 has been applied so far and whether there is a need for further changes , including in the area of selective distribution .
What the Commissions wants is the right balance between , on the one hand , ensuring that consumers can take advantage of the on-line marketplace , and ensuring that manufacturers are able to organise their distribution systems as they feel appropriate .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I thank you , but , in general , I hope that the Commission considers that the time is right to re-examine the guidelines on vertical restraints that you mentioned just now , since they are in fact already about 10 years old .
We do of course need to take account of the most recent developments : on-line selling and electronic auctions have profoundly changed our distribution methods , as well as conditions of competition .
We must be very aware of that .
( DE ) Commissioner , I should be interested to hear your views on the situation surrounding the relevant market power exercised over such modes of distribution .
At what point would you consider such market power to be present , and what action would you take against it ?
Member of the Commission . - I shall just repeat what I have already mentioned , that the Commission is currently examining the way that Regulation ( EC ) No 2790 / 1999 - which , as the honourable Member rightly said , is 10 years old - has been applied so far .
We have to decide whether there is a need for further changes , including in the area of selective distribution .
It is important for the Commission , in this review , to strike the right balance to allow European consumers to take full advantage of the Internet to overcome geographical barriers , while at the same time allowing manufacturers to organise their distribution systems as they feel appropriate .
In that context , the benefits that selective distribution brings to consumers , both in the on-line and off-line worlds , will certainly be revisited .
Mr Rübig asked what we can do in the present situation .
We have to take into account , after this review , what the need is , and then we will come back with our final conclusions and we will pick up the point that the honourable Member touched upon .
Subject : State aid for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs )
Will the Commission say what additional means - compatible with Community rules on state aid - are available to Member States during the current economic crisis to help SMEs , in particular to support their access to funding ?
Member of the Commission . - I will do my utmost .
On 19 January 2009 , the Commission adopted a new temporary state aid framework which provides additional openings for Member States to grant state aid until the end of 2010 .
This initiative was previewed in the Commission 's recovery plan the previous month .
The main objective of the framework is to limit the fallout of the crisis by facilitating companies ' access to finance .
Those measures are applicable to all companies - but small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) can access higher aid intensities , as they are clearly the most vulnerable when access to credit is tightened .
In other words this measure is of particular benefit to SMEs .
The most relevant for SMEs is the new possibility for the granting of EUR 500 000 per undertaking to cover investments and / or working capital over a period of two years .
That is a new temporary compatible aid - not by the way a new de minimis of EUR 500 000 - and provided that it fulfils the specific conditions , this new aid is declared compatible by the Commission under Article 87 ( 3 ) ( b ) of the Treaty , in other words under a clearly very exceptional legal basis which is directly linked to the current financial crisis .
That new aid can be cumulated with the de minimis , but within the limit of EUR 500 000 for the period 2008-2010 .
In addition , under the temporary framework , Member States could also grant state-aid guarantees for loans at a reduced premium , aid in the form of a subsidised interest rate applicable to all types of loans , and subsidised loans for the production of green products involving the early adaptation to , or going further than , the future Community product standards .
The Commission has also increased the allowed risk capital - an injection in SMEs - from EUR 1.5 million to EUR 2.5 million per year , and a reduction of the required level of private participation from 50 % to 30 % .

Finally , while all measures adopted under this temporary framework still need to be notified to the Commission , specific arrangements to ensure a fast adoption of the Commission 's decisions have been put in place .
So they are quick , effective and efficient .
( EL ) Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for her truly detailed reply .
The European Commission , as the guardian of competition policy , rightly allows this temporary aid to small and medium-sized enterprises because , as we all know here in this House , small and medium-sized enterprises are the backbone of the European economy .
I have another question which goes beyond the boundaries of my first question : the European Union is not alone in the world ; there are other leading commercial players and economic powers outside Europe , our third country partners , who are distorting competition to saturation point at present due to the economic crisis .
Have you developed cooperation to address infringement of competition rules in connection with third countries ?
( DE ) I would like to know which rule actually applies to equity replacement loans in this context .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to ask the Commissioner if these extraordinary grants also include social measures for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Can these worker-related measures be subsidised at the same time as the enterprise ?
Member of the Commission . - That is an intriguing question .
We are major players , looking at the playing field as a whole , but we are aware that there are a couple of other players , and that they are not always behaving as we want them to behave .
Having said that , Mr President , there are at any rate a couple of bodies on which we are doing our utmost to put this very point the honourable Member has raised on the agenda : during the G20 meeting in London for instance , where it was a very important point for discussion , but also during our involvement in the WTO Round ; and I think it makes sense that we are pushing and just trying to get the point accepted by all of the players .
I am proud to say that more than a hundred member states are involved in the same type of competition policy as the one we favour , so it is not only us .
We are in close contact , sometimes via official agreements , sometimes via bilateral agreements , to try to get a line all over the globe .
Certainly with the new US Administration we are just starting again , and we do have excellent cooperation lines with our counterparts in Washington , such as the FTC and the DOJ .
So that is the main issue , but if you would allow me to go off at a tangent to your question a little , it is also about protectionism : that would be the devil in our midst and we should fight to prevent it becoming a reality .
For protectionism is outdated , it is incompatible with the single market and it is indeed a very bad tool for enabling our citizens , our consumers , and our business worlds to be successful on that fair level playing field .
It is of course the Member States that are responsible for efforts in the employment and social areas , and they have to take their decisions on how this option of opening up the state aid rules a little can be fitted in .
The Commission would also like to point out that the structural funds - and that was what I was touching upon in an earlier question when we were dealing with the Polish shipyards - and in particular the European Social Fund and the European Regional Development Fund , can be used by the Member States to cushion the social consequences of job losses , and furthermore the use of the European globalisation fund can be considered under certain conditions .
Subject : Research and maritime professions
Marine science , technology and research are crucially important for the sustainable development of maritime activities and help broaden the scope of maritime studies and improve the qualifications and skills associated with the maritime professions .
In that context , will the Commission say what measures it will take to promote research in this field and give Europeans more and broader prospects of a career in the maritime sector ?
Will the economic crisis adversely affect that aim ?
Member of the Commission . - Throughout the past year the Commission has recognised that marine science and technology is a cross-cutting priority area .
This culminated in the adoption by the Commission , in September 2008 , of the communication on a European Union strategy for marine and maritime research .
The strategy seeks in particular to foster integration across thematic priorities to address complex sea-related issues , boost synergies between Member States ' research efforts , promote the financing of financial marine research infrastructure and build new governance with the marine and maritime scientific communities , particularly through increased cooperation between marine science and maritime industries .
The following actions have already been implemented in the framework of the strategy .
First , joint calls for proposals are being prepared and should be launched later this year to address major cross-thematic marine and maritime issues .
Second , steps have been taken to upgrade the BONUS programme into a major Community research initiative under Article 169 of the Treaty - one of the questions later on is also related to this issue .
Third , steps have been taken to progressively replace all existing marine ERA-NETs with one integrated marine ERA-NET .
Fourth , steps have been taken to explore new sources of financing critical marine research infrastructures , particularly through the Structural Funds .
Finally , two projects will be financed to foster cooperation between marine science and maritime industries as well as a stronger integration between the different actors within the marine scientific community .
The implementation of the European Union strategy for marine and maritime research under the current financial perspective will ensure the promotion in the coming years of marine and maritime research at Community level , through the framework programme instruments .
The broadening of prospects for careers related to the sea cluster , which is also part of your question , is not directly an objective of the research policy .
However , by stimulating cooperation between marine scientists and maritime industries , as well as more integrated marine and maritime research , the European Union strategy for marine and maritime research can indirectly broaden the scope of maritime skills and promote marine clusters .
It can in this way indirectly contribute to the upgrading of qualifications and skills associated with the maritime professions .
Finally , in the broader framework of your question and my reply , in the European economic recovery plan last autumn , the Commission proposed to Member States and the private sector to increase planned investments in R & D. This was followed up by the spring European Council conclusions , which have sent a strong message on the need for stepping up and improving the quality of investment in knowledge and research for economic recovery .
Of course this is also very valid for marine and maritime research .
It is still premature for any assessment on how and if the Member States will follow these recommendations .
One thing , however , remains clear : even in the current difficult economic and financial circumstances , we should not lose sight of long-term objectives such as sustainable development and the low-carbon economy .
It is thus important to focus on so-called ' smart investments ' which at the same time look at overcoming the crisis in the short term and at long-term possibilities and how strong we will be when we come out of the crisis .

( EL ) Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for the full reply which he has given me and I should like to ask him if the research programme can also include neighbouring countries , especially countries in the Mediterranean region , within the framework of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation .
Member of the Commission . - Neighbouring countries of course can be included .
It is quite clear that the framework programme is open as long as there is cooperation with the European Union Member States .
But I would like to be even more precise .
We have quite a few - more than 10 - so-called ' associated members ' of the framework programme .
Those associated members which pay the contribution have practically the same rights and responsibilities as the Member States .
For example , the Western Balkans , Switzerland , Norway , Iceland , Israel and some others are associated countries .
So all these countries have exactly the same rights and obligations .
For others , within our strategy we are trying to develop a policy , which we have proposed .
We have tried to do everything so that sooner rather than later all the neighbourhood countries - depending on their ability and also on mutual interests - will become associated countries .
This means in reality that when we talk about research the European Union is much bigger than the Union of 27 Members .
Subject : Evaluation of creativity , innovation and technological development in Member States
Given that 2009 has been designated the European Year of Creativity and Innovation , and given the EU 's programmes , namely the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development ( 2007-2013 ) and the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme ( CIP ) , will the Commission say whether it has any statistics on the level of appropriations taken up so far by each Member State in the sectors covered by the above programmes ?
What are the most popular sectors in each Member State ( in percentages ) ?
Does any assessment exist of the response of SMEs ( small and medium-sized enterprises ) to these programmes ( in percentages ) ?
Member of the Commission . - I can assure the honourable Member that , with regard to the seventh Research Framework Programme ( FP7 ) , the Commission systematically collects and publishes , for all to see , clear and detailed statistical data illustrating the implementation of this programme .
It is important to remember that Community funding for research is awarded to beneficiaries on the sole criterion of the scientific excellence of their proposals .
But even though no account is taken of nationality in awarding contracts , we do collect and closely follow the data on the geographic distribution of FP7 beneficiaries and their respective collaborative links .
This gives us an important insight into the level and strength of synergies developed between countries as a result of their participation in FP7 activities .
You can find all of this data , and many other detailed statistics about FP7 implementation , in the statistical annex to the Commission 's annual report on research and technological development activities , which we submit every year to the Council and Parliament .
More importantly , all of these reports going back to 1998 are publicly available on line via the Commission 's ' Europa ' Internet site .
So what does this data tell us ?
I cannot reel off here today a long list of statistics , as we do not have time for that , but let me nevertheless give you some few highlights concerning the focus of your question : the relative popularity of FP7 research areas among the Member States .
Information and communication technologies ( ICT ) , health and Marie Curie actions were generally the most popular fields among Member States in terms of the numbers of participations in signed grant agreements .
It should be noted , however , that their popularity is also a function of the size of the budget available to each of these research areas of FP7 and , also , the number and type of signed grant agreements present in the databases at the time of such assessment .
Generally it can be noted that the participation of new Member States is stronger in the fields of security , socioeconomic research and space , and weaker , for example , in ICT and health .
In the country that the honourable Member comes from there is a marked focus on ICT , but relatively weak participation , for example , in health , socioeconomic research and space .
Concerning the response of SMEs to FP7 , every year the Commission publishes a detailed assessment of SME participation by country of origin as part of our annual report , which I have mentioned .
Our latest data on SME participation in FP7 indicates that a total of 2 431 SMEs are now participating in FP7 signed grant agreements .
For detailed information I would refer the honourable Member to the report itself .
But , if the honourable Member wishes , I could hand out some of the tables with the relevant information from FP7 here today , because I have them with me .
The actions of the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme are more policy-driven than grant-oriented .
In particular the Entrepreneurship and Innovation Specific Programme ( EIP ) serves mainly as a policy support programme .
If we look at its main instruments , Enterprise Europe Network exclusively benefits SMEs by providing information on access by different types of SME finance and identifying project-funding opportunities and helping to find technology and business partners .
The EIP Financial Instrument , which accounts for about half of the programmes budget , is also reserved exclusively for SMEs .
By the end of September 2008 , around 12 000 SMEs had received financing through the SME Guarantee Facility , with applications received from 17 Member States .
In addition , the first call for proposals on eco-innovation pilot and market replication projects was published in 2008 to carry out actions in the fields of recycling , the food and drink sector , buildings and green business .
The 2008 call notably succeeded in covering the priority given to small and medium-sized enterprises .
In total , 74 % of all participations were SMEs .
And lastly , the Information and Communication Technologies Policy Support specific Programme of CIP launched calls for proposals for 2007 and 2008 with a focus on pilot project testing ICT-based innovations , where SMEs receive more than 30 % of the total budget .
More importantly , this programme aims at opening up EU-wide markets for such innovations that are supplied by SMEs all across the European Union .
As with FP7 reports , reports relating to the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme are publicly available on the Europa website .
( EL ) Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his reply ; there is indeed information on the website .
Thank you also , Commissioner , for the tables which you have given me .
I have a supplementary question to ask : can you tell us how many jobs have been created in the Member States of the European Union within the framework of projects carried out under programmes implemented via small and medium-sized enterprises ?
Also , have you calculated the increase in gross domestic product generated from these projects ?
You have mentioned several areas where new Member States are developing their activities in both programmes .
I would like to ask you what you would say in general : are new Member States less active in comparison with old Member States , and , if so , what can the Commission do in order to help them ?
Member of the Commission . - The first question was quite specific .
Of course we do not know how many jobs are created : economies are simply much more complex than if there were a causal relation between how much money you put in one programme and how much you supported .
We are pretty sure - I am pretty sure also , when I move among the researchers , among the SMEs , when I hear the reactions and when I hear their emotions and how well they are actually using the programme , then I am sometimes much more satisfied than when I hear that we are a bit too bureaucratic , and so on .
But I think that we have to look at that .
We try to accommodate the various needs of SMEs : ones which are competing , which have their own capacity to compete , which have research capacity ; but we also try to accommodate the others , which have the research needs but do not have the capacity .
That is why we are paying , for example , for research via universities , institutes and so on .
Concerning the increase in GDP , statistically of course it is not possible to have a direct link , but you can do correlation analyses from which you can find out that this is correlated in the long term .
So the countries which are investing more in R & D are , of course , more developed , and vice versa .
This is , then , the reality : that those that are wealthier invest more in R & D later .
So in essence , even if I cannot precisely answer that question , I can give you a fairly sure answer from the statistical analysis that this is the way to strengthen the competitiveness and , as a result , the GDP , jobs and so on of anybody who is investing more in this context .
On the question of the new Member States - and that is really an interesting question , because we are , of course , following that quite closely - I can say that they are quite active , that they are applying a lot ; on average their success rates are slightly higher than the success rates of more developed Member States , which I think is normal , because somehow the strength of institutions is in the countries which have a longer and stronger tradition in R & D and of course normally are also stronger .
But if you look at something very simple - if you look at the correlation : how much the country is investing in R & D at home and how much it is getting from the framework programme via pure competition - there , a strong correlation exists .
So the country which is actually investing more at home , and which therefore also has stronger research potential , is getting it twice - it is getting it at home , and is also getting it via competition in the European Framework Programme , which is for excellence .
But something else is also interesting .
If you look at how much the Member States - the new Member States - are investing in their R & D in global European investment , and how much they are getting from FP7 , the proportion of the latter is higher than they are actually investing at home .
So these connections are very clear , and my advice would be : use all possible instruments to strengthen capacity at home ; use - in smart ways - structural and cohesion funds , where they have committed the amount of framework programme actually for the purpose of that - EUR 50 billion is committed - and use that money so that in the future they would help themselves at home and they would help themselves also in the possibility to compete globally , because the world is global .
Subject : BONUS-169
The BONUS project ( Baltic Sea marine research funding organisation ) is a very important means of grouping national and regional research programmes to support sustainable development in the Baltic Sea region , with a view to coordinating , developing and implementing them by means of joint cooperation activities .
Consequently Lithuania and the other Baltic States strongly support the transition from BONUS ERA-NET + to BONUS-169 .
Could the Commission state what new measures are envisaged for BONUS-169 ?
Will the proposal be presented during the present Commission 's term of office ?
Is there anything that might hinder the transition to BONUS-169 ?

Member of the Commission . - Mr Paleckis , I am convinced that the BONUS Article 169 initiative is expected to substantially improve the effectiveness of environmental and sustainable development policies for the entire Baltic region .
It would , in particular , greatly contribute to the implementation of mainly the environmental part of the European Union Strategy for the Baltic Sea Region that the Commission is planning to present to the European Council in June 2009 .
We are now moving ahead swiftly with the preparation of this legislative proposal on an Article 169 and have included BONUS-169 in our legislative programme for 2009 .
We are making every effort to table a legislative proposal as soon as we possibly can in 2009 .
However , the timing of the legislative proposal is not entirely in our hands : it also depends on the timely and successful response by the BONUS consortium in revising the tentative Action Plan .
If the latter reaches the Commission by the beginning of June - this was agreed by the BONUS consortium - then I am quite confident that the legislative proposal can be tabled still under the mandate of the current Commission .
- ( LT ) Many thanks , Commissioner , for your precise and clear reply : there is obviously hope that this matter will soon be set in motion .
I would like to ask you , does the fact that environmental protection in the Baltic Sea is to be tightened even more mean that this project has something to do with the impact of the Nord Stream project on environmental protection in the Baltic Sea ?
Is this happening , or not ?
Member of the Commission . - My expectations of the BONUS programme itself are also high .
That is why I am working extremely hard to get it on the table to propose to you while I am still in office .
You should be aware that our experiences with Article 169 initiatives , starting with EDCTP in the previous framework programme , were at times not too good .
That is why we asked Mr van Velzen to prepare a report on that .
By the way , today EDCTP is perfect and is going really well , but we had asked Mr van Velzen to table proposals for the future of ' 169 ' initiatives , and we are now following his recommendations .
One should also take into account that this is the first of an original nature and the true European added value should be presented via that kind of a programme .
I am sure that this will be an example which will be followed later on by other regions .
In short , I am very much in favour of the proposal , but I think that the stronger we build it the better it will be for BONUS and for the region .
Subject : Communicating with citizens
Given the importance the Commission has placed on effective communication with citizens , particularly in the light of the economic crisis , when many citizens are unsure about the future , and given that the consultation process is an effective tool in empowering citizens to input directly into the policy process at EU level , would the Commission agree that further steps need to be taken to raise citizens ' awareness of EU consultations via the media and other appropriate forums at national , regional and local levels in order to ensure that more individuals and grass-roots organisations become involved ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - First of all , I would like to say that civil society is one of the key actors in democracy .
It plays a very active role in European integration and fulfils an important function in the communication between European citizens and the institutions .
Civil society helps citizens in exerting their right to participate in the democratic life of the EU .
The Commission recognises the need to create a clearer access to the EU for organised civil society as well as for individual citizens and we have a long and healthy tradition of interaction with civil society organisations , which started more than 30 years ago .
Over the years , a large number of our services have developed regular dialogue with stakeholders .
This dialogue takes into account our long-standing policy of openness and inclusiveness and it also reflects the wide differences in the policy fields and the diversity of stakeholders .
The Commission consults civil society in a variety of ways , including consultation papers , communications , advisory committees , expert groups , workshops and forums .
Online consultation is commonly used .
Moreover , we also organise ad hoc meetings and open hearings .
In many cases , a consultation is a combination of different tools and takes place in several phases of the preparation of a policy proposal .
There is a need for a common operational framework to ensure that these consultations are carried out in a transparent and coherent way .
Therefore , in 2002 the Commission set out principles and minimum standards for consulting external parties .
According to these standards , attention needs to be paid to providing clear consultation documents , consulting all relevant target groups , leaving sufficient time for participation , publishing results and providing feedback etc .
The European Transparency Initiative has also made a commitment to further reinforce the application of the current minimum standards for consultation .
A model template for open , public consultations has been introduced , including an invitation to stakeholder organisations to subscribe to the register of interest representatives .
As such , they will be alerted to consultations published on the Commission 's single access point for open consultation , Your Voice in Europe .
Use of this template will improve the transparency and coherence of the presentation of stakeholder consultations .
Of course we need to constantly reflect on how to further promote awareness about the launching of a specific consultation , so that more people are aware of the fact that a consultation is beginning .
We can probably use our representation offices more actively .
Let me add , finally , that the Plan D initiatives , including citizens ' consultations , also provide new ideas for how to engage with citizens and to include also those who do not already belong to political parties or civil society organisations , so as to ensure that we really have an open consultation .
We are trying out different methods of how to engage with citizens .
I thank the Commissioner for her answer , and I agree : the Commission is certainly making some efforts .
But , given that 53 % of European citizens are saying they are not interested in the European elections , I think one of the reasons for that is that many European citizens are not aware that they can effect change and have an impact through the consultation process : my experience from contact with stakeholders in civil society is that very many of them are simply unaware of this process .
I myself make an effort every few months to alert stakeholders to the various consultation processes that are ongoing and I genuinely believe and would ask you , Commissioner , if you do not agree that it would be very useful for the Commission offices in each country to draw up a list , a very wide-ranging list , of all stakeholders and ensure that they are alerted to the consultation process , so that they would know and could take part .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I absolutely agree - 100 % .
This is what we just discussed this afternoon in the interinstitutional group for information and communication : encouraging our representation offices and the European Houses - because in most capitals we share the same premises .
We should use them as European Houses , making it known to citizens when there is a consultation where they can give their views on the common agricultural policy or trade or environment policy .
So I definitely share your views on doing even more to mobilise citizens .
I also think that these experiments with things like the citizens ' consultations lead to greater interest in the EU .
As one participant said : I took an interest in the EU when the EU showed an interest in me , asking me what I think .
I believe that in the end we will also have better policies by asking and consulting citizens .
Subject : The Commission 's role and participation in the upcoming European elections
Can the Commission inform me of what non-party role it will be playing to increase voter turnout in the European elections ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Commission supports and complements the communication efforts by the European Parliament and national authorities and political parties by carrying out thematic , awareness-raising activities at both European and local levels .
Our objective is primarily to inform voters on the date and relevance of the elections , and thus encourage them to vote .
Special attention will be given to women and young people , with dedicated products and activities .
Amongst others , we will transmit TV and radio clips produced by Parliament to illustrate the priority topics of the European elections on Europe by satellite and EU Tube .
We will also assist in their dissemination through national , regional and local broadcasters in the Member States .
Moreover , the Commission is developing a multimedia campaign for young people in all Member States and involving multipliers via on-line social media , blogs , and on-line magazines .
All major web pages , for example Europa , have the election logo and link to Parliament 's elections website .
But traditional publications including posters , postcards and outdoor installations are also being prepared .
In Member States , all of our representations have been mobilised to organised elections-linked activities and to mobilise all of our multipliers , and almost 500 Europe Direct information relays are organising events to disseminate promotional material and provide a discussion platform for candidates .
Finally , the Europe Direct Contact Centre provides free-of-charge factual information on EU-related questions from citizens and businesses in all 23 official languages by phone , e-mail and web assistance .
Commissioner , thank you for your information on the Commission 's activities .
Could I just ask one more question ?
During the election campaign there will be many lies told about the European Union .
Some will be matters of opinion , and I would not expect the Commission to interfere in those situations , but where outright lies are told about the Community , will the Commission establish a rapid rebuttal unit for the next two or three months , whereby either you can respond directly to lies and distortions about the European Union , or candidates can approach you for factual information to rebut false statements about the activities of the Community ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Thank you for that follow-up question .
Rebuttal forms part of our regular activities at times , and it is also part of what our representation offices do .
Of course , candidates or different stakeholders can always turn to us to ask for factual information and to also provide replies to these kinds of statements being made .
But I think the Commission will probably play a role in providing factual information rather than being a party to the debate , which I think is for the political parties and for the candidates .
But we will always try to offer factual information , and that is something that we do on a regular basis .

My supplementary question is very similar to Mr Martin 's , because one of the issues that I found very difficult during the Lisbon Treaty referendum was not being able to get factual information quickly enough to deal with some of the lies and misinformation that were being disseminated .
I wonder would the Commission consider - given that we are very close to the election at this point - making sure that there is a dedicated group or number of people within each Member State with a particular telephone number etc. where candidates could immediately access the Commission for information on particular issues like that .
I know it is close to the elections , but I would ask the Commissioner to seriously consider trying to put something like that in place .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I doubt that we will have time to set up a particular service at this late stage and before the elections .
However , we already have the service that offers a possibility to make phone calls or requests and try to get as much information as possible .
But what we will do is start preparing a citizens ' summary of the Lisbon Treaty , for example .
This is something that we will do in cooperation with the other institutions .
Of course we will try to do that as quickly as possible , not as part of the campaign .
We will make sure that this is made available in all official languages and in all Member States .
But I also think we have a chance to sort out questions on this , because we already know the issues .
We are also used to answering questions via Europe Direct , for example , and through our representations , so we will try to help as much as we can .
We also have question-and-answer material that we have put together .
So I think that this can be of help both to the candidates and other stakeholders .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was suspended at 8 p.m. and resumed at 9.05 p.m. )

Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Term of protection of copyright and related rights ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Crowley , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2006 / 116 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the term of protection of copyright and related rights - C6-0281 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to welcome Commissioner McCreevy into the Chamber and to thank all colleagues who are here this evening .
The extension of copyright and the term of protection has been a long and arduous journey for all of us , in particular because a huge amount of people are not fully aware of all the facts associated with copyright .
At the outset , let me put on the official record of the House my thanks to all of my colleagues , both those who support and those who oppose the proposal I am putting forward , for their contributions , their input and in particular for their helpful advice and guidance along the road .
I should also like to thank the secretariat of the Committee on Legal Affairs and in particular Giorgio , who has been a very strong advocate and adviser with regard to all these areas , and , finally , Commissioner McCreevy and all his staff .
I would hate to name them individually , but the man sitting next to you has done Trojan work with regard to this report and this directive .
Many lies have been told - and I use the word ' lies ' guardedly with regard to what we are trying to do here .
This can be condensed down very simply into four very clear areas .
Firstly , the extension of the term of protection from the present 50 years to a further extension of term .
We are now proposing , as part of a compromise , 70 years .
That proposal for compromise is founded on some of the resistance from the Council of Ministers , and it disappoints me that the Council Presidency is not represented here tonight .
In fact , all during this process I feel the Council Presidency has not been too helpful in trying to bring this issue forward .
At the outset of the Czech Presidency , I advised the Prime Minister , as well as the minister with responsibility and the officials from the Czech Presidency , that this could be a great success for the Presidency as well as a success for this Parliament .
But other pressures came to bear upon them , and they have taken a disinterested or semi-detached attitude with regard to trying to find solutions .
As well as that , other Member States in the Council of Ministers have purposely tried to block and hinder progress in this process by putting in spurious claims and spurious amendments without actually looking at the detail or the content or even engaging properly with Parliament to see how Parliament could be flexible with regard to what needs to happen .
But the second point with regard to what this directive is doing - and possibly the most important of all - is that for the first time it recognises the contribution of session musicians by establishing a fund to allow them to ensure that they have a return and remuneration for their work - which has been exploited by people over a long period of time - for which they may only get a one-off payment if they are lucky .
This will ensure that those who are near the end of their playing careers or those who may have other economic issues with regard to them can get further protection from it .
Thirdly , with regard to the whole area of balancing the rights and the powers of those who are in negotiation between the record companies and the musicians , it gives extra rights to musicians and to others to ensure this can happen .
Fourthly , and most importantly of all , by ensuring that there is clarity with regard to how the law operates within the European Union .
Many of my colleagues , particularly those from Spain and other Mediterranean countries , have put forward ideas with regard to the audiovisual sector , and we have tried to accommodate them by putting into the draft report this idea of having a separate directive to deal with the audiovisual sector , because it has different issues that relate to it and requires different solutions .
Likewise , as has been discovered during the course of our debates and discussions , there is a huge area with regard to the management of the collection societies and how they best represent the rights and the collection management of the monies that are due to artists to ensure that they can come towards them .
Finally , let me just say that people should realise that this is a creative right ; this is something that an individual has created and has given to us ; it is something that we should pay for - not an exorbitant amount , but a small amount .
The idea of copyright today is seen to be thrown away at the wind - everybody can get everything for free .
If we go down that road , in the short term it may be all great for us , but in the long term it will kill creativity , it will kill the opportunity for new musicians , new bands and new experiences to come before us all .
In our audience tonight we have some musicians , some producers and , indeed , some interested parties .
I would say to them that this is the first step that we see on the stage towards guaranteeing that artists and musicians can take more control of what their rights are .
If we succeed in this first step , you can guarantee we can move on to the next steps towards Everest .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission fully supports Parliament 's compromise text which is tabled to be voted at this part-session .
This very balanced compromise text will hopefully facilitate the adoption of the proposal at a single reading .
Such an outcome will be a very welcome development for EU performers .
It will show our appreciation for the creative contribution musicians make to our lives and to our culture .
Parliament 's compromise text has four main planks , all of which we wholeheartedly support : firstly , an extension of the term of copyright protection for performers and record producers from 50 to 70 years ; secondly , a new claim for session players amounting to 20 % of record labels ' off-line and online sales revenue ; thirdly a ' use it or lose it ' provision that allows performers to recover the rights after 50 years , should the producer fail to market the sound recording ; and , fourthly , a so-called ' clean slate ' , which prevents record producers from making deductions from the royalties they pay to feature performers .
I am especially pleased to note that the session players ' fund , which operates on the basis of 20 % of gross sales revenue , has to date come through the legislative process intact .
Essentially this fund is tested on the fact that , contrary to all the criticism we have heard in the past year , the term extension will , on the one hand , provide income to performers in their twilight years and , on the other hand , promote the emergence of new arts .
Let me stress that this proposal is far from a simple term extension .
For the first time ever in European copyright laws there will be a scheme whereby artists participate in the labels ' sales revenue : 20 % of gross turnover is set aside for session artists .
This is truly innovative .
Mostly importantly , the 20 % set aside is not revenue that accrues to a few superstars .
This 20 % is exclusively for distribution to the session players .
Contrary to a widely-held belief , the likes of Sir Cliff Richard will not get a single penny out of the session players ' fund , and record labels such as EMI or Universal , which contribute to the session players ' fund , will have to make a profit on only 80 % of gross turnover .
Then there is the clean slate , a provision that ends the unfortunate practice of deducting advances from featured artists ' royalties .
Again , this provision is there for the lesser-known performers because it is their records which often do not recoup the advances .
There is also a clause allowing performers to undo buy-out contracts once their producers cease to sell their recorded performances .
All of this is highly innovative and no EU proposal has ever pushed the boat out so far in favour of performers .
This is not a proposal for the benefit of record labels .
This is a carefully balanced approach aimed at rewarding Europe 's creators .
Some might argue that European creators are over-protected .
Those who rely on copyright for their income would beg to differ .
If artists stayed in the music recording business because it pays to do so , consumers would enjoy more variety as a consequence .
We also welcome the invitation for the Commission to conduct a separate impact assessment on audiovisual performers and to come forward with appropriate proposals during the course of 2010 .
We are confident that we can deliver the impact assessment within the time foreseen by Parliament .
The Commission agrees that the issue of managing online rights for the redistribution of TV and radio programmes merits close attention .
As a corollary to the term proposal we have addressed the broadcaster 's legitimate concerns on online rights .
The Commission therefore proposes to make the following declaration once the proposal is adopted in Council .
The declaration would read : ' The Commission recognises the pressing need for the collective management of the rights of phonogram performers and phonogram producers when radio or television productions incorporating broadcasts from commercial phonograms as an integral part thereof are made available to the public in such a way that members of the public may access the radio or television productions from a place and at a time individually chosen by them .
The Commission will take appropriate measures to facilitate the implementation of such collective management and , as a first step , the Commission will institute a structured dialogue between stakeholders with the aim of establishing a functioning licensing regime .
This declaration is limited to the on-demand making available of radio or television productions and does not cover the making available of the phonogram itself . '
End of the intended declaration .
The Commission put forward this proposal in July 2008 .
We are now in the midst of the worst economic crisis the world has seen in my lifetime .
For many EU citizens this crisis affects their daily lives .
Europe 's performers often live a very precarious existence at the best of times .
This proposal ensures that performers can in their later life recoup a share in the income they generate .
Parliament is being sensitive to this , and the process has shown that the impetus to act for our creators is still alive .
I believe that all the fears expressed by those who are against term extension will prove unfounded .
In conclusion I would like to warmly thank the rapporteur , Brian Crowley , and express my appreciation and admiration for the efficient handling of this file by the European Parliament .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate our rapporteur and all the Members who have worked on this issue .
I should also like to thank the commissioner for the file he submitted to us .
Performers have been overlooked all too often in previous legislation , and , like anyone else who helps to create intellectual property , they have a right to receive proper remuneration .
This amendment has therefore extended this principle to performers , which is already a considerable step forward .
However , much still remains to be done , for this compromise is only a first step .
The circumstances of copyright distribution companies still vary considerably in the various countries , which have very different statuses , and , from this perspective , harmonisation is not ready to be carried out in practice .
Parliament 's report calls on the Commission to perform impact assessments and to monitor this measure .
The next Commission will therefore be called on to continue this work .
As regards the granting of licences , I should like to draw attention to the fact that the artistic community is extremely insecure as a result of approaches such as this , since artists fear that large producers will have the upper hand over works created by small producers .
Therefore , a balance will still have to be found along these lines .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( EL ) Mr President , I too should like to add my congratulations to the rapporteur and the Commission on the compromise .
The main proposals contained in the directive include the extension to the period of protection for performers and producers from 50 to 70 years , the creation of a fund for musicians and the introduction of ' use it or lose it ' clauses in contracts .
All this is important , and was discussed by us in committee , as were the idea of the ' use it or lose it ' clause , the simplification of administrative procedures and the harmonisation of rules in all the Member States .
These were important issues which were included in the compromise , with which we are satisfied .
At the same time , we are satisfied because the 70-year period brings protection into line with the period of time for which intellectual property is protected , which is also 70 years .
The extension to this period of protection will help with efforts to promote young musical producers , thereby allowing Europe to become a global source of exceptional musical talent which makes an active contribution to artistic creation and job security .
At the same time , the Member States will have tax revenue and Europe will become an exporter of intellectual property .
I consider the compromise to be satisfactory and welcome the success achieved .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - Mr President , I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur and , for the first time in my 10 years in this place , to congratulate the Commission on both its proposal and on the compromises it came forward with later .
I come from a point of view where I like copyright .
I believe copyright and patents protect people , businesses and intellectual property ( IP ) , and intellectual property is the bedrock of entrepreneurial free market economies .
People and companies happily invest time and money in the hope of finding a product - in this case , music - that people will like and want to buy .
Across the world societies with strong IP protection move forward .
Those that have fewer entrepreneurs and fewer patents just go backwards .
Now 38 000 session musicians in the United Kingdom have signed a petition backing these proposals .
Session musicians deserve the help they will be getting from this proposal .
There is one in my constituency , a guy called Ted Carroll - one of many hundreds of session musicians - who has written to me asking us to adopt these compromises .
That is why I am strongly in favour of this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal being submitted to you is a positive measure for artists , for art and for culture , and our Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will support it .
Indeed , what is before you now is a compromise that strives to take account of the various points of view and the various interests and which - and this is the interesting part - is liable to be adopted by the Council , which so far has come up against a small blocking minority .
This compromise improves the Commission 's proposal .
It makes the relationships between producers and performers fairer thanks to a clause that permits performers to exercise their rights where they are not exercised by producers .
It guarantees fairer conditions for session musicians in relation to soloists .
Session musicians will benefit from a permanent 20 % levy .
Under the Spanish Presidency we are going to give thought to extending the proposal to the audiovisual sector , that is , to producers and actors .
In terms of broadcasters , I am grateful to you , Commissioner , for the declaration you just made , and I believe that a very precise declaration should in fact be attached to the Council 's common position so that matters relating to the radio broadcasting of music are not jeopardised .
We are talking here about real revenue ; session musicians are going to see their income tripled , to reach up to EUR 2 000 .
Consumers ' interests are not harmed since extending the term of protection does not increase prices .
Libraries ' interests are not harmed since libraries do not pay royalties to performers or record producers .
They pay them only to authors , and , even then , there are many exceptions .
This is why I am profoundly grateful to Mr Crowley , Mrs Gill , Commissioner McCreevy and the Commission for all of this work .
It reflects the state of the world , increased life expectancy and new uses for works , and this is why we must adopt this text - to try to ensure that it is made definitive at first reading .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , this report has had a long , and at times complex , birth within Parliament , subject to intense lobbying from all sides , and with myths and counterclaims being the order of the day .
Owing to the urgency and importance of getting this report adopted in this parliamentary term , the rapporteur and our fellow shadow rapporteur have worked hard to reach agreement on the key points in the Council 's position .
I therefore congratulate all those who have been involved in coming to a sensible , just and sustainable consensus .
I am , however , disappointed that the Council has failed time and again to reach any similar agreement .
I am pleased , though , that the report meets my main aims and the objectives of the PSE Group , and that , if we are to have an extension of the copyright term of protection , increased revenues must first and foremost benefit the performers .
That is why I am able to accept the compromise amendments tabled by the rapporteur , as there are extra measures for performers .
I would like to single out some key amendments : Amendment 58 , which is a permanent ' use it or lose it ' clause ; Amendments 59 to 61 on a permanent claim for session players , under which labels have to set aside 20 % of all sales revenue ; Amendment 62 on a clean slate for featured artists ; Amendment 71 on the possibility for featured artists to renegotiate better contracts ; and , finally , Amendment 75 on an assessment of the impact on audiovisual performers .
I would therefore like to ask colleagues who have reservations to reconsider and vote for this report .
I recognise that it is not perfect and that there are concerns .
In different circumstances I would have liked it to have addressed , especially for featured artists , the time period allowed for record labels under the ' use it or lose it ' clause , which kicks in after a year rather than after a matter of months , which would have been preferable .
To conclude , I would ask the Council urgently to come to agreement on this issue .
All the other key players have reached agreement , and performers need clarification sooner , rather than later .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , despite an enterprising charm offensive from the Commissioner and his services , I still cannot support this proposal to extend the copyright term .
I know the proposal was well meant , but in the digital era , when the way in which recordings are distributed is rapidly changing , why should we make an irreversible change by extending a system that , at its core , still operates with contracts and a structure more relevant to physical distribution and sale ?
The only hope to rescue that situation is to address the matter of contracts that have become unfair over time , and this has not been done .
We should be making it clear that assignment for life without renewal clauses is no longer acceptable , and one of the prices recording companies must pay for any extension .
A lot of commendable work has been done to impose good conditions in return for the extension , but I fear these bolt-on additions do not render it fully fit for the purpose in the long-term future , and they also contain their own inconsistencies and unfairness because they have not addressed the matter of contracts .
I have looked for a compromise that I could live with , and I did offer the idea of limiting the term extension to recordings published before 1975 , as appears in ALDE Amendments 80 and 81 , which are compatible with the main package .
I admit that this is a fix for the rock-and-roll era , which is concentrating minds right now and which saw both an explosion in popular music and remarkably poor contracts .
However , such an amendment would not put us in an irreversible position for all newer recordings .
It would see us through to the end of the current model of recording companies , which are , when all is said and done , the main beneficiaries of , and agitators for , this extension .
It would also give us time to reflect on and develop more performer- and future-oriented proposals really fit for a digital age .
If you come back addressing the points that I have raised , then it could be a package worth voting for , but otherwise I cannot support it .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the excellent work he has accomplished .
Copyright protection currently lasts for a maximum of 50 years , and in my opinion this period is not sufficient to give fair remuneration to artists for their creative work and performance .
Indeed , it is important to improve the social situation of artists through greater protection , provided by the institutions .
It is for this reason that we are in favour of extending the copyright protection period to 95 years , and we are requesting that the additional earnings generated by this extension be given exclusively to the artists and that , in particular , for the additional 45 years , the latter should be released from the contractual obligation requiring them to transfer part of the revenue to third parties .
This measure should in fact be exclusively aimed at providing a genuine advantage for authors and performers .
On the other hand , it would also be desirable for the Commission to assess the impact of and need to widen the scope of this extension to include the audiovisual sector .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we have a problem with copyright and we have a problem with remuneration for artists .
So we should and we must become proactive and do something here .
However , if we become proactive , then it is important that we react to the challenges of the digital era and not flog dead horses .
Let me explain how I arrived at this image .
The proposal before us actually only honours one single promise , and that is the promise to promote the music industry .
If we were to address what is actually happening with the artists and their income and calculate that , we would arrive at averages that are clearly too low for artists to support themselves and get something out of it .
Moreover , this money does not go directly to artists .
The fund is too small to achieve anything .
An artist with whom I discussed this told me that a redistribution was taking place here between the quick and the dead .
I had to contradict him : it is a redistribution between artists and producers , the music industry , and then only the big names .
All in all , Commissioner , this proposal is not appropriate .
We need to find something better .
We need , for example , to create something like a flat rate .
Even the proposals you make in connection with the ' use-it-or-lose-it ' clause are still theoretical law .
Please can we do something clever and well-founded , just as the artists recommended and requested in our hearing in the Committee on Legal Affairs .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , I believe that the intention of this initiative was genuinely about improving the social situation of performers , as Commissioner McCreevy and our colleague Brian Crowley have asserted , but it does not in fact achieve this .
Unfortunately , even the changes introduced by committee do not go far enough in improving the proposal .
It is a proposal which , I believe , will ultimately reward those artists that are already successful , and indeed reward the industry .
I am baffled at the notion of extending the term of copyright , whether it is to 70 years or 95 years , and I am baffled by it not just because it is dubious and almost out of step with the digital age but also because , quite clearly , a move like that will primarily benefit industrial interests and not struggling artists .
I believe , notwithstanding all of the hard work and goodwill , that MEPs should reject this proposal .
I think the Commission needs to go back to the drawing board and come up with the right proposal , one that is not just about supporting performers and artists , but that in real and practical terms will deliver precisely that .
( ES ) Mr President , unlike the two previous speakers , I am in agreement with the majority of the Members who have spoken on this point .
This is a good directive , in fact an excellent directive , which is designed to protect performing artists .
When there is talk of having to find a more intelligent way of doing deals , what is actually being discussed is doing away with the concept of intellectual property .
Deals can only be done if there is an established law .
We already have an established law at the national level .
The Commission , under the leadership of Mr McCreevy , has adopted a fine initiative , a positive initiative , and I believe that the House should adopt the agreement that we have reached within the Committee on Legal Affairs thanks to the work done by the rapporteur , Mr Crowley , and the various shadow rapporteurs , such as Mrs Gill and Mr Toubon .

I believe this is a magnificent directive , and that it will strengthen the creation of intellectual property .
In addition , the directive includes several recommendations regarding further work to be done .
I believe that the adoption of the report by this House - and I hope that the Council will align itself with the Commission and Parliament - will serve to ensure that in the next term of office the Commission will continue along this road , will make proposals to Parliament and that we will make progress within the framework of the protection of intellectual property , which is vital for the development of our European Union as a great institution based on a common culture .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Crowley is a capable MEP , who often comes up with intelligent proposals .
This time , however , I find it difficult to follow his intentions .
The Commission is proposing that the term of protection for music recordings be increased from the current 50 years to 95 years , which would nearly double the current term .
Most would agree that this is excessive .
The compromise that is now being talked about is 70 years , and this is heading in the right direction .
Several questions still remain , however .
Will an extension increase cultural diversity and facilitate the writing of new compositions ?
What effect has the copyright extension in the United States had on developments there ?
Has it strengthened the position of the artists or is it the music companies ' that are the major beneficiaries ?
Can we justify an extension that increases the term of protection so dramatically ?
Is it not too simplistic to argue that creativity and the creative desire are directly linked to the duration of protection ?
In my opinion , these questions have still not been answered .
As a Liberal , I believe in copyright law and the purpose behind it , and I can therefore agree with several of my fellow Members here in this House .
It is , of course , important to safeguard the production of new compositions and for composers to have control over their own work , including from a financial point of view .
However , our legal interventions in this House must , of course , be proportionate , and I do not think that is the case in this instance .
In my home country , the question of access to compositions on the Internet is being debated , particularly after the prominent trial that resulted in the Pirate Bay ruling .
At this point in time , when copyright is the subject of intensive debate , I therefore believe that we would be making a mistake if we approved the Commission 's proposal for an extension to the term of protection for musical compositions from 50 to 95 years .
Therefore , like Mrs Bowles , I am going to reject the proposal in its entirety .
It is my belief that the Commission should try again .
Commissioner , have a rethink , rework the proposal and come back !
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me that , in the face of the major changes affecting the musical and cultural sector in general , Europe risks responding with protectionist solutions and outdated schemes , promising crumbs to performers and small music companies and instead ultimately furthering the interests of the big stars who will have considerably greater opportunity to increase their profits .
You see , in the wake of the Swedish court 's judgment against the managers of the website The Pirate Bay , who were punished for having encouraged peer-to-peer sharing of musical material , Parliament 's approval of a measure of this kind would consolidate a negative and altogether inappropriate approach to the new dynamics of the current technological era and the need of entire generations for culture , communication and freedom .
The protection of artists ' freedom of expression in fact lies in their relationship with society ; the freedom to produce art and the freedom to enjoy it go hand in hand and have a common adversary in the mercantile subservience of culture that would be strengthened by this legislation .
( EL ) Mr President , the Commission proposal and the report want to make the creation of art and manmade culture permanent commodities .
They are not designed to protect musicians .
This extension will only profit the monopoly behemoths , the multinational companies in the music , show and entertainment industry which will continue to grow rich from the creations of others .
The losers will be the workers , the artists and human evolution itself because , under coercion from the multinationals , the overwhelming majority of players and performers are obliged to assign all their rights to them in return for a pittance .
This extension will generate profits of hundreds of millions of euros for the multinationals , but only a few dozen euros a year for musicians .
At the same time , the large companies will also control intellectual production on the basis of the law of profit .
The Commission proposal , which is supported by the major political groups in the European Parliament , is telling proof of the nature , character and interests which the European Union defends and safeguards .
In order to safeguard the profitability of capital , it is turning everything into a commodity , from water through to art , culture and the creations of man .
( SV ) Mr President , the proposal to extend the copyright term to 95 years is an appalling example of how the large record companies have succeeded in lobbying for a proposal that goes entirely their way .
Such a long extension to the term of protection for copyright will only hit individual consumers and it will inhibit the production of new music .
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left have therefore tabled an amendment in which we ask for the 95 years requirement to be removed .
We also ask for the whole directive to be rejected .
The rights to the song Happy Birthday are supposedly owned by the North American company Warner .
People who celebrate their birthday in public hardly dare sing that song in certain places in the United States out of fear of reprisals and fines .
This is an absurd example of how bad it can get when we allow individual interests and the industry to govern policy .
That example was from the US , where the term of protection for copyright is already 95 years .
Let this not be the case in Europe .
Reject the requirement for 95 years and reject the entire directive !
I also wonder whether the Commission has carried out an impact assessment of how much of the future revenue will go to the individual artists and how much will actually be retained by the large corporations .
( EL ) Commissioner , as we heard during the debate , opinions on the legislative regulation extending the period of protection for intellectual property vary .
I should like to highlight once again that the adoption of this specific directive will not affect consumers , nor will it cause the price of phonograms to rise .
All of us are endeavouring to extend the period of protection of related rights in line with the increase in life expectancy .
Intellectual property is protected for 70 years after the author 's death , thereby generating a certain amount of revenue for their family .
The current protection for related rights of performers , which covers 50 years from recording , is therefore very short .
That is why the compromise setting a period of 70 years would be a good idea .
I also wish to draw your attention to the study to be prepared on actors and the possible proposal for a directive which will be presented in 2010 .
I also consider that actors ' interpretations should be protected , especially in a period in which artistic creation is important and when technological developments can be a help in safeguarding income for artists .
To close , I hope for the European Commission 's cooperation on the proposal for the new directive .
Mr President , let me be clear : I support the extension of copyright from 50 to 70 years .
My problem is : who benefits ?
I welcome the fact that , as demanded by the Musicians ' Union , session musicians are going to get 20 % of the profits for distribution .
The problem is the balance between the multinational record companies and the featured artists .
Many of these people signed contracts 30 or 40 years ago that gave them 8 % of the dealer 's price , with the companies responsible for producing , distributing and collecting the money from sales .
Now these selfsame multinational record companies will get a multi-million-euro windfall for doing absolutely nothing because , in this new digital age , there is nothing to do .
On the basis of an industrial structure long made redundant by technological change , it is the Sheriff of Nottingham winning , not Robin Hood .
These artists should have been able to reclaim their property that they alone were responsible for creating .
( SV ) Mr President , let us get one thing clear : an extension to the term of protection for copyright would not result in more or better music .
What 25-year old musician would honestly say ' no , I am not going to make this record , as I will only be paid for it until I am 75 and not until I am 120 ' ?
It will not even encourage poor musicians , as it is not their records that sell more than 50 years after they were made .
Instead , it encourages either the large record companies or those who have already earned a lot from their recordings .
I think this has completely lost all sense of proportion .
Someone who invents a cure for cancer today will - over and above receiving the Nobel Prize for Medicine - have his or her invention protected for no more than 20 years , whereas someone who can make a record would then have that invention , or rather the record , protected for 95 years .
That is out of all proportion .
I do , however , agree that 70 years is better than 95 , although I do nevertheless think that the best thing to do would be to reject the entire proposal .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to think that I have learned a lot from my time here as European Commissioner .
Some people might contend that I have not , but I think I have .
But one thing that I have learned is that anything touching on the area of intellectual property is fraught with all types of pitfalls .
There have been a number of issues raised in this whole area of intellectual property in Parliament and the Council of Ministers , both in my time as Commissioner and in my time previously as an Irish government minister , and some of these issues have been around for 20 / 30 years .
So I have learned that any aspect of this topic gets a tremendous amount of coverage , generates a lot of debate and polarises a lot of Members of Parliament , Member States and different stakeholders .
So I have learned that it is exceptionally difficult to address anything in this area and try to reach an acceptable solution .
During my time here as Commissioner there have been many instances where we have failed to reach any agreement in certain areas .
That being so , I am not the least bit surprised at the depth and sincerity of the arguments put on all sides of this debate , because any issue relating to the intellectual property area always generate this kind of argument , and people who are on the opposing side of the compromise proposal put forward by Mr Crowley will be on totally the opposite side in other areas of intellectual property .
So it is very interesting , in this type of debate , to see people who would take one position in other areas of intellectual property taking a different position here , because this is a very difficult area , and I accept the sincerity of the people who have contributed .
There is little point in my going over all the various points raised individually and debating them , because they have been debated ad nauseam in the committee .
One thing that Mr Crowley and rapporteurs from other committees did is to give it a lot of time .
Parliament has given this an exceptional amount of time and an exceptional degree of effort , and many of the assistants and people in my own DG worked exceptionally hard on this to try and reach what we thought would be an acceptable compromise .
But I will touch on some of the areas .
Let me just eliminate a few points at the outset that do not relate so much to this debate as to what surrounded the earlier debate by which we came up with this proposal .
Let me assure you that the people who asked me to go forward with a proposal here were the performers - that is where the intensive lobbying came from .
If there is disagreement here in the House and in Member States , I can equally say there were different views in my DG on this issue when I first came to it as to how we should proceed , and many of the differing viewpoints put forward here were reflected there as well .
I think that is natural : if it generates such divided views here and in other Member States you can expect the same in the DG .
But I was lobbied fairly intensively by ordinary performers .
Yes , the high-profile performers came and lent their support to the cause , because the ordinary performers thought that it would be better to have some of the big names in this particular area as well , but the ordinary performers - the session musicians , who most people have never heard of - were the biggest lobbyists here .
I think it is significant to note that , as Mr Heaton-Harris said , 38 000 session musicians support this particular proposal .
So one has to make a judgement on which is the proper way to go forward .
I would say that most people know the singers of their favourite four songs or records , but I doubt very much that many of them know who actually wrote them .
But the writer of the song is entitled to life plus 70 years .
If I named six tunes here tonight out of the most popular tunes created , I doubt that there would be anyone in this Chamber who would be able to name who wrote the songs , but each one who knows a particular record would be able to say : that was sung by such and such .
The writer gets life plus 70 , but the performer gets only 50 years from the date of his performance .
From any type of moral perspective that is unfair .
Some people had one hit song when they were 21 or 22 and were then never heard of again , and they did not make an awful lot of money out of it .
In their twilight years when they are approaching 70 and beyond I think it would be only reasonable that they could have a little bit of additional income .
You can boil down all the technical arguments and the intellectual arguments and everything else , but on the basis of fair play I think that argument wins out .
As Mr Crowley and others mentioned , this was a genuine attempt to address some of these issues - and some very conflicting issues .
We have done our best to get a proposal .
Mr Crowley has put an extraordinary degree of work into this area in trying to reach agreements and compromises and has worked long and hard .
I shall just refer to some of the issues raised .
Ms Gill , who is very supportive of the proposal and I thank her very much for her support , mentioned the ' use it or lose it ' clause , which kicks in after a year , but , in the implementation in Member States , Member States can allow it to kick in after three months or six months if they so wish .
Ms Bowles - and I do not doubt for one moment her sincerity in this regard - feels she is not in a position to vote for this particular proposal or the compromise proposal put forward by Brian Crowley .
She mentioned the matter of contracts .
Well , I do not think the matter of contracts should kill the proposal .
It is definitely another issue which could be the subject of another initiative if - and only if - this proposal succeeds .
Ms Lichtenberger made a fine address .
I would point out to her that EUR 2 000 certainly is not peanuts for a session player .
The fund , as I said earlier , is endorsed by 38 000 performers and I think they should know .
Mr Medina Ortega , from his vast experience as a politician , made a very good point , and I agree with him that we have to propose something here that has a reasonable chance of flying in the Council of Ministers as well .
As he pointed out , we have to be realistic , because , with different views there as well , we have to come forward with a proposal - as Mr Crowley and others have done - that has a realistic chance of flying in the Council of Ministers , and he put that point very forcibly and well .
Mr Schmidt and Mr Musacchio made points about the existing label business models , but we are not endorsing the existing label business models .
A 70-year term is open to all new innovative business models .
Mr Holm referred to the possibility of being fined , for example , for singing Happy Birthday but I think he has his ideas confused here .
It is not about the song : it is only about its recording by a performer , so Mr Holm can sing Happy Birthday any time he wishes and he will not be in danger of being penalised in any way .
This is about the recording by the performer , not by the writer .
Mr Mavrommatis made a number of points which we have noted but I think 70 years is the best proxy for life .
In conclusion , I would like to express my appreciation and admiration for the efficient handling of this file by everybody involved in the European Parliament .
It has resulted in the compromise proposal put forward by Brian Crowley , and I think it demonstrates our willingness to improve the legal framework for our creative community .
I think that in the future it will show that protecting those who create was the right choice , and that increasing efficiency of rights management infrastructures will prove wrong those who claim that better protection will lead to a less thriving online culture .

I would like to thank everybody concerned with the debate , particularly the rapporteur Brian Crowley , not because he is a colleague of mine from Ireland and a long-standing friend , but because he has put in an extraordinary amount of work to try and make this compromise acceptable to as many competing interests in Parliament as possible and also facilitated a compromise which , as Mr Medina Ortega has said , has a reasonable chance of acceptance in the Council of Minsters as well .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should again like to thank colleagues for their contributions to this debate .
Unfortunately , despite all our discussions , proposals , amendments and further re-amendments of amendments , and the changes that have taken place , some colleagues still have not grasped the way that this situation has moved on .
I must say , on a very personal level , that I can appreciate everybody 's viewpoint and understand where they are coming from .
it is difficult to do so when we get amendments from colleagues attached to which is an article in the Financial Times stating that we should vote against copyright , when at the bottom of that article it says ' copyright protected ' .
Even the Financial Times , which is opposed to copyright protection or extension , uses the copyright tool itself !
Likewise , I hear consumer organisations saying that it is wrong to extend copyright because this will interfere with consumers ' rights and consumer choices , again not realising or not giving credence to the fact that copyright already exists and that those rights and protection are already there .
Likewise , I hear colleagues mentioning the imposition that this will place on innovation and creativity , but how will people create anything if they cannot protect their rights ?
If they cannot protect their creations , how will they do that ?
Likewise , people who speak about merchandising - or ' mercantiling ' , as was the translation - in the record industry should wake up and smell the coffee .
This has been there since the year dot .
Before recorded music ever came into being , when you bought sheet music you had to pay a certain fee that went back to the creator of that music and every time it was performed the performer got a cut from it as well .
So what we are talking about is putting balance and fairness into the argument , to ensure the rights of those who are weakest in contractual terms , who are weakest in enforcement terms and who are approaching the end of their musical careers , so that they can get protection and uses .
It is important that people recognise that the advent of new technology - which we all welcome as it is fantastic - does not mean that you have the right to take something for nothing .
When in the past you went into a record store and took a label 's CD or vinyl record and walked out with it you would be caught for shoplifting , and downloading music free of charge without paying a fee to somebody is equivalent to that .
This is about allowing for proper mechanisms to be put in place .

I want to thank Jacques Toubon , Neena Gill and all my colleagues for their help and assistance , and am particularly grateful to Mr Medina Ortega for his useful guidance and advice in helping me out of a problem with the Spanish side of things .
That concludes this item .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The objective of this report is to support European artists by extending the term of protection of copyright of phonograms from 50 years to 70 years .
The document also provides for establishment of a fund for session musicians , maintained from contributions of producers equivalent to at least 20 % of their annual revenues from the extension of copyright .
Fifty years after publication of a phonogram , the performer will be able to terminate the contract if the producer is not marketing the phonogram .
These are new , although cosmetic , changes in copyright law , which urgently needs thorough revision .
Copyright existed before the Internet , and refers to a different era .
Now a new approach to this matter is needed .
Current legislation , including Directive 2006 / 116 / EC of 12 December 2006 , does not fill a legal loophole which exists because of the development of new technology .
Adoption of the Crowley report by the European Parliament will allow a certain multicultural protection , which will foster competitiveness in the world music industry .
Parliament has also asked the Commission to make an assessment of the need for a similar extension of the term of protection of copyright to performers and producers in the audiovisual sector .
No later than 1 January 2010 , the Commission is to present a report on the results of this assessment to the European Parliament , the Council and the European Economic and Social Committee .
We still have to wait for a thorough revision of copyright law .
Action Plan on Urban Mobility ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Savary , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on an action plan on urban mobility .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you .
It is a somewhat unprecedented exercise in style that the European Parliament is carrying out on this report since , I would remind you , the issue of urban mobility was first raised by the transport commissioner , Jacques Barrot , over two years ago now , and it resulted in a Green Paper by the European Commission , which submitted its conclusions to us in spring 2007 .
The latter were addressed in a report - an own-initiative report - by our Parliament , drafted by my fellow Member , Mr Rack , who is here in the Chamber .
The European institutional system stipulates that a Green Paper must be followed by a White Paper , and , in the case in point , it was European Commission proposals for action plans on urban mobility that were on the table .
I must thank Mr Tajani , who is here , for advising me in December that it would not be politically possible for the European Commission to submit a proposal there and then .
It is understandable : for reasons of their own , a number of States have reservations about this now that the European elections are approaching , but Parliament sought to take up the gauntlet .
I should also like to pay tribute to my fellow Members present here today , from all the political groups - especially the coordinators - and to the Committee on Regional Development , for having supported my proposal , which was to build on the advantage that we had and to say that , since the Commission could no longer take the initiative , we should do .
What we are going to propose is somewhat unprecedented .
I do not know whether a precedent has been set , here in this House .
We are going to propose to the Commission the action plan that it should have proposed to us .
Naturally , no legal openings are to be expected from an own-initiative report such as this .
By proposing a very practical action plan , with extremely precise proposals , Parliament , not being the executive , and not being the government of the European Union - that is the Commission 's role - can hope for nothing other than to be heard .
I must say in passing that , over the last few months , we have obtained the overwhelming support of all the organisations that take an interest in these matters .
They include , in particular - I should like to make the point here for the benefit of the few remaining Members who have some reservations about this initiative - local authorities and all the organisations that represent local authorities , including in countries which , today , plead subsidiarity as a way of explaining to us that this action plan is out of the question .
I therefore believe that local authorities have recognised that urban mobility is likely to be one of the major challenges of the 21st century .
Why ?
Because , today , 60 % of Europeans live in the urban community .
In 2020 , this figure will rise to 80 % , and we , the European Union , have a legal basis that makes us jointly responsible , with the Member States and local authorities , for transport policy .
Would we , as Europeans , give up on having the slightest idea or the slightest initiative in areas in which transport will present the most complicated and , no doubt , the most fundamental problems in the years to come ?
We think not , and that is why the European Parliament did not want us to keep quiet , did not want us to keep quiet on urban mobility .
Rather , in some ways it wanted us to use this initiative to call on the Commission to take up this matter again as a priority for the next mandate .
I should like to thank all of the coordinators , since we have worked in an unprecedented manner , we have worked very much upstream , and the report that has been submitted has achieved very broad support within the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I should like to say that this is a report that is based on the principle of subsidiarity .
It is out of the question - yes , I have gone on for too long , but I am sure you will forgive your rapporteur , Mr President - for Europe to think about taking any urban transport-related decisions whatsoever on behalf of local authorities .
I myself am a local elected representative , and I am very committed to the freedom of administration of local authorities , as the campaigns that I have led in this House with , in particular , Mr Piecyk , my colleague from the Committee on Transport and Tourism , have shown .
What I do believe , however , is that Europe can incentivise , can improve the exchange of information and best practices , and that is the essence of our proposals , which will be outlined shortly .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank Mr Savary for his work .
I should like to thank him for the commitment he has shown to promoting a European policy on transport in major cities , in cities .
This is not a secondary issue : if we do indeed want to rise to the challenge of transport in Europe , we have to work in the field of urban transport .
That is why I should like firstly to thank Mr Savary .
I repeat : thanks to him , we have made progress in the field of urban transport , and today 's report , which will be voted on tomorrow , is a very important message ; it is a message that I must listen to , and I hope to be able to give Mr Savary positive feedback on his commitment during the next term of office .
I am grateful to him once again for the work he has done on the issue of urban transport .
I shall now continue in my mother tongue .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , urban transport clearly forms an integral part of the European Union transport system since the whole system often begins and ends in large urban areas , and crosses plenty of them along the way .
For this reason , it is important not only to consider urban mobility from the point of view of city life , but also from the perspective of transport of all kinds , including long-distance transport .
Combating climate change , facilitating trade , guaranteeing energy supplies , responding to citizen 's mobility needs , reducing problems associated with congestion and tackling demographic change are all issues of fundamental importance for European policy , and mobility in urban areas is intimately linked to all of these challenges .
It was for precisely this reason that the Commission presented its Green Paper on Urban Mobility in September 2007 , and the consultation that followed the adoption of the Green Paper has demonstrated that there is broad agreement on the fact that the European Union has a role to play in this area .
Your resolution on the Green Paper on Urban Mobility , drafted under Mr Rack 's leadership and adopted on 9 July 2008 , upholds this conclusion .
The aim of the Paper was to pave the way for an action plan on urban mobility ; Parliament 's decision to go ahead with its own action plan before any Commission proposal was made sends a strong political signal ; that is why I emphasised the significance of Mr Savary 's work as rapporteur , as it shows how much importance Parliament attaches to a job we absolutely cannot afford to neglect .


As you are well aware , I am committed to the issue of urban mobility and to the swift adoption of a well-drafted action plan .
I would like to reiterate that this is planned for in the Commission 's programme of work for 2009 and I hope that it will be adopted as soon as possible .
Mr Savary put it very well in his speech ; there is some resistance within the European institutions as some people feel that an action plan of this kind would violate the principle of subsidiarity .
I do not think there is any question of this , especially if we look at the Latin root of the word subsidiarity , which is subsidium , meaning ' help ' : it is our job as European institutions to help local institutions work more successfully .
Helping someone does not mean replacing them , it means contributing towards a better solution to problems !
Without going into detail on the proposal , I can confirm that our action plan will be based on activities that we have been driving for some time , and will integrate them into a coherent context , seeking to present that political vision that is still lacking in European action on urban mobility .
In this way , the political framework should be outlined for other future intervention in fields in which action at Community level is deemed useful , or indeed essential .
Your report will certainly make an important contribution to our internal discussions and I can assure you that we will be able to consider many of the proposals it contains .
Of course , there are aspects and details that require further clarification or debate .
We will examine your suggestions very carefully , I can assure you , together with the recommendation from the Committee of the Regions , with whom you consulted .
Today 's vote will not be the end of our dialogue on this .
As the Commission 's work proceeds , I will make sure I stay in contact with Mr Savary and the other Members who have followed the transport sector closely , so that the plan the Commission adopts will be in keeping with what Parliament is adopting and will represent genuine quality .
Finally - let me say again - our plan will not show that the Commission is replacing local bodies , but simply that the Commission wants to help local bodies to improve their work by sharing information and best practices that will enable citizens to live better and move around more easily within cities , outside cities and while crossing cities .
I therefore thank the European Parliament for the work it has done and the vote it is to hold on this plan .

Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Savary , ladies and gentlemen , we are here in a parliamentary assembly that is made for voting on texts , Commissioner , and we are above all in a parliamentary assembly so that texts are implemented .
We note today that , after the excellent work carried out by your predecessor with regard to the Green Paper and to the 400-odd contributions that have followed it , work has barely moved on , to the extent that , as you yourself repeated just now , it was interesting that the European Parliament should have expressed an opinion .
Indeed , nature abhors a vacuum , so when the European Commission does not do its job , it is Parliament that has to do it , and , in that respect , I must say - and you have said it too , Commissioner - that the work done by Mr Savary is very interesting since , in fact , he has provided you with all the material needed to draft the action plan .
I do not mean that a role reversal is taking place between the Commission and Parliament , but we should note that , while the Treaty of Lisbon has yet to be adopted , Parliament is in fact seizing a little more power .
This work by Mr Savary is excellent because it takes account once again of a number of proposals by the Committee on Regional Development .
While respecting the principle of subsidiarity , of course , we expect you to present us with a guide .
The latter will be useful .
Its aim will not be to constrain local authorities , but rather to help them .
We expect you to present us with indicators - again , not as a constraint , but as a support .
Above all we also expect you to present us with the travel plan-related elements .
In certain countries , these exist ; in certain countries , they are even mandatory , they are absolutely vital .
I should like to give an example .
At the Urban Housing Intergroup , which I have the honour of chairing , we have highlighted urban growth over the last few years : in 10 years , urban growth has covered three times the surface of Luxembourg .
So , how is that linked to our debate this evening ?
It has a very direct link since city-based users travel exactly 20 % more each day due to urban growth , and more than 70 % use their own cars .
All of this is a means of saying that , when the Committee on Regional Development asks you to observe the condition not only of the integrated approach but also of the travel plans , it is establishing a general principle that we very much hope you will take into account in your action plan .
This issue has obviously already been raised within our Urban Housing Intergroup , and we would like to express our gratitude to you in advance for taking account of the integrated approach here too .
You have not answered our questions today , Commissioner .
You have made what is , in a way , a half-hearted commitment ; you have been quite firm on the principle , but you have not provided us with any guarantees .
The situation is in fact serious .
Why ? 400 million Europeans live in cities , and those 400 million Europeans are affected by living conditions such as this that cause them to waste time every day in traffic jams .
We know that these traffic jams cost us 1 % of GDP .
At the same time as we are talking about a recovery plan - an economic recovery plan - we are letting billions of euro go to waste .
Swifter action is required , Commissioner , for these action plans on urban mobility are a crucial element of the recovery plan , but they are also crucial in terms of the climate-change challenge since , as you pointed out , 40 % of pollution is found in cities .
I should not like to ignore the safety aspect , either , since two out of three road accidents occur in cities .
When we know that one death costs nearly EUR 1 million , and one case of serious injuries more than EUR 1 million , you see the economic cost and the human cost that this challenge of urban mobility represents each year .
Thus , for all of these practical reasons , on the eve of the European elections , we are asking you , Commissioner , if possible during the conclusion of this evening 's debate , to go further in your proposals and in your promises , not by making general promises , but by committing to an action plan - your action plan - so that our fellow citizens will be more inclined to vote on 7 June .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I join the rapporteur , Gilles Savary , in expressing my regret that the Commission did not go through with its original plan for an integrated action plan .
There are many good reasons why everyone involved , from local authorities through to the European Union , is trying to improve urban transport conditions .
We know that most people in Europe live in towns and that current transport conditions are anything but optimal .
That is why there is agreement in principle to make integrated proposals at Parliament 's initiative on the plan and on Mr Savary 's report .
I thank him for his commitment and for his specific proposals .
At the same time , however , I should like to make it abundantly clear that what many fear or believe they should fear will not happen .
No one wants to take the right to configure traffic conditions away from the municipalities or the local or regional authorities .
We merely want to help from the European side to ensure that action is taken on the basis of reasonable common rules where a municipality , a town or a regional entity considers it reasonable .
The principle of subsidiarity is not in danger .
What we want to do here will help to protect that principle .
That is why we shall continue , in the interests of the citizens , to try and ensure that , when a citizen drives another ten or twenty kilometres in Europe , he does not stumble upon a traffic-calming zone which he believes to be the same as in his home district , only to find that totally different rules apply .
No one wants to impose some sort of congestion charge or other rules on communities , but if they are used , then they should be used within a framework which citizens recognise .
We have been in agreement on the sense in taking a common approach to traffic signs for over 100 years .
This should also apply in future to this issue .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) I should like to start by thanking rapporteur Gilles Savary , and all those who have contributed to the end result , for the work they have done , and the rapporteur , in particular , for persevering , despite the fact that the Commission has indicated its intention to abandon the plan of action , at least for the time being , which we have been calling for for so long .
I should like to ask the Commission to adopt the recommendations which we will be voting on tomorrow and to swing into action at the earliest opportunity .
Even though there is a small minority in Parliament , and evidently also some people in the Commission and the Member States , who believe that we should steer clear from anything that is related to towns , it is abundantly clear that Europe offers added value when it comes to addressing problems that are considerable and largely shared .
The report contains a number of interesting proposals .
An obvious one is the collection of information , of comparable data which will help map out problems .
Others include the exchange and promotion of sound ideas , directing technological innovation , ensuring that systems are interoperable , encouraging towns to compile mobility plans and taking steps to arrive at sustainable mobility .
These and other examples clearly concern matters that should be organised at European level in a bid to make our towns more liveable , more easily accessible and more sustainable .
I therefore count on the Commission to take this over and address this in the interests of our residents .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too thank the rapporteur .
In the context of climate change , urban transport plays a central role , because it is responsible for 70 % of all harmful emissions .
Only if we change our transport policy in the EU will we be able to achieve our own climate protection targets .
The greatest potential is in towns , where 90 % of all car journeys are less than 6 km long and which therefore offer an ideal opportunity to take a bus or train or go by bicycle or on foot .
We are delighted that the majority is in favour of only giving EU money to towns with over 100 000 inhabitants which can also submit a sustainable mobility plan .
We are sorry that our proposal to introduce a general speed limit of 30 km / h , with the facility for towns to set higher speeds on certain roads in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , did not achieve a majority .
This would not only be good for the climate ; it would also reduce the number of road traffic accidents .
Every year 40 000 people die on the roads of Europe ; that is 40 000 too many .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) I should like to start by thanking Mr Savary for our good cooperation .
He has drafted a sound report in close cooperation with the shadow rapporteurs .
The report is clear about the fact that urban mobility is a part of the transport sector where many challenges and opportunities lie .
Challenges in the field of European climate objectives , congestion control , traffic safety and user-friendliness , and opportunities with regard to sustainable economic development , and , closely related to this , the growth of inland shipping .
Since the report is excellent and is right to give due consideration to the principle of subsidiarity , I should like , briefly , to address the link between urban mobility and inland shipping .
Sustainable economic development in Europe , not least in the area of transport and in the urban areas , will largely depend on the use of inland shipping .
Many European cities have inland waterways and , consequently , the innate capacity to meet growing demand in transport in a sustainable manner .
After all , the increase in inland shipping requires no major infrastructural investments , does not contribute to congestion in European cities and does not increase the environmental and climate problems in European cities , provided that it uses clean engines and clean fuel .
If the inland shipping capacity is already present in European cities , this should be utilised and promoted .
The future of urban mobility is therefore closely connected to the future of inland shipping .
I would therefore ask the European Commission to keep a close eye on the interests of inland shipping when it drafts new legislation on urban mobility .
( DE ) Mr President , we have been debating urban transport in the EU for a very long time .
Why exactly ?
We are not even competent for it .
Competence was originally devised because about 80 % of the population live in towns and , due to climate change , we now want to take this on .
Fortunately , thanks to our protests , we were able to reduce these ambitions on the part of the European Commission to an action plan on urban transport .
My thanks to Commissioner Tajani for his insight .
Subsidere means to support rather than to prescribe , but of course , as an Italian , he knows that better than I , as a German with A-level Latin .
What is important to me , first and foremost , is that our report , Parliament 's report should highlight strict compliance with the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
Legislative measures at European level are inadmissible for urban traffic .
Supportive measures are what we are here for .
Brainstorming and encouraging the exchange of best practices make sense .
We do not all need to reinvent the bicycle .
Our towns need bespoke solutions , but they can only be worked out by local players , because only they know what is needed .
Municipalities need to take account of very diverse situations and they therefore need sufficient room for manoeuvre , especially if they are to keep their high streets alive .
They are important to the attractiveness of a town .
It is therefore important not to exclude private cars and to focus more on logistics in the town .
I should therefore like to see more support for research into inner-city retail logistics .
That would take some of the strain off a city .
It is also important to take account of demographic change .
Our society is constantly ageing .
Mobility requirements and residential requirements are changing .
If we want to reduce traffic , people need to be able to obtain their everyday requirements close to home , and that is also a challenge to the retail trade .
Anything else would simply promote the countryside .
We do not need an urban mobility observatory .
It would cost a great deal of money and generate a great deal of paper , which would simply be filed away in Brussels .
( EL ) Mr President , this report on urban mobility forms an important part of viable mobility in Europe and an integral part of the strategy for achieving sustainable growth and the Lisbon objectives .
The challenge is for innovative actions to be adopted and legislative measures to be taken that will significantly improve the quality of life of citizens in cities .
It is a fact that the daily lives of European citizens have become considerably more difficult as a result of stress from travelling , congestion , pollution , noise and the deterioration in the environment .
A balance therefore needs to be struck between the ambition , on the one hand , to develop the common transport policy as a right to mobility and as an important part of economic growth and , on the other hand , an integrated approach that will improve traffic congestion and make a drastic contribution towards combating climate change .
In brief , that will promote a more humane life .
We need to develop combined means of transport as quickly as possible and give citizens information on all urban transport networks , so that they are in a position to choose .
I too should like to congratulate the rapporteur on his very good and substantial report and to ask the European Commission not to waste any time or effort in preparing the action plan .
( PL ) Mr President , I congratulate Mr Savary on his treatment of the subject .
Transport is a fundamental problem in urban areas .
These issues , in accordance with the subsidiarity principle , are governed by domestic , and especially local , legislation .
However , the importance of this problem should be recognised , and specific help and coordination should be arranged at the European level .
This concerns both the promotion of good experiences and the propagation of innovative , technical and organisational solutions .
Special support is needed for intelligent transport systems in urban areas , which allow for effective traffic management as well as safety .
Combining the potential of transport , information technology and telecommunications is useful here .
Also needed are modal solutions , which use various means of mass transport and reduce congestion in city centres .
I consider it essential to change urban planning models so that urban transport will be friendly to people and the environment .
I also support the concept of creating a special financial instrument for urban mobility in the next financial perspective .
Let us remember what the rapporteur has emphasised , that almost 80 % of the inhabitants of the EU live in urban areas .
They lose a lot of time because of the bad organisation of transport .
Let us not waste that time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in response to this I can emphasise once again that I am committed to presenting the action plan in 2009 .
I am aware of the sense of urgency felt by the majority of Members , but - as Mr El Khadraoui pointed out - there are legal objections in several European institutions , not just the Commission , and we must overcome these by convincing those who have doubts that an action plan of this kind , I repeat , will not breach the principle of subsidiarity .
I will say it again , having studied Latin for many years , I am very familiar with the meaning of the word , which is positive ; it means ' to help ' .
After the debate we have had today and having read Mr Savary 's text , we want to carry on down this route .
For my part , I have no hesitations , but in order to reach our goal we need to persuade many people , and I think the right way to do this is with strong political , technical but also legal arguments .
The text drawn up by Parliament will certainly be of great assistance in seeking to overcome the objections that I am sure can be overcome in the next few months .
The Commission will thus give citizens an action plan , which will definitely take full account of the work you have done in recent weeks and months .
That is why I would like to thank you again , reaffirming my commitment and my desire to press ahead in the direction taken by my predecessor and also chosen by the European Parliament , while wishing to ensure that the decision is supported by as many people as possible so that the plan will be more effective .
Choosing to adopt the plan perhaps a few weeks earlier , but without the full support of all parties , may not be the most helpful way to achieve the goals we all believe in .
Nonetheless , I think that after this debate and after Parliament 's decision we will have made some significant progress , and therefore the requests made by the majority of Members - because even during the course of the debate there have been different undertones concerning the action plan - can , I think , be brought to a satisfactory conclusion in the coming months .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should obviously like straight away to reassure Mrs Sommer during this discussion .
There have been many laws here that have affected local authorities : on the pitting of the Stadtwerke , or municipal utilities , against one another , for example ; on public service obligations in the transport sector ; and on the directives on public contracts .
Well , this is not what this is about .
This is much more to do with subsidiarity .
It is not a question of deciding here that a local council , a municipality or an urban area should become a ' 30 zone ' or should give priority to rail travel .
I have made sure that we do not revert to this type of debate .
The question I asked myself was : ' What can the European Union 's added value be ? '
The answer is , firstly , its desire to act .
The European Union cannot leave the urban question to one side the very same month - December 2008 - that it sets itself , thanks to Mrs Merkel and to Mr Sarkozy , a particularly ambitious climate-change plan .
How can we embark on a ' three times twenty ' climate-change plan and say ' I am not interested in the urban environment ' , when the latter has the biggest influence on climate change ?
This is a question of political consistency - European political consistency - since we had agreed , and the governments had too , to embark on the climate-change plan .
There is a legitimate need to focus on the urban environment , and we cannot escape it , either in the area of transport or in other areas .
Yes , we must ensure that local councils take sovereign decisions ; they are closer to us .
However , what we can do is to ensure that they meet with one another , that they exchange best practices , and information .
We can ensure that they are encouraged to implement urban development plans , which is something that they have not all been able to do .
We can ensure that they integrate all modes of transport : soft transport , public transport , water transport - Mr Blokland is right - and rail transport .
We can ensure that they make urban transport more attractive to users .
That is what we are aiming for , and that is why we are calling for a financial instrument .
There is Marco Polo , which encourages the use of combined transport .
There are the URBAN programmes .
We have several European programmes that provide incentives .
We are not inventing them this time ; that has been going on for years .
Without its being increased , the next financial perspective should be reoriented towards urban transport .
That is our proposal .
To conclude , I would say - Madam President , excuse me , I am the rapporteur - to Mr Tajani that , if , tomorrow , we have a very large majority , he should be able to go back to the Commission and say : ' I believe that we must do something , because we have legitimacy and because Parliament has not acted alone ' .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
European citizens ' quality of life depends directly on making urban transport more convenient and greener .
For this reason , making transport accessible and supporting interoperability are vital actions .
At the same time , the investments channelled into these types of public works are an effective way of investing funds provided in the European and national economic recovery plans .
This approach is about focusing on citizens in their dual role of workers - through the creation of new jobs - and beneficiaries of transport services and of the improvement in the quality of the environment .
However , numerous European initiatives and recommendations on improving urban mobility need an integrated approach .
Observing the principle of subsidiarity does not exclude the need to implement a consistent legal framework and create a common reference framework which includes , apart from integrated recommendations , a comprehensive set of good practices .
As a result of this , the local authorities directly responsible for this matter will have both the opportunity to and interest in strengthening their cooperation with all those interested in the sustainable development of transport at local and regional level .
I too call on the European Commission to urgently draw up the action plan for urban mobility in order to speed up the consistent integration of this sector as part of the European transport network in general .
The existing technologies and means for transporting passengers and goods in an urban environment have reached their absolute limit .
Indeed , smaller European cities are already being choked by vehicle traffic .
In order for us to improve our citizens ' quality of life , we must speed up the development and implementation of scientific research and innovation in the area of urban mobility .
It is definitely the case that channelling resources into simply expanding the existing infrastructure will not help us overcome the growing crisis .
We must find new , ' intelligent ' solutions for tackling not only current , but also future problems with urban transport .
This is why I welcome the suggestion for developing a new generation CIVITAS programme as I think that the focus must be on developing the next generation of information technology for managing traffic flows .
The integrated planning approach adopted in recent years is relatively widely used in drawing up urban plans for larger cities in Europe .
The creation and funding of a permanent European structure , which will gather and spread good practice in this area , as well as promote dialogue between the interested parties from every region of the European Union , will mark a new , important step towards encouraging sustainable mobility in urban areas .
The Intelligent Transport Systems Action Plan - Intelligent Transport Systems in the field of road transport and interfaces with other transport modes ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Anne E. Jensen , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Intelligent Transport Systems Action Plan , and
the report by Anne E. Jensen , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the framework for the deployment of Intelligent Transport Systems in the field of road transport and for interfaces with other transport modes - C6-0512 / 2008 - .

rapporteur . - ( DA ) Madam President , I am not sure whether I can speak with the same enthusiasm as Mr Savary , but intelligent transport systems are a very exciting topic .
So , what are intelligent transport systems ?
Well , it is not that simple to answer that question , because we are talking about a whole host of different systems : systems which enable safer , more effective and environmentally sound transport , by taking advantage of modern information and communication technology .
ITS , as intelligent transport is also known , is therefore a generic term covering many different things .
Under the umbrella of ITS can be found things as diverse as eCall , which generates an automatic call to an emergency call centre in the case of an accident , road toll systems , which are systems designed to collect road charges , and the already widely known GPS systems , which many of us have in our cars to help us navigate through unknown terrain .
However , ITS has many other untapped potentials : potentials for communication between vehicles , between vehicle and road and between vehicle and information centre .
So , why are we not simply starting to use this technology on a larger scale , if it is so good ?
Well , what we face here is the question of which comes first , the chicken or the egg .
Should the technology installed in the car which is capable of communicating with a roadside transmitter come first ?
Car manufacturers are aware of the possibilities , but they will not be able to attract investment in such technologies if there are no roadside transmitters in place first . The authorities , on the other hand , do not want to invest in transmitters before cars are equipped to receive the signals .
Something will have to happen , however , and we will need to get things moving .
In this context , the Commission has produced the Intelligent Transport Systems Action Plan and submitted a proposal for a directive which should promote ITS use by kick-starting standardisation .
We should compliment the Commission on this .
There is need for this initiative .
The two reports on intelligent transport systems which we will be discussing today , the action plan and the directive are inextricably interlinked .
That is how it should be because an action plan without a directive would not give us anything very new .
Many of the things included in the action plan are projects which are already underway .
What is crucial , however , is the directive , because it will boost the development of important standards in the EU .
The action plan , on the other hand , is intended to delimit the scope of the directive and ensure that we channel the experience which we have gained from common projects into standardisation .
The adoption of common standards , through a European ITS Committee , applies to four specific areas : firstly , optimal use of road , traffic and travel data , secondly , continuity of ITS services on transport corridors and in conurbations , thirdly , road safety and security and , fourthly , integration of the vehicle into the transport infrastructure .
In addition , we are also dealing with the very important question of data security .
We do not want a big-brother society , so data security and the rights of the individual must be incorporated into the standards from the very outset .
Another issue of the utmost importance is responsibilities and division of responsibilities .
If something goes wrong , we should be able to identify where the problem lies , with the motorist , the satellite navigation system or the technology in the vehicle .
Otherwise , we will make no further progress .
And , as a result , we will not secure the necessary investment .
I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs from the other groups for their close cooperation .
We have experienced some difference of opinion as to what extent we should focus on modal alternatives to road transport , but I think that we have struck a balance between ensuring use of ITS technology in road transport and its interface with other modes of transport .
There is a possibility of using information technology to make easy comparisons between the different ways of getting from A to B and to get an overview of the fastest , cheapest and most environmentally sound options .
I would have liked us to have reached speedy agreement on this with the Council , but that has not been possible .
The Czech Presidency has done a very good job , but I hope that the way we have tightened up the Commission 's proposal will make the directive more palatable to the Council , because it is a directive that we are seeking .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Parliament , particularly the rapporteur , Mrs Jensen , and all the shadow rapporteurs , for their excellent work and the way in which they have welcomed the Commission 's proposals .
I am , of course , pleased with the choices made and take note of the suggested amendments to the draft directive .
Most of all , I am happy to see that Parliament has confirmed the importance of the EGNOS and Galileo satellite positioning systems for the Intelligent Transport System ( ITS ) application .
I would , however , like to ask Parliament some questions and try to give some answers as to why the Commission has put forward a directive to promote the deployment of ITS and , secondly , whether the local and national initiatives in this field are not sufficient .
The Commission has been funding specific research and development programmes into intelligent transport systems since 1988 , which have produced unquestionably positive results and inspired numerous recommendations .
These research and development projects have formed an important basis on which to make technological progress , coordinate actions and encourage preliminary deployment , in general , in a fragmented fashion .
It is now time , therefore , to move from recommendations to concrete action in order to reap the benefits of applying intelligent transport systems : benefits that may take the form of road safety , easing traffic jams and reducing the environmental impact of the road system .
That is the purpose behind this crucial draft directive to promote measures aimed at removing the barriers to broader and better coordinated ITS deployment .
I would like to give a couple of examples that help to explain why voluntary or local strategies are not always enough : today , a haulier travelling between Barcelona and Frankfurt is equipped not only with a mobile telephone and on-board navigation system , but also with at least three different electronic toll collection terminals for the countries it must cross , or to avoid passing through residential areas .
In 2001 , the Commission recommended that Member States publish detailed information on road types within the network and on restricted traffic zones .
Unfortunately , we have seen only a few local or national authorities take up this recommendation .
What ultimately happens is that drivers with navigation systems use the entire road network , and all too often heavy goods vehicles are directed to wholly unsuitable roads or dangerous routes , for example near schools or on very steep roads .
The new directive will make it possible to adopt the necessary measures to avoid such situations , thereby lessening all the problems we have come across .
The Commission awaits an agreement between Parliament and the Council on the draft directive , which represents a key tool for implementing the action plan .
We will work closely with both you and the Council to reach an agreement as soon as possible , and I hope that next week 's informal Council meeting at Litoměřice in the Czech Republic , where ITS is on the agenda , will be instrumental in this .
Mrs Jensen has been invited and will therefore be attending , I believe , if only in an informal capacity , but the point is that we will be able to compare the positions of Commission , Parliament and Council in order to try to speed up what I hope will be an easy agreement , so that we may give a practical response to citizens and approve a shared text as soon as possible .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have been following the ITS plan as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development .
Our committee 's opinion , passed with unanimity , has been largely reproduced by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , in a spirit of cooperation that we succeed in creating on long-term projects .
I would like to thank all those who have contributed their work and ideas .
We have all tried to avoid the heavy-handed long words that too often characterise declarations of principle .
We have tried to put across the fact that we were not discussing how many or which roads to plan , but simply working out how we can move around in a more coordinated , safe , people-friendly , environmentally friendly and therefore intelligent way , which is no mean feat in itself .
We have tried to demonstrate the role of technology , of safety , of peripheral zones , of waterways and , most importantly , of coordination with the Structural Funds , so that the planned timetables and targets will be consistent and coordinated .
We have tried to map out an increasingly important role for safety and the integrated management , not just of transport , but above all of the people transported .
I believe we have succeeded in providing a consistent and convincing approach .
I now hope for two things : that the Commission will not simply ' take note ' and then go off in whatever direction it sees fit when the time comes to make operative decisions ; and that the operative strategies outlined in the plan will form the basis of the choices of all other programmers of related activities .
Too often , we have gazed into crystal balls and seen a series of marvellous plans , but each is impenetrable to the next .

It would be disappointing if we were to continue to fund roads when we have decided that fewer cars should be on the road ; it would be disappointing if we were to continue to fund vehicles designed without taking account of interconnection or passive safety , or consumption not only of fuel but also of the environment ; it would be disappointing if together we were to plan to go down one route and the money and resources for which we are responsible were then to end up going down another , being spent without coordination in terms of time .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Madam President , the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is of the view that one of the most important pillars of European transport policy is intelligent transport technology .
Two years ago , when we discussed this matter here in Parliament during the mid-term review of the transport policy White Paper , which I was the rapporteur for , we set as one of the key objectives the deployment of intelligent technologies as a tool to help us improve efficiency on our roads and raise the level of services .
But those intelligent developments which will make our roads safer and road transport more environmentally friendly already exist now .
However , in order to ensure the deployment of our technological developments , we need this action plan and directive .
I suggested in the regulation that we set a minimum level for intelligent applications so that we can provide our TEN-T network at least with this minimum level .
These applications will then support efficiency and safety .
We are obviously expecting funding proposals from the Commission for those of the intelligent solutions which will not be implemented using private funding .
Similarly , we are also expecting proposals from the Commission with regard to how traffic crossing external borders can be seamlessly adapted to Europe 's intelligent infrastructure which we are hoping for .
Within the context of the directive , the European Commission has been given an unusually large amount of trust , considering that the directive is a framework directive .
This is why it is important for Parliament to participate , as part of the comitology procedures , in drawing up the implementing regulations .
Madam President , we have voted today on the review of the Green Paper on the future of the TEN-T policy .
We can be sure that the future of Europe 's TEN-T network lies with intelligent transport . Thank you very much .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Jensen for the quality of the work she has done and for her two reports .
Intelligent transport systems are advanced applications aimed at offering innovative services in terms of modes of transport and traffic management , as well as enabling various users to be better informed and make safer , better coordinated and ' smarter ' use of transport networks .
However , I think that it is important for intelligent transport systems to relate to all types of transport and not just urban transport , which is why I have made amendments with this in mind .
In addition , urban transport and urban mobility are very much part of urban development .
I am therefore pleased that we also have our colleague from the Committee on Regional Development in the Chamber .
I think that it is important that the use of intelligent transport systems can make an effective contribution to the reduction in fuel consumption , and by implication , to improved air quality in cities and to traffic flow .
I think it is important to provide passengers with information , protect data of a personal nature and , of course , ensure that data is anonymous so as to be able to protect users .
Last but not least , I feel that this is a step forward , but major investment is needed in this sector .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , in principle one must agree with the general objective of the directive .
Better information systems for travellers and road infrastructure operators , for example with a view to reducing road traffic accidents and making transport cheaper and more efficient , is obviously a good idea , as is the facility for collecting environmental data .
However , I have three main concerns .
Firstly , faith in so-called smart technology easily tempts people into handing their responsibility over to machines and instruments .
Secondly , there is an ever-increasing danger of all the data collected being misused .
People 's privacy is in ever-increasing danger .
Thirdly , this directive is too car-oriented .
Interoperability with other transport systems , such as public transport , would be much more important than the elaborate game of cat-and-mouse that industry is trying to play with us .
( DE ) Madam President , I unconditionally support the Commission 's aim of creating a legal framework for the coordinated introduction and use of intelligent transport systems in the field of road transport .
My personal long-standing fight for the mass introduction of eCall , the electronic emergency callout system , brings the urgency of this home to me almost daily , and intelligent transport systems can do so much more .
They contribute towards environmental sustainability , improved efficiency , enhanced safety and non-discriminatory competitiveness in road passenger and freight traffic .
They also support co-modality , including by developing interfaces with other modes of transport such as rail , waterways and aviation , which started to incorporate intelligent transport systems a long time ago .
All this cannot be achieved by the Member States alone ; it can only be achieved as a Community task .
Intelligent transport systems based on EU-wide compulsory minimum underlying standards and specifications improve the environment for innovation and create planning security , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises .
I welcome in particular the planned open , vehicle-integrated platform for intelligent transport system services .
The action plan at last includes a timetable for the introduction of individual systems a ) for safety in road transport , such as ESP and eCall , b ) for continuity in traffic management ; for example , information on congestion charges or parking management reduces the number of cars driving round looking for a parking place , c ) to use road , traffic and travel data in real time , which will be an asset both to professional lorry drivers and everyone else using the roads .
The directive sets out detailed requirements for the compulsory and coordinated introduction of standard intelligent transport systems throughout the EU and their application in the Member States .
It also safeguards the use of personal data .
But beware , the introduction of intelligent transport systems will cost a lot of money , because infrastructures and vehicles will need to be fitted with the necessary information and communications technology .
We still know too little about whether potential users are willing or able to pay .
( FR ) Madam President , first of all I should like to thank Mrs Jensen for her consistently outstanding work , since it is very open and very alert to all of the opinions expressed .
I should like to start by saying that , behind intelligent transport systems , there are all the same European funds , and that I was somewhat amazed to discover how they were practically all channelled towards cars .
I believe that cars obviously do have their good points ; the automotive sector is an extremely powerful economic sector in Europe .
However , I do think that we need to add some intelligence to all modes of transport .
I am not overlooking the fact that there is ERTMS for the railways , SESAR , and GALILEO , but in my view we are lacking a user-oriented approach with regard to user information ; to accessibility for persons with reduced mobility and the possibility today of adapting urban vehicles ; to the introduction of an energy-saving urban vehicle ; to safety in the field of transport , especially in relation to public transport , which is a very important issue ; to user information ; and to ticketing , areas in which there is often considerable progress to be made .
I therefore believe that the resources should be diversified in the years to come .
In particular , I should like attention to be paid to respect for personal data ; we must prevent a situation where we find ourselves back in Orwell 's 1984 , where we seek to realise the fantastical notion of replacing humans entirely with machines .
We saw what happened on the Hudson River last winter : had there not been a pilot , there would have no doubt been no mechanism that could have straightened up the plane .
To conclude , I believe that priority must also be given to modes of transport other than cars .
Notwithstanding those reservations , I support the report that has been submitted .
( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
The introduction of intelligent transport systems offers numerous obvious benefits .
This will make transport in Europe safer and more efficient , while promoting environmental protection and energy efficiency too .
We should also acknowledge the Commission 's action plan and the clear deadline that has been set .
I also think it is important that when the systems are deployed , the aspects relating to compatibility , coherence and regulation are applied too .
As far as consumers are concerned , apart from affordability , they must also have the opportunity of making a free choice , and suitable laws must be introduced to guarantee that there is no possibility at all of private individuals ' data being misused .
A logical , high-level , intelligent system must be deployed which can be developed further and can implement new technological advances effectively .
It is in all our interests to make this a reality .
At the same time , it is also crucially important for the European car industry that we can keep on moving .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work .
Madam President , I speak as a civil engineer , and my son has a transport surveying business stretching right through the United Kingdom .
This matter is extremely important because , from Europe , we can make sure that the latest technology impacts on the usefulness and efficiency of road transport in all its forms .
This is one big growth area year by year .
Even in a recession time , we are forecasting something like a 55 % increase between now and 2020 on freight and 35 % on passenger cars , etc , and with that , of course , energy increases .
So often , as elected Members , we journey round our constituencies and find ourselves in traffic jams , and so often we have to make phone calls to find out what the situation is ahead .
We need more data on the windscreens so that we can sort out our own salvations in a more effective and efficient manner .
I wish Mrs Jensen and the Commissioner every success .
Madam President , honourable Members , I believe that we should look to the future with optimism , because as far as approval of the directive is concerned , I believe that in addition to strong cooperation on the part of the Czech Presidency , there is a willingness from the Swedish Presidency to conclude a positive agreement between Commission , Parliament and Council .
This therefore gives me hope , and I think it may even be something to inspire Parliament tomorrow to vote in favour of the texts we are debating .
I would like to respond to some of the remarks made and to reassure Mrs Ţicău as to our objectives : beginning with an action plan and a directive that looks at the transport system generically , with that perspective , we then look at the urban dimension and focus on that , but we do need to consider the general first , in order to come to the specific .
I also wanted to respond to Mr Kusstatcher on the subject of the road sector and other transport systems .
At present there is no coherent European framework for the deployment and use of intelligent transport systems ( ITS ) in the road sector , while for other modes of transport , as Mr Savary pointed out , specific plans have been created : SESAR , the new-generation air traffic management system , RIS for river transport and VTMIS for sea transport , not forgetting the RTMS system for rail transport .
The ITS action plan thus primarily concerns the road sector , but also includes specific actions and initiatives aimed at ensuring and improving the interconnectivity of road transport with other modes of transport , through appropriate interfaces .
I was keen to point out , not least to Mr Savary , that obviously the ITS action plan incorporates not only measures for elderly drivers , but also for road users defined as ' vulnerable ' , namely cyclists and pedestrians .
These , among others , feature in the list of measures that may be adopted by the Committee for the intelligent transport systems set out in the directive .
In particular , they deal with the use of ITS for the safety of users , as for example in the case of intelligent signs for the visually impaired .

In light of this , with a directive we can introduce certain rules , but the problem is also in having intelligent drivers ; it is not enough to have intelligent systems , we must also ensure that whoever sits behind the wheel of a car or lorry , or rides a motorbike or bicycle , uses their intelligence .
Sadly , this is not something that can be regulated with a directive , regulation or action plan ; we must simply use sound rules to persuade European citizens to use their intelligence and not to use alcohol or drugs when they take to the road .
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Madam President , I think that Commissioner Tajani , put his finger on it just now , because that is precisely what all of this is about .
We have to make motorists act more intelligently .
We have discussed this at great length and Mr Kusstatscher has also said on many occasions that , rather than allowing these systems to make us behave more stupidly , we must ensure that they actually help us to be better informed and act more wisely .
That is very important .
Likewise , I think it is important that we bear in mind the example of a lorry driving across the length and breadth of Europe - today we have lorry drivers complaining that very soon they will no longer be able to see through the windscreen because of all the gadgets that they need to be able to communicate with road toll and road pricing systems , as well as other information systems .
We need a common platform , so that any data fed into the computer is fed back to the lorry driver in his own language .
The possibilities are there .
There are , in fact , an incredible number of good possibilities .
We have also spent some time discussing the amount of funding to be earmarked for this .
We understand this to amount to some EUR 300 million , much of which will be channelled into EasyWay - first and foremost by the Commission .
I might mention that in my own country , in Denmark , we have just adopted a plan to allocate EUR 40 million for ITS over the next five years .

EUR 40 million is a lot for a small country with 5 million inhabitants , but it will , in fact , allow us to make quite a lot of progress .
Therefore , I think that if we start looking at the different Member States , it is possible to get some perspective on this .
This is exactly the kind of thing that we need to get off the ground and I hope that this very topic will be included on the transport ministers ' agenda when we convene for the meeting on the 29th .
In conclusion , I would like to say a few words about the amendments : we have substantive support for this proposal for the directive and only four amendments to the report outstanding for tomorrow . Personally , I am in favour of Amendment 57 tabled by the Socialist Group and Amendment 59 tabled by the Greens , but I oppose Amendments 58 and 60 .
I think that the fact that we have so few amendments is evidence of the strength of Parliament 's support for this .
So , Mr Tajani , you have got off the ground with a robust negotiating mandate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
The present day and age demands rapid adaptation of transport to the exponential growth in its use and in the expectations of society .
I think , therefore , that the introduction of Intelligent Transport Systems ( ITS ) is extremely useful .
We should be aware that the current state of affairs in road transport is very worrying .
This is illustrated by such statistics as :
the number of deaths on the roads in the EU in 2006 was about 43 000 , including about 5 500 in Poland ;

the annual cost of road traffic congestion in the EU is about 1 % of GDP ;
CO2 emissions caused by road transport amount to about 70 % of all transport-related CO2 emissions .
The following are , therefore , necessary :
optimal use of road and road traffic data ;
ensuring continuity and reliability of ITS services in European transport corridors and conurbations ;
extensive use in large urban areas of telematic applications , which combine transport issues with information technology and telecommunications ;
rapid and harmonised introduction of applications which support road traffic safety , such as eCall , ADAS and others ;
better integration of the transport infrastructure with vehicles and between vehicles ;
Europe-wide coordination , making use of the experience and good practices of leading countries .
Let us try , therefore , to implement ITS throughout the EU , in relation to all means of transport and all passengers , and with regard to both public and private transport .
Second ' Marco Polo ' programme ( debate )
The next item is the report by Ulrich Stockmann , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1692 / 2006 establishing the second ' Marco Polo ' programme for the granting of Community financial assistance to improve the environmental performance of the freight transport system ( ' Marco Polo II ' ) - C6-0482 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the displacement of freight from road to rail and internal waterways or short sea shipping is a slow burner in our transport debates and has been for decades .
Now , in the context of the climate debate , this debate has naturally taken on new importance .
In the meantime , we have arrived at this shift via various political approaches and instruments .
However , if we look at it carefully , traffic is very difficult to shift in practice and this is only achieved in very rare cases .
Firstly , because connections between the modes of transport are still not sufficiently harmonised ; secondly , because rail and inland waterways are still not sufficiently established as European service providers , and thirdly , because the environmentally-friendly forms of transport obviously cannot essentially provide a door-to-door service .
All these difficulties are being further exacerbated in the present recession by plummeting prices in road freight transport .
Marco Polo II has also felt the impact of all these problems .
That is why we transport politicians are urgently interested in a solution , because our stated target , namely that Marco Polo should help to displace 60 % of the increase in road freight traffic , is now a long way away .
We therefore need to switch direction before the end of this parliamentary term and we have therefore found a most reasonable compromise .
What is to happen ?
Firstly , the Commission instructed an agency to take over the administration of the programme and to simplify the administration procedure even before this regulation was proposed .
That makes sense .
We have found and jointly negotiated a whole series of points in the compromise in order to make the programme more attractive .
Firstly , the threshold for Motorways of the Sea has been reduced from 250 to 200 million tonne-kilometres a year ; secondly , the threshold for traffic displacement projects has been reduced from 80 to 60 million tonne-kilometres , as has the threshold for inland waterway projects , where Parliament pushed through a reduction from 17 to 13 million tonne-kilometres .
We have also increased the permissible funding level for additional infrastructures from 10 % to 20 % .
That makes sense .
Finally , we also successfully argued that economic crises such as we are experiencing now can also be cited as grounds for extending the term of contracts .
So we have made the programme considerably more attractive .
This compromise which we reached was also made possible by a high degree of consensus between all parliamentarians , who put aside justifiable considerations and fundamental debate at this point , in order to quickly get the programme started again .
That is why , before the Commission tables a Marco Polo III proposal , we really need a general debate so that we can reintroduce all these points which are necessary to our future orientation .
Moreover , we naturally want to know how the adjustment we have made now will work out .
This is the subject of the vote and I hope I shall have your support tomorrow .
Madam President , honourable Members , I would like to thank Mr Stockmann for the work he has done .
Since 2003 , the Marco Polo programme has aimed to create a more sustainable transport system in Europe by shifting a substantial part of the annual increase in road freight transport to other , more environmentally friendly modes of transport such as inland waterways , rail transport and short sea shipping .
The first Marco Polo programme , which aimed to shift 48 billon tonne-kilometres from the roads in four years , ended in 2006 , although the external assessment has shown that only 64 % of this figure was achieved .
The experience gained with the second Marco Polo programme shows that , unfortunately , it is not becoming more effective , and that Europe is not making full use of this important tool for achieving a transport system more suited to the evolution of the market .
Last year , I sent a series of letters to all EU transport ministers , urging them to use Marco Polo .
I therefore believe - and it looks as though Parliament shares my view - that the time has come to amend the regulation , to change the rules on access to this project , or programme , which must be granting funds that are not always used .
We are definitely moving in the right direction , because we are trying to help small and medium-sized enterprises to benefit from a Community project .
SMEs have , up to now , faced quite a lot of difficulty in accessing the European funds granted through the Marco Polo programme .
The message we are sending out today is not only directed at those who use Marco Polo .
It is , I believe , a call for many European regulations to be amended , since the same is true of other sectors and of national regulations involving European funds ; they are not always written in such a way as to make them easy to access .
This is a very real problem in all Member States , and I would emphasise again that it concerns not only our regulations , but also national regulations that involve European funds .
So then , I feel that today we are not only working on the Marco Polo programme , rather we are sending a message on good law-making for the benefit of citizens and on simplifying access to Community projects .
I therefore think , of course , that Mr Stockmann 's work is worthy of support and that the proposed text should be adopted , so that Parliament , I repeat , can send out a positive message tomorrow to the entire European Union .
Let me say again , this is not just a matter that concerns Marco Polo ; it is a much broader issue .
Starting with Marco Polo , I believe that we will be doing a service to other sectors that are particularly conscious of the use of Community funds and the take-up of the various programmes that the Commission offers to the 27 EU states and their businesses .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( DA ) Madam President , when the Committee on Budgets decided to issue a statement on the Marco Polo programme , its precise reason for doing so was that it had found it difficult to ensure that the funding was being used for its designated purpose .
We , therefore , obviously welcome the fact that action is now being taken .
The Commission deserves praise for this .
We are trying to simplify the administration and tighten up the rules , in order to make it easier for funding to be used for its designated purpose .
In response , we on the Committee on Budgets have also agreed that , if we fail to improve the implementation of the programme , if we fail to ensure that funding is being used for its designated purpose , we will need to rethink whether so much money should be allocated to Marco Polo and whether some of the funding should be rechannelled into other programmes , where it can be better used .
Of course , we need to carry out a mid-term review of the budget after the 2010 elections and one of the things we will obviously need to get to grips with then is an assessment of which programmes are working and which are not .
Where we see that there is more acute need , we will obviously divert money away from projects where it cannot be used and redirect it , so that it is not merely wasted as a grant .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , plenary will vote tomorrow on the Marco Polo II programme to improve the environmental performance of freight transport .
Marco Polo II offers improved planning security , because it is timetabled to run until 31 December 2013 .
It has a budget of EUR 450 million .
The eligibility thresholds for the proposed projects are to be lowered in comparison with Marco Polo I and are equal to utilisation by small and medium-sized enterprises .
I am particularly grateful to the rapporteur for that .
In light of the current financial situation of many small and medium-sized enterprises , this is a very citizen-friendly policy to which I can give my unconditional support .
The programme is based on displacing traffic and reducing the overload on road transport .
It will also strengthen co-modality and hence contribute towards an efficient and sustainable transport system .
With a positive vote , which I recommend for tomorrow , the legislative procedure will be closed at first reading .
Madam President , Commissioner , speaking on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I would like to draw attention to the following matters .
Despite commendable objectives , such as reducing overload in road transport , reducing the effects of road transport on the environment , and preferring short sea shipping , rail , inland waterway or a combination of transport modes for goods transport , barely half of the financial means available for realisation of the Marco Polo programme are used each year , and only 60 % of the programme 's planned activities are executed .
The European Commission 's proposals to simplify the programme should , therefore , be supported , and in particular : participation in the programme of small and single-person businesses without having to form consortia ; a clear reduction in the tonne-kilometre threshold required for eligibility for the programme ; raising funding intensity by increasing financial aid , which has grown from EUR 1 to EUR 2 per 500 tonne-kilometres of shifted goods transport ; and simplifying the procedures for granting financial aid .
I would like to express the hope that all these measures will help to ensure that the best use is made of the financial means available in the programme .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) This evening , we are discussing the changes to the Marco Polo II programme .
I am indebted to the European Commission for coming up with proposals to lower the thresholds for this fund , and I am pleased that Mr Stockmann has embraced these proposals with the necessary dynamism .
The extra reduction in the threshold for inland shipping , in particular , can count on my support .
There is a problem , though .
This reduction is not enough .
In the Committee on Transport and Tourism , Mrs Wortmann-Kool and I successfully remedied this mistake .
I regret , though , that Mr Stockmann deems our amendment - number 24 - undesirable .
I know him , after all , as a staunch supporter of inland shipping and I had hoped that such amendments would have been agreeable to him .
After all , the threshold proposed by the Commission is still far too high for the small entrepreneur , which the canal shipping trader is , almost by definition .
I cannot understand why the other institutions should wish to pick holes in Amendment 24 .
We have a well-stocked fund for sustainable transport .
Inland shipping is the cleanest modality by far .
Why should we not lower the threshold more for this sector ?
The European Commission is , in my view , scared that such proposals will prompt a few Member States in the Council to demand reductions in other areas .
I should like to ask the European Commission to stand firm and explicitly recognise in this House the importance of inland shipping as the cleanest mode of transport .

( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we shall be investing EUR 400 million in the Marco Polo II programme up to 2013 , together with a great many hopes and prospects for a more efficient and viable transport system that will guarantee added environmental value in the European Union , while at the same time combining economic , social and territorial cohesion .
The results of the call for submission of proposals for the Marco Polo II programme published in 2008 and the conclusions of the evaluation of the first Marco Polo programme have shown that this programme can bring about a discernible shift in transport .
However , it is highly probable that the aim laid down in its legal basis , namely of avoiding congestion or displacing a substantial part of the overall growth forecast for international freight road transport in Europe , will not be achieved .
For the programme to achieve its aims , Marco Polo II must be made more attractive .
The legal basis needs to be changed and verification procedures need to be simpler and clearer .
In addition , the conditions and requirements for funding need adjusting to the real aim and the changes need to be made as fast as possible to secure the greatest possible effect .
We in the European Parliament support and are hoping for easier access to the programme for small businesses , lower and simpler thresholds for the eligibility of projects and an increase in grants ; in other words , a programme which is more functional and directly effective .
These changes and adjustments can be used as an example of a vital , dynamic and effective Europe , which is something we need to make citizens understand and experience on the eve of the European elections .
Madam President , honourable Members , as we close I would like to answer some of the questions you have asked , while thanking you for the support given to this agreement at first reading , which will definitely help to improve the effectiveness of the second Marco Polo programme .
I would like to say that in recent years my staff - whom I thank again for their work - have already begun to reflect on the Marco Polo programme beyond 2013 , and that this assessment will focus , among other things , on the points set out in the compromise agreement .
In particular , I would like to emphasise the need to differentiate between transport modes in the conditions for funding , on the basis of safety , environmental performance and energy efficiency , the need to set up demand-driven assistance at the application stage , taking account of the needs of small and medium-sized enterprises , the recognition of economic recession as an exceptional reason for extending the duration of projects , and product-specific lowering of eligibility thresholds .
With regard to lowering thresholds , I would like to reassure Mr Blokland that the text we are adopting already provides a lower threshold for inland waterways .
I do not think we could have done any more than we have , as the administrative costs would increase , but I believe we have certainly sent the signal you called for .
Going back to our reflections on the Marco Polo programme beyond 2013 : as I was saying , the themes will also include the possibility of indicating the targets for minimum funding thresholds for proposed projects in terms of energy efficiency and environmental benefits in addition to tonne-kilometres shifted .
In addition , the possibility of ensuring consistency between the Marco Polo Programme , the Logistics Action Plan and the TEN-T programme by taking the appropriate measures in order to coordinate the allocation of Community funds , in particular for Motorways of the Sea ; and the need to take into account the specific characteristics of the inland waterway sector and its small and medium-sized enterprises , for example by way of a dedicated programme for the inland waterway sector .
In any case , the Commission intends to present its communication on the future of the programme , possibly with a proposal for a third Marco Polo programme , during the course of 2011 .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I agree with you .
We can send out a positive message tomorrow , namely that we are able to make citizen-friendly and sensible amendments to our legislation when it is necessary to do so .
We should not only send out this message ; we should also start up an information campaign in the countries of Europe , so that we can capitalise on the attractiveness of this programme , because we really have made all the necessary adjustments .
Now there are real deals to be had at bargain prices .
If we cannot manage to shift anything now , then we really do need to question the entire programme .
I hope , Mrs Jensen , that we shall not have to put the money into other programmes , because this is an important concern .
We must and will displace traffic wherever possible , but it is difficult .
Mr Blokland , you have already had an answer .
We re-negotiated inland waterway transport and forced an additional compromise on the Council , as it were .
Our concern was to finish at first reading .
That is why we could not take too radical an approach and had to negotiate with one eye on compromise and consensus .
As a result , we achieved a great deal .
I look forward to the fundamental debate which we shall have shortly on the third programme , on the basis of a communication which the Commission has promised , so that we can discuss all the fundamental questions , everything that we have listed in a joint motion for a compromise , such as whether we should split up the programme for individual modes of transport and so on .
Then it will become exciting again .
Now it just has to work , so that it does not grind to a halt and projects already under way possibly fall by the way-side in this crisis .
That really would be a pity , hence this compromise .
My thanks once again to everyone for their input .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
European rail network for competitive freight ( debate )
The next item is the report by Petr Duchoň , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning a European rail network for competitive freight - C6-0509 / 2008 - .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the aim of the Commission proposal is to create European corridors for rail freight transport and also to establish rules for managing and administering these corridors .
The Commission is trying to increase the competitiveness of rail freight transport through the proposal and I would like to take the opportunity to applaud this .
The Committee for Transport and Tourism has discussed the Commission proposal , in respect of which a total of 250 draft amendments were submitted .
In negotiations over the draft amendments a compromise was achieved which won support across the political spectrum .
The compromise arises mainly from an attempt to optimise rail transport as a whole while at the same time retaining enough flexibility to resolve crisis situations .
The text proposed by the Commission has also been refined and simplified , and emphasis has been given to creating space for the legitimate interests of individual countries , both in terms of establishing corridors and managing and administering them .
The position of the rail companies in the administrative authority has been strengthened compared to what it was in the Commission proposal .
A stronger role is also given to organisations involved in the European rail freight corridors .
The comments relating to cooperation with third countries affected by the corridor have been accepted .
A number of changes involve a better balance of interests between passenger and rail freight transport .
A request for transparent decision-making has also been accepted in relation to assigning track categories and setting out rules of precedence for high-speed freight trains .
In conclusion , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteur and the workers of the European Parliament for their cooperation and the honourable Members of this House for their patience .


Madam President , honourable Members , Mr Duchoň , for my part I would like to thank Parliament for having agreed to look at this proposal so promptly ; I believe it is extremely important for the development of rail freight transport .
My particular thanks go to the rapporteur , Mr Duchoň , and the Committee on Transport and Tourism for their willingness and the quality of the work carried out , which has helped to strengthen a legislative proposal aimed primarily at better integrated rail transport at European level through closer cooperation between infrastructure managers .
Rail transport is the last - I would emphasise this , the last - mode of transport to retain a highly national dimension .
Crossing a border by train can still be difficult in many cases .
The infrastructure managers are to a large extent responsible for this difficulty , and so we need to encourage them to work together , whether in terms of infrastructure management or planning and carrying out investment .
The infrastructure for freight needs to be brought under European policy as it already has a significant international dimension .
I would remind you that 50 % of freight services are now international , and that this is set to increase in future .
Secondly , the proposal aims to enable the expansion of rail freight transport services .
This sector cannot develop and compete with and / or supplement the road sector without a considerable improvement of the infrastructure made available for freight trains .
Today , in the vast majority of Member States , rail freight transport is required to fit around the needs of passenger transport .
Unfortunately that much is true for both infrastructure management and investment .
Thirdly , thanks to this proposal , it will be possible to integrate the railways into the freight transport system more successfully , and to develop co-modality in Europe .
In fact , in order for rail transport to be able to make a substantial contribution to the Community 's transport goals , railway infrastructure must be better linked to other modes of transport , especially sea and road transport .
In addition to the main objectives of the proposal , though , I would like to mention four essential principles on which the text we are discussing is based .
The first principle is the identification of corridors and thus of the network .
This identification is based on economic rather than political factors .
The second principle is strengthened cooperation between infrastructure managers .
The third principle , which I would like to look at in more detail , concerns better guarantees in terms of the quality and reliability of services provided by the infrastructure , thanks to provisions designed to strike a better balance between passenger and freight traffic in infrastructure management .
This does not mean systematically giving priority to freight trains over passenger trains on the entire national network ; on the contrary - let me make this clear - this concerns dedicated freight corridors , that is to say specific and clearly identified lines .
Freight trains will not therefore be systematically penalised , especially where there is a greater need for speed and / or punctuality .
This , in our opinion , is what we mean in practice when we talk about defining freight corridors or promoting competitive freight transport .
Finally , the fourth pillar is the definition and creation of a real network of strategic terminals .
In this case , the word ' terminal ' is used in the widest sense , to include rail yards , port terminals , logistical platforms , roads , railways , and so on , which are indispensable for the proper functioning of freight corridors and the transport system as a whole .
That was what I wanted to say , and I would like to thank you again for Parliament 's promptness and efficiency , it makes me proud to remember that I was myself a Member of this House for many years .
The rapporteur and the transport committee deserve to be congratulated on their work . Thank you .
Madam President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen and those still in the gallery , especially Mr Lübbering .
My group supports the Commission 's fundamental concern of increasing rail freight traffic by creating cross-border traffic corridors and special regulations for the purpose .
Mr Vice-President , we thank you not only for the proposal ; we also thank you for the fact that you have stayed the course until just before midnight tonight , but we like to work .
Thank you .
Moreover , and there may have been a slip of the tongue in the announcement of your Commission proposal , our group , together with our good rapporteur , is firmly convinced that there should be no absolute priority for freight trains over all other trains , just easier access for freight traffic , because in almost all the Member States rail networks are used both by freight trains and by international , national , regional and local trains .
In cases of operational disruptions in particular , we cannot have some distant office making decisions ; competence must remain with the individual infrastructure operators and railway companies , so that normal train traffic can be resumed as quickly and as efficiently as possible .
Even within the special regulation for the European freight rail network , the Member States must continue to be responsible for creating and changing freight corridors .
Any sort of transfer of competence to the European Commission would not be helpful , on that we should agree .
Finally , railway companies , shippers and forwarding agents should be consulted on corridor regulations , because they have practical knowledge and experience about how to make the most effective use of the rail network for competitive freight traffic .
My congratulations once again to the rapporteur .
He has written an excellent report which was adopted in committee with great satisfaction for the most part .
My thanks to the rapporteur .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Cross-border goods trains trundle through the European Union at an average speed of 18 kilometres per hour .
In 2007 , only 60 % of all goods trains arrived at their destinations at the scheduled time .
Why ?
Because the international transport of goods by train is still being organised in a wholly ineffective manner .
In that way , the transport of goods by train can clearly never compete with road haulage .
At this rate , we will not achieve the European environmental objectives , and our intention to emit 20 % less CO2 by 2020 will come to nothing .
The aim of this European Commission proposal is to create a competitive railway network for goods transport in the European Union .
This can be done by creating cross-border corridors , by bringing about increased cooperation between infrastructural managers and better mutual coordination of investments between Member States and by making better priority arrangements in the case of delays .
In that way , the capacity and competitiveness of the railway network can be improved considerably .
The Commission 's original proposal to grant priority to goods trains in the event of delays at all times went too far , but thanks to sound cooperation with the rapporteur , I have struck an excellent compromise which guarantees flexibility and a pragmatic approach .
Unfortunately , the Albertini proposal has turned this important section into yet another empty shell .
That is why the Socialist Group in the European Parliament will be voting against Amendment 71 .
Yet , the proposal , as it is now before us , still manages to encourage people to work together , and users and market operators are given due consideration in the planning and implementation .
It is time we finally worked together on a real internal market for rail transport and thus invested in a green and sustainable future .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance also want more freight on the railways , but not at the expense of passenger traffic .
Passenger mobility is a public service in Europe .
The Commission is ignoring the realities of Europe 's rail networks , in which goods and passengers are carried on the same rails .
There should be no dogmatic priority for either one sort of train or the other .
We Greens want to use the one-stop shops to create a single contact person for everyone who wants to send freight trains across borders in Europe .
In addition , we want more transparency when paths are allocated and during operational disruptions , in order to avoid unfair distortions of competition , among other things .
The Commission and you , as the guardian of the treaties , must eliminate the practice which allows state-owned companies to reserve paths free of charge solely to keep out competitors .
Our motions on noise reduction , especially from freight traffic , were rejected by the major coalition here in the House .
However , we Greens shall continue to lobby for railways to remain environmentally friendly , especially by retrofitting existing freight wagons .
( DE ) Madam President , in competition with road freight traffic , freight traffic on the railways only stands a chance if it really is established throughout Europe , which is why I welcome the introduction of cross-border freight traffic corridors , on which freight traffic will be optimised .
That is what it is about .
With this report , we have defused justified concerns about a reduction in the standard of passenger traffic with fixed priority regulations for freight traffic .
However , we shall have to do more work on the report , because we are process workers and we are only at first reading .
In future we shall have to also take account of how the Member States react .
We need a different basis on which to calculate the number of corridors .
Parliament has proposed one per country .
I think that we in Germany would need a north / south and an east / west corridor .
Secondly , we need to consider if alternate corridors are possible in areas which possibly have less mixed traffic .
Thirdly , it must be clear that the overall capacity of rail transport must not be reduced .
Last but not least , many citizens worry that more freight traffic on the railways will bring more noise with it .
That is why we must start with sensible legislation on noise reduction in freight rail traffic straight away in the next parliamentary term .
I look forward to more work .
We still have things to do .
My thanks to the rapporteur , because this really was a good compromise on a very contentious issue .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mr Duchoň on his brilliant report .
I have tabled an amendment on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats concerning Article 14 ( 2 ) .
According to this article , in the event of additional difficulties in the flow of traffic , freight trains have priority over other trains on European freight corridors .
In Italy , and in a large part of Europe , freight and passenger transport share the same lines ; at present there are few sections dedicated to freight .
This kind of priority would penalise regional passenger transport in the main Italian centres , for example in the city of Milan , which is located on three TEN corridors .
In order to avoid a situation in which passenger transport suffers disproportionately at the expense of freight transport , I suggested including the aforesaid amendment prohibiting the application of these priority rules during commuter rush hours , when most people are travelling to work .
Rush hours would be limited to a maximum time slot , on working days only , of three hours in the morning and three hours in the late afternoon .
Using information provided by infrastructure managers , each Member State would define the rush hour period for the individual country , bearing in mind regional and long-distance freight traffic .
Mr President , honourable Members , today 's conclusions on this subject are extremely positive from my point of view , and help to send a very clear message to Member States , namely that the European railway system needs corridors that are in some way dedicated to freight .
The creation of these corridors must be coordinated and consistent at Community level and all the stakeholders in the railway sector must participate in this effort .
As regards the compromise amendments proposed by the rapporteur , they provide for an improvement of the process of repartition and reserve of capacity in terms of quality railway lines for international freight trains , as well as the establishment of a reserve capacity for short-term demands .
The Commission can accept this approach , as it can also accept the compromise amendment on the management of international freight trains in the event of network disruption .
For the rest , Parliament is sovereign . Thank you .
The debate has demonstrated relatively broad agreement across the political spectrum .
For that I would like to thank both the shadow rapporteurs and everyone taking part in the discussion .
I think the greatest fears arise from the possibility of collisions between freight trains and passenger trains .
The submitted text takes account of this danger and leaves sufficient flexibility for handling crisis situations in the hands of the operators .
As far as properly and smoothly functioning rail operations are concerned , there should be no such conflicts of course and it makes no sense to debate the priorities of one or the sort of rail transport .
It is therefore only a matter of potential conflict during crisis situations , but as I have already indicated the key issue here is to leave enough power in the hands of rail operators and this document does exactly that .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting closed at 23.50 . )
Opening of the sitting
Documents received : see Minutes
Patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare ( debate )
The next item is the report by John Bowis , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border health care - C6-0257 / 2008 - .
As many of you know , John Bowis was taken ill recently in Brussels and was hospitalised .
He had an operation , which I am pleased to say was a success , and he is now recovering , so he is an example of cross-border health care .
His place is taken today by my friend and colleague , Philip Bushill-Matthews .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I have a very difficult task and a very easy task .
It is very difficult because this dossier is very complicated and very sensitive , and it is a dossier on which , personally , I have done very little work .
It is very easy because it is a report by my distinguished colleague , John Bowis , who , as you say , is currently recovering from major heart surgery , undertaken a couple of weeks ago in Brussels .
He has done an amazing job in bringing this dossier to such a successful conclusion today and , indeed , in laying the foundations for this success in his original report on patient mobility way back in June 2005 .
I am sure he would also wish me to thank the Commissioner personally for her support , to thank the shadow rapporteurs and to thank our group secretariat , and indeed his own research assistant , for the huge efforts they have all made to secure broad agreement on so many of the controversial issues .
With their help , John has sought to shed light on what has been a very murky area , and to bring clarity where uncertainty prevailed before , based consistently on the twin principles that the patient must always come first and that patient choice should be determined by needs and not by means .
For the last 10 years , European citizens have been going to the courts to fight for their right to go to another Member State for treatment .
It is clear that patients want this right , and that they deserve this right and are entitled to this right .
They should not have to go to court in order to achieve it .
The proposal before us now is our chance to make this a reality .
Now is the time for us , as politicians , to take our responsibility and to replace the need for the judges who have gone before , by creating legal certainty ourselves .
Most people will always want to be treated close to home .
However , there will always be patients who wish to travel to another Member State for treatment , for whatever reason .
If patients do choose this option , we must make sure that the terms under which they do so are transparent and fair .
We must make sure that they know how much they will be charged , what quality and safety standards they can expect and what rights they have if something goes wrong .
This report addresses all these issues .
Let me be clear that this right for patients should in no way be detrimental to Member States ' ability to provide quality health care for all their citizens .
This report does not tell Member States how they should organise their own health systems .
It does not dictate what quality of care they should provide .
In fact , it builds in safeguards for Member States to help protect their own national health systems , for example by choosing a system of prior authorisation in certain circumstances .
However , such prior authorisation must not be used to limit patient choice .
Indeed , the increased availability of cross-border health care should in turn help stimulate national systems to provide increasingly better standards of health care themselves .
I look forward to the comments from colleagues in the debate which now follows .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I feel very honoured to be able to join you here today and to participate in discussions on a number of important topics relating to public health which are on today 's agenda .
These include the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare , ensuring patient safety and joint EU action on rare diseases .
I would like to start by saying that all three issues are among the priorities of the Czech Presidency and they will also be on the agenda of the Council for Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Protection on 7 June 2009 in Luxembourg .
We therefore warmly welcome the forthcoming debate .
The Czech Presidency is fully aware of the important role played by the European Parliament in the legislative process in the area of public health , and it understands that close cooperation between the Council and Parliament is essential .
Your reports on these three topics have therefore come at the right time .
I would now like to say a few words from the perspective of the Council concerning the proposed directive of the European Parliament and the Council on applying patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
The Czech Presidency is fully aware of the need to provide legal certainty for patients receiving healthcare in another Member State , and it is building on the results of the French Presidency 's work in this area .
Our objective is to seek the approval of this text , which will be clear and comprehensible to EU citizens , which will respect primary law including the subsidiarity principle and which will fulfil the declared objective of establishing legal certainty for EU citizens concerning the application of their rights when receiving cross-border healthcare .
However , at the same time careful thought must be given to possible impacts of the proposal 's implementation on the stability of healthcare systems in EU Member States .
In view of the fundamental importance of the proposal very intensive discussions have taken place and are still continuing in the legal bodies of the Council .
Therefore at present I am not able to tell you whether the Council will achieve political agreement at the end of the Czech Presidency , i.e. at the EPSCO Council in June .
However , I can make a number of general conclusions at this point .
The future directive should codify all of the case law of the European Court of Justice applying to the implementation of the principle of free movement of goods and services in the area of public health and it should also add a regulation on the coordination of social systems and provide Member States with the option of making healthcare provision in another Member State conditional on prior authorisation , or the option to apply a ' gate-keeping ' system .
We find these principles in John Bowis 's report on the proposed directive which you will be debating .
It is also possible to identify other topics that the European Parliament and the Council have in common : the importance of providing full and correct information to patients about options for receiving cross-border healthcare or the emphasis on ensuring high quality and safety in the provision of care .
The Czech Presidency appreciates the care taken by Parliament in drafting this report , the wording of which has emerged from numerous difficult but fruitful discussions in a number of relevant committees .
I am aware that the wording of the report represents a compromise between the various political groups and that finding this compromise has not been at all easy .
I would therefore like to thank everyone who took part in creating it and the rapporteur John Bowis , to whom we all wish a speedy recovery , of course .
This represents a valuable contribution , enabling the legislative process for proposed directive to continue further .
The Council will review the text of the report in detail , as well as all of the amendment proposals , and will carefully consider incorporating them into the common position of the Council in order to support a second-reading agreement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as I mentioned earlier it is still too soon to say whether the June EPSCO Council will produce a political agreement on the proposed directive , as discussions based on the compromise proposal submitted by the Czech Presidency have not yet ended .
In any case , the Council will discuss this topic further , taking into account the report approved by the European Parliament .
I am sure Ms Filipiová will not object if I inform the House that she is , herself , a wheel-chair user .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , before I speak about patients ' rights in cross-border health care , let me pay a special tribute to the rapporteur , Mr John Bowis , who unfortunately is not with us today , but to whom we owe so much on this file .
I wish him a speedy recovery and also health and happiness after so many years of excellent service to European citizens .
( Applause )
I also want to thank all the shadow rapporteurs for their constructive work , and of course Mr Bushill-Matthews , who is speaking today on behalf of Mr Bowis .

Yesterday , here in Strasbourg , we celebrated European Patients ' Rights Day .
In doing so , we acknowledged the growing role of patients in health care and recognised the importance of patients having both confidence and knowledge about the care they receive .
The central question in this context is : what can the European Union do for patients ?
We have the opportunity this morning to take a major step forward towards building a Europe for patients , for each and every European citizen that you , honourable Members , represent .
First , I must say that I very much appreciate the hard work undertaken by Parliament on the examination of the proposal for a directive on patients ' rights in cross-border health care which will shortly be submitted to your vote .
Let me thank and congratulate you all for your interesting and often challenging debates and for a very efficient process .
Allow me to recall briefly the rationale behind this proposed directive , as well as its main objectives and principles .
The origin of the proposal lies in a decade of jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice , which ruled that patients have the right to be reimbursed for health care received abroad , even if they could have received that health care at home .
This is important .
This is a right that the Treaty directly grants to EU citizens .
However , if the rulings were clear for the individuals concerned , the question of how they apply to all other cases was obscure .
Therefore , the need for a legislative framework became apparent , so that all patients in Europe can exercise their right to reimbursement of cross-border health care .
This right should not only be for patients who have access to information that is not publicly available and who can afford a lawyer .
Therefore , after in-depth reflection and broad consultation , the Commission adopted , on 2 July last year , its proposal for a directive .
First and foremost , its overall aim is to provide patients with better opportunities and access to health care across Europe .
Patients are at the very heart of this draft law , which also fully respects the diversity of health systems across Europe .
Let me be clear on this .
I know many fears have been expressed , but this legislation will not impose changes in the organisation and financing of national health systems .
The proposed directive has three main objectives : first , to clarify the conditions under which patients will be reimbursed at the home country tariff for cross-border health care ; second , to give assurance about the quality and safety of care throughout Europe ; and third , to foster European cooperation among health-care systems .
On the basis of these three pillars , much can be done for our citizens , primarily for those who want to seek cross-border health care , but , beyond this , for all patients across Europe .
I look forward to your debate .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , how can we define this directive ?
It represents an opportunity for patients to choose suitable treatment and fast access to services ; an opportunity for regional health care systems to improve the quality and efficiency of their health service ; an opportunity for greater European integration in the personal care services sector .
European reference networks , technology standards and the development of telemedicine will bolster the cross-border cooperation that is already underway .
That requires a suitable information system , monitoring of the quality and efficiency of health care facilities , a guarantee regarding health workers ' professional ethics , and a non-bureaucratic procedure for regulating cross-border mobility .
The directive provides a measured response to these requirements .
Mr President , Mrs Vassiliou , even though he is not here , I would like , first of all , to congratulate our colleague , Mr Bowis .
I regret , moreover , his absence because he is so involved in his report on patients ' rights that he really deserved to be here today .
Now , it is obvious that this is certainly not about a new directive on services .
It is about rejecting the idea that the Court of Justice makes European law instead of the politicians .
That is unacceptable .
Europe 's citizens have the right to receive care in another Member State , subject to conditions .
I wish to reassure those Members who are worried about potential future abuses : this directive fully respects the sovereignty of Member States in relation to their health systems .
Contrary , too , to what some of its opponents have said , this text is addressed to all patients and is re-establishing more justice and more fairness , since , up to now , only the wealthiest have had access to cross-border care .
With this directive , every citizen could receive such care , provided that , in the case of hospital care , prior authorisation is obtained from his or her Member State of affiliation , thus allowing reimbursement of the costs at tariffs in force in the Member State of origin .
Provided that everything is done to avoid medical tourism , I see this only as progress .
It is a big step forward for a Europe for health , it is fairer , it gives more information to our fellow citizens on the care available , and it increases cooperation in the context of new health technologies .
Mr President , Mrs Vassiliou , ladies and gentlemen , we are going to give our verdict on a text for which I have been hoping and praying for a long time , especially in the framework of my report on the impact of the exclusion of health services from the Services Directive .
However , I am afraid the recent vote has left a bitter taste in my mouth .
The report , as adopted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , with the support of most of the political groups except the Socialists , is in fact , with some improvements , merely a response to the Court of Justice 's decisions .
Not only does it not respond to the major challenges for health policies in the Union , it also does not solve the issue of legal uncertainty for patients and enshrines a market approach to healthcare .
In relation to legal uncertainty , it seems obvious to me that the vagueness prevailing between the respective conditions for application of this directive and Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 1971 and , soon , of Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 , adopted yesterday , will only give rise to new decisions from the Court of Justice .

As for the market approach , the spirit of this report can already be found in summary in its legal basis , in other words Article 95 governing the rules of the internal market .
Health would therefore only be a commodity like any other , subject to the same rules of supply and demand .
That can only lead to unequal access to care , where well-heeled and well-informed citizens are able to choose the best care available in the EU , whilst the rest would have to make do with services that are already weakened in many Member States , and which this directive is by no means designed to improve .
In the same spirit , Amendment 67 amounts to introducing competition between the national public health systems , as each person would be free , providing they pay , of course , to join the system of their choice in the EU .
I would like finally to raise the question of prior authorisation for hospital healthcare , the introduction of which is subject to a whole series of limitations on the Member States , even though this principle allows both control of the financial equilibrium of the social systems and a guarantee for patients about the conditions for reimbursement .
For all these reasons , and because I have few illusions about the outcome of today 's vote , given the wonderful unanimity ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - Mr President , on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee we wanted to welcome this proposal and to underscore what it brings in terms of legal certainty , which is to be applauded , and also in terms of emphasising patient choice .
But also we felt , as a committee - and I think this is important , given the concerns that have been expressed this morning - that it does respect subsidiarity and it does , therefore , respect the integrity of national health systems .
The only area where we depart , perhaps , from the leading report is that we would have liked to have seen more done for those patients where things unfortunately go wrong .
We feel that the applicable law regime and the jurisdiction rules that are set out are not clear enough : it could have been more patient-oriented to make sure , as we have done in other areas , that patients could bring claims in their country of residence and could receive compensation according to the law of their country of residence .
It would be a good idea if this were looked at again .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( SK ) As draftsman for the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality I would like to thank Mr Bowis for his close cooperation and our many discussions when preparing this report .
I also wish him all the best .
The report directly relates to patients ' rights and European lawmakers here must ensure that equality is applied consistently to the provision of healthcare for women and men .
Any form of gender-based discrimination whatsoever practised by healthcare facilities , insurers or state officials is unacceptable .
The danger of the proposed system is that cross-border healthcare , which implies a form of preferential treatment , will mainly be used by financially better off citizens .
One way to solve the situation is through the possibility of inter-regional cooperation .
Cross-border regional agreements between financial establishments and healthcare facilities should help to harmonise patient requirements , the stability of public finances and particularly the priority of the state to ensure that its citizens remain in good health .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , since 1998 the European Court of Justice has determined that patients have the right to be reimbursed for health care received in another Member State .
This report , on the back of the draft proposal from the Commissioner , clarifies how to apply the principles set out in those ECJ cases .
I welcome John Bowis 's excellent report and his skilful resolution of the many legitimate concerns that were with the original draft proposal .
The report is based on patients ' needs and not patients ' means .
The definitions of hospital care and prior authorisation have been discussed and , I understand , agreed with Council and Commission .
Quality standards will remain a Member State competence , while safety standards a European-wide one .
One-stop-shop equivalent sources of patient information will be essential in every Member State to allow informed choices by patients , and the provision of mutual recognition of prescriptions , I think , will be a very important add-on to this piece of legislation and must follow on quickly .
While health services were initially included in the draft proposal of the Bolkestein cross-border services proposal , it quickly became apparent that a stand-alone directive on this most important issue of health - which has ramifications for all aspects of health care in our 27 Member States - was needed .
Patients will always prefer to receive health care close to where they live .
Currently , only one percent of our budgets are spent on cross-border health care .
Let us keep this in perspective .
However , when circumstances dictate , it can be beneficial to receive health care in another EU country - notably in border regions , whereby the nearest health facility , for example , may be in another country , or where there is more expertise available , for example in the case of rare diseases , or a particular care or treatment could possibly be provided faster in another country .
I must fully acknowledge that the general competence in health policy and financing of health policy remains , and will continue to remain , at Member State level .
I have one single point to make on the Trakatellis report .
There is a lot of concern and misinterpretation on Amendment 15 , and I welcome the opportunity that the split vote will allow to vote against the concept of ' eradication ' of rare diseases , which has caused a lot of concern .
I will , however , be supporting the rest of the amendment and the excellent work done by my colleague Professor Antonios Trakatellis on rare diseases .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like , on behalf of my group , to wish Mr Bowis a speedy recovery .
I know that he was working hard in the committee until the last day of the vote , and I hope , now , that he recuperates after his operation and gets well soon and that we will be seeing him here again before the summer recess .
Allow me to start by saying that my group thinks this is a very good report .
We can see that the Commission 's proposal has been thoroughly improved by numerous amendments from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and by compromises that we reached together .
Commissioner Vassiliou , you and your team produced good work , but there was scope for improvement , and we have succeeded in improving it .
We have managed to ensure that all patients will now know that they have rights in the European Union just like everyone else does .
They can move around , just as is self-evident for every worker , every student and for goods , services and other things .
Patients , too , are to have their rights in the internal market .
That is what this legislation lays down , and for that reason we welcome it unreservedly .
We must also point out , however , which areas of the report we particularly approved of .
These include , for example , the fact that patients are to be granted free movement for non-hospital care .
We also think , however , that the Member States should retain the competence for their healthcare systems .
They should be able to plan for their hospital care , their specialist care , and their investments in the Member State in question should be affordable .
We do not seek to take away this authority , this competence , from the Member States .
Nor do we want them to be bled dry .
It is therefore right for there to be prior authorisation for certain kinds of treatment .
This , too , is something that my group is very happy to give its full backing to , and I will return to this issue at the end .
This is a good approach , which is something that characterises the report as a whole .
One thing that I very much welcome , on a personal level , is the fact that there are to be reference networks at long last .
How long have we been demanding that it must be clear where in the European Union best practice is taking place ? Where are treatments being performed best ?
Where are they being most successful ?
Which team in which hospital in which Member State has news to report ? At the moment , this is left to chance .
Perhaps a small part of the scientific community knows about it , but not every local doctor .
The fact that we are able to improve this situation through the advent of reference networks is a great achievement . These sources of information will enable every patient in every Member State to drop in or call up and ask , ' What are my rights ? '
They will be told in their own language what their rights are and , where they have a problem , they will get an answer .
This is a positive development .
As I reach the end of my speaking time , I must also mention those areas that the majority of my group find regrettable .
For the vast majority of my group , this involves two items that are critical for us and for our voting behaviour today .
The first of these is that we want to see a dual legal basis .
We need to use the health article , Article 152 , in order to ensure that the message that we are sending out to the world is that this is an issue of health policy as well as of freedom of movement .
We need this , and it is a condition of our support .
Furthermore , we are convinced that prior authorisation , as set out in Article 8 ( 3 ) , is inadequately defined .
If we are unable to obtain an improvement in this through the amendments that have been tabled , my group will not , unfortunately , be able to bring itself to vote through this report , which is something that I personally regret , although perhaps this will act as a spur to do better at second reading if we do not make enough ground today .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) This directive is about patients .
I cannot emphasise that enough , since we have , of course , been talking about a great many other things in the context of cross-border healthcare : the free movement of medical services and what to do regarding the market in healthcare .
That is expressly not what we are talking about now .
We are talking about a pragmatic approach .
How can we make the system such that patients benefit from it ?
And if we do not do that , who will ?
Patients are in such a weak position .
You do not want sick people to have to engage in a battle with cold healthcare bureaucrats , who look at health policy on their spreadsheet , on their computer with its figures and statistics .
That must not happen .
That is why this is also a social directive .
Cross-border care has , of course , long been possible for anyone who can pay for it , but something needs to be done also for those who cannot pay .
That is what we are talking about here today , Mr President .
It is also for these reasons that our group attaches importance to prior authorisation , which is naturally a crucial element here , Mrs Filipiová .
I very much appreciate , by the way , that the Council is present here today .
Prior authorisation is to be in place not in order to make cross-border care impossible - absolutely not - but , rather , in order to avoid seriously undermining the national systems .
We agree with that and we are going further in this matter than we would perhaps normally have done .
A compromise is therefore necessary .
We consider that there must be exceptions for rare diseases or life-threatening situations on waiting lists .
We would like to set down the definition of hospital care on a European level and not separately for each Member State , quite simply in order to give legal certainty to patients and to ensure certainty within the national systems .
Moreover , we are of the opinion that patients who are already so ill should not , if something goes wrong , have to engage in lengthy legal proceedings ; instead , a European ombudsman system for patients should be put in place .
On the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety we have of course had a disagreement about this , and I call on all Members on the left to just set ideology aside this time and ensure that we adopt a good directive for patients and take a pragmatic approach .
I have listened with great respect to what Mrs Roth-Behrendt said here on this matter .
Finally , many thanks indeed to the rapporteur , Mr Bowis .
He has done terrific work and I sincerely hope he gets well soon .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are approving a directive of considerable importance , a directive that concerns patients - as has already been pointed out - and all European citizens .
On the very eve of the European elections , all European citizens can see , once again , how Parliament can have a positive effect on the life of each of them .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union establishes the right to healthcare and , with this directive , we are now giving substance to that right .
It is an issue that concerns a huge number of citizens : a recent Eurobarometer survey showed that today 50 % of European citizens are prepared to travel to receive treatment abroad , in the hope of finding better , faster treatment for their illness , and 74 % of citizens feel that when they go abroad for treatment , this should be reimbursed by their own Member State .
The area is currently governed by national laws , and citizens are poorly informed with regard to the options , reimbursement and possible treatment abroad .
Indeed , today only 4 % of European citizens are treated abroad .
The European Union has uniform regulations only in cases of emergency healthcare treatment received abroad on the basis of the regulation on the European health insurance card .
Today Parliament is granting European citizens ' request for health protection , and in the field of healthcare Europe is preparing to do away with borders and to enable all patients to choose where they receive treatment .
Mr President , the directive we are dealing with today must above all be seen as a complement to the cooperation that has been in existence for three decades between the Member States and their social security systems .
Today , in my country , Luxembourg , more than 30 % of healthcare is already provided outside its borders and , moreover , the case of Mr Bowis , to whom I wish a full recovery , is a perfect example of the correct use of the existing regulation , as he was admitted to hospital in Brussels as an emergency case .
He has been well cared for and , for a British citizen , there is no problem about reimbursements .
What , therefore , does this directive need to improve ?
It must firstly improve the information given to citizens : information on the services offered , information on the centres of excellence which Mrs Roth-Behrendt has explained so well and , above all , information on the quality of care .
I believe that many member countries , including my own , have to make progress on quality criteria and on quality of care information .
In addition , of course , if I am abroad and things go wrong , I need to have a place that I can turn to .
All that is well regulated in the current text , but we think there are three things that have to improve .
Firstly , we believe that a system of prior authorisation for hospital care has a twin advantage : firstly , it is a big advantage for European citizens because they will know exactly when they will be reimbursed and the care will be also pre-financed .
Moreover , this allows the planning of major hospital infrastructures , since a good health system will not be created by the invisible hand of the market .
It has to be planned .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance 's second demand concerns a twin legal basis , because we do not want healthcare to be considered as a market .
It must be very clear that the system is organised , above all by the Member States .
The third point relates to rare diseases : we want specific legislation because this is too important , and we would be deluding Europe 's citizens if we were to say ' go and look somewhere in Europe , and it will be taken care of ' .
We want specific legislation .
Thus we do not want a Bolkenstein II , we want a text that gives legal certainty and that serves the majority of Europe 's citizens .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) I too wish to offer my sincere thanks to Mr Bowis .
He has worked very hard on this report and I hope that he will get well soon .
However , I must say that the European Commission is trying , under the misleading term of ' patients ' rights ' , to introduce market principles into healthcare for all of Europe .
It goes without saying that my group is in favour of more rights for patients and of patient mobility in border regions .
We , ourselves , go much further .
We consider that everyone , rich and poor , has a right to adequate access to high quality healthcare .
I have serious problems , however , with the fact that the proposal is based on the article on the internal market , which in itself indicates that economic interests come before the interests of patients .
Furthermore , the proposal is superfluous .
For the reimbursement of costs is already settled .
The fact that some insurers and Member States do not observe these arrangements must be handled better .
The proposal also deals unevenly with a matter that falls within the competence of the Member States , the result of which is that people with a fat wallet have access to better care .
The proposed system of compensation and costs , in accordance with the rules of the home country , introduces a form of patient mobility that is contrary to the principle of equal access for everyone to healthcare .
The proposal also holds a great risk that soon it will not be the patient who has the right to seek treatment abroad , but rather insurers or Member States who will be able to compel patients to go to the cheapest provider .
It will thus be an obligation instead of a right of the patient .
Given that we have 27 countries with 27 different health care systems , the Commission 's proposal , based solely on Article 95 - the famous harmonisation article - will lead to the dismantling of the national healthcare systems and thus remove the responsibilities from the Member States .
We favour taking equal access by the patient as the starting point , and not giving the market a greater role in health care .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , one consequence which the Patient Directive in its current form might have for the healthcare sector is to make it very difficult to control public spending .
I would , therefore , ask that we vote in favour of Amendment 122 , which deals with prior authorisation .
I think that it is imperative that all citizens have free and equal access to treatment , in due turn and according to their need .
This means that the doctor should be the one to decide which treatment you get - and when .
Unfortunately , this directive illustrates a very clear trend , one whereby we are all being transformed from citizens into consumers .
Instead of being citizens in a society which is based on the principle of reciprocal obligation , we have become consumers in a large internal market .
However , being a citizen means being a human being and we are all citizens , just as surely as we are all human .
But , as consumers , we are reduced to being the objects of a marketing campaign .
This means that we are objects , rather than subjects .
Patients should be subjects , not the objects of a marketing campaign .
Mr President , I join in sending best wishes to our rapporteur , wishing him a speedy recovery and return .
Obtaining the best service for our constituents is , I am sure , in the interests of us all .
However , for me it is vital that this directive get the balance right between freedom of movement versus patient safety and accountability .
I have no interest in promoting medical tourism and believe , therefore , that national autonomy over regulatory aspects must be protected and that we must avoid a harmonisation of standards to the lowest possible denominator .
We must also guard against increased pressure on local services to the detriment of indigenous patients , and that is particularly relevant in areas where there are specialisations which people would seek out .
Moreover , the issue of follow-up care after foreign treatment must be adequately addressed , because I have concerns that services such as physiotherapy and others could be overstretched because of follow-up care demands .
Mr President , I wish to warmly welcome the report by my esteemed colleague , Mr Bowis , on patients ' rights to cross-border health care .

I regret that Mr Bowis is not present with us in the House this morning , and I wish him a speedy recovery from his illness .
It has been an honour for me to play my part in working to improve patients ' rights to cross-border health care .
I myself am a beneficiary of cross-border health care .
I was lucky enough to be able to afford to pay .
Now I want those who are not as lucky as I was to be able to benefit from the right to travel to receive health care without having to worry about costs , fully informed as to their rights and as to the quality of care they can expect to receive .
The issue of patients ' rights to cross-border health care has been debated and promulgated through the European Court of Justice in the past number of years .
It is thus timely and appropriate that we , the representatives of the people , define clearly and unequivocally for the people patients ' undeniable right to access high-quality health care , regardless of their means or their geographical location .
We should also have the right to access high-quality health care close to home .
However , we also need to recognise that this is not always possible , especially in the case of rare diseases , where treatment may not be available in the patient 's Member State of affiliation .
If we need to travel abroad for health care , we should not have to go through any uncertainty as to our ability to foot the bill for what is often expensive treatment .
Therefore , I am delighted that this uncertainty and confusion has been cleared up once and for all .
Once prior authorisation is given in normal circumstances , patients will be liable only for the cost of treatment above and beyond what it would have cost them should they have received the same or similar treatment at home .
Information about quality and standards of care in other Member States is another important factor for those of us who may need to travel abroad for treatment .
We have worked hard to ensure that this information will be available to patients should we have to or wish to travel for treatment .
The national contact points proposed in this document are thus one of the key innovations and will play a huge role in helping and facilitating patient mobility .
I welcome this report and I hope it will get through today .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Roth-Behrendt did an excellent job of explaining our group 's position and , in particular , outlined perfectly why we very much appreciate how much ground has been covered in improving this text .
She also made it clear , however , how important it is to go the last mile , namely a dual legal basis and a clearer and stronger rightful possibility for Member States to have prior authorisation with regard to hospital treatment .
So , in short , let us not keep having this discussion , since we are very familiar with this directive , having discussed it for months .
I would like to ask two particularly political questions , since it is decision-making time .
The first question is to Commissioner Vassiliou : exactly what does the Commission think about the dual legal basis ?
Secondly , I am addressing in particular the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats - I am sorry that my friend John Bowis is not here , as we solved a great many issues during this parliamentary term with him as coordinator of the main groups of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , and I too , of course , wish him a speedy recovery - I would ask the PPE-DE Group and also , I think , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe : do you consider it better to proceed to the second reading without the vote of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament ?
Without a large majority ?
I therefore call on you to give serious thought to Amendments 116 and 125 on the dual legal basis and Amendments 156 and 118 on prior authorisation .
If these documents are approved we will vote in favour ; it will not be possible any other way .
It is up to you to consider and choose the outcome you want to see .
( DA ) Mr President , we are in the midst of a European election campaign - an election campaign in which we have to forge a closer relationship with European citizens .
Here we have a piece of legislation which does forge a close relationship with European citizens .
Let us seize this law and put the patient centre stage .
As one of the rapporteurs for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , my focus group is a man of a type which all of you will recognise from constituencies .
I come from a country in which , whenever I go to the supermarket , I see a man riding a moped with a wooden box on the back .
This man is at the heart of patient mobility , because everyone should be able to travel abroad and receive treatment , if they so wish , regardless of their pay packet or savings .
Those patients who want to travel are , in fact , quite few in number .
It is only those who are desperate who travel abroad .
However , just because my man on a moped is actually able to travel does not mean that he should have to spend his own money on travel .
Fortunately , there is broad agreement in the House that the individual patient should not have to pay out of his own pocket .
This is truly an improvement on the Commission 's proposal .
The ALDE 's core amendment has been to appoint a European Patients Ombudsman .
Thank you for endorsing it .
The precise role of the Patients Ombudsman will be to ensure that the EU citizen , the patient , is able to exercise the right conferred on him or her by this piece of legislation .
The ball is now in the Council 's court .
It is now in the court of the ministers who constantly tell us that we must get more in touch with EU citizens .
But what I am saying is that the EU must get more in touch with EU citizens .
Here is a case which is being handed to you on a plate .
Seize it !
Let us not waste this opportunity !
( PL ) Mr President , defining patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare is an urgent task .
Patients have the right to know the basis on which they will be given medical help , irrespective of whether they are travelling and unexpectedly need help , or whether because of difficulties in getting access to specific medical services in their own country they decide to travel to healthcare facilities in another European Union country .
They should be informed about possible charges which they will have to pay , and also of the possibilities of prefinancing .
They should also be guaranteed access to reliable information about the quality of the services available in recommended healthcare facilities .
I am thinking here of reference networks and information points .
Patients should be guaranteed information on their rights in cases of harm arising as a result of improper treatment , and also information about mutual recognition of prescriptions .
Monitoring of cross-border healthcare will be useful in assessing the situation in this area .
I would like to wish Mr Bowis a speedy return to health .

( DA ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Bowis for doing an excellent job in conducting these not-so-easy negotiations .
One of the difficult issues has been help for patients with rare diseases - a topic which we will be discussing here in the latter part of the morning .
We all want to give these patients the best treatment options available and , naturally , we see that close European cooperation in this respect will bring us huge benefits .
However , it will be of no help whatsoever if we merely let patients travel across Europe , without empowering their countries of origin to control such travel , both medically and financially .
If the text is adopted in its current form , it will give all patients suffering from a rare disease the option of travelling abroad and receiving any treatment whatsoever , which their country of origin then has to finance .
However , how do we control spending and how do we ensure that patients do not receive inappropriate or excessive treatment ?
After all , they are at the mercy of their care providers .
They also run the risk of coming into serious conflict with their countries of origin , which may refuse to pay up , under the excuse that the disease which they suffer from is not rare enough .
We have not yet reached any agreement on how to identify that section of the patient population .
We would vastly prefer a separate piece of legislation in this area so that we are able to help people with rare diseases in the optimal way possible .

( EL ) Mr President , I too should like to wish our friend John Bowis a speedy recovery and all the best and , at the same time , to thank him for his hard work .
I want to start by saying that we have no objection whatsoever to cross-border healthcare .
On the contrary , we recognise that the Member States need to make use of the powers granted to them under Article 152 of the Treaty on European Union .
Unfortunately , this directive is based on Article 95 and I am waiting for the Commissioner to clarify the legal basis to us .
We do not want a policy to be applied which favours financially privileged patients to the detriment of the lower social classes .
Mr Maaten is not here , but I do not think that it is ' ideological inflexibility ' to say that we may end up with twin-track health care .
Our objective must be to provide equal healthcare , without intervention on the part of the European Union in social security systems and without aiming to commercialise the health sector .
( PL ) Mr President , the regulation of the opportunities for receiving treatment in other Member States of the European Union , which will come into force following adoption of the directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare , will result in Community intervention in healthcare systems , in contravention of previous provisions .
In addition , opportunities for treatment will be created , especially for wealthy patients , and at the same time access to healthcare will be obstructed , especially for patients in poor Member States .
The strategy of granting special privileges to the elite in terms of access to high quality healthcare is currently being pursued by the liberal government in Poland , and this is leading to the privatisation of state healthcare facilities and is depriving most of society of the opportunity to receive treatment .
Irrespective of the opinion of the Court of Justice , human health should not be a marketable commodity , but an inalienable right which must be guaranteed by state health services in accordance with the principle of respect and protection of the right to life and health , and the inalienable worth of every human being .
( DE ) Mr President , pension claims , unemployment insurance and sickness insurance - nearly 25 years after the advent of the Schengen Agreement , social provision is still limping along behind it .
Holiday visitors are often brazenly exploited and have to pay exorbitant bills locally that are then either only partially reimbursed or not reimbursed at all when they return to their home country within the Union .
The European Health Insurance Card is often not accepted , unfortunately , while the settlement of payments between the Member States does not really work .
Particularly in times of tight budgets , however , the patient must be put more at the centre of healthcare provision .
To that end , patient rights must , of course , be strengthened .
Whether a patient in a medical emergency is able to get prior authorisation for the reimbursement of costs for hospital treatment must be viewed as doubtful .
If we are constantly economising on medical staff due to cost pressures , then I would say our healthcare system is heading in the wrong direction .
Better cooperation makes sense , therefore , but it absolutely must not be allowed to degenerate into a bureaucratic obstacle race .
( HU ) ' He that is good with a hammer tends to think everything is a nail ' goes the saying .
This describes my sentiments too about the current crisis : I see growth and recovery in everything .
I think that this legislation will open up a range of opportunities for us .
Apart from revolutionising health care , it may also give new impetus to the creation of jobs and economic development .
Introducing patient mobility will not only have an impact on healthcare .
It may have a beneficial impact not only on the host country 's cultural offering , but on its restaurant trade too .
In fact , it may lead to the creation of thousands of jobs in the hospitality sector as well .
This would result in an increase in revenue not only , and certainly not primarily in the healthcare sector , but in related services .
Similarly , the financial services sector can also look forward to growth .
Indeed , operating the new system will also require a large number of clearing houses , healthcare brokers , advisers , insurance experts , interpreters and translators .
During the rehabilitation period , the entire ' medical tourism ' chain would gain from this benefit .
The main advantage offered by this regulation is that it provides a win-win situation .
For instance , if a Member State does not want its citizens to enjoy this new opportunity , they will improve the level of their own healthcare service and waiting times .
If a Member State attracts patients from abroad , this brings in money to the country and the healthcare sector , resulting in a rise in the level of patient care in that country .
As a Hungarian MEP , I can see an exceptional opportunity in promoting ' medical tourism ' based on patient mobility in Europe .
Numerous patients are already coming from abroad for treatment in my country , but there has been a fair amount of confusion on the issue of insurance .
Things have largely depended on the sending country 's very latest regulations .
I am sure that this regulation will improve the quality of each of our lives .
I wish Mr Bowis a speedy recovery .
Incidentally , he too had previously received a lengthy period of treatment in Hungary .
I also offer my congratulations on this legislation .
It will give me great pleasure to support this excellent document .
( NL ) The most important thing for a good healthcare policy , dear Members , is that everyone should be able to obtain good and affordable healthcare , preferably close to home .
But if only 1 % of patients go abroad for treatment , this is entirely because of uncertainty about quality and about reimbursement .
That is precisely why this directive is good news , above all for people in border regions , for patients on long waiting lists , for people with conditions for which better treatments are available abroad .
Yet the right of these patients to be treated abroad should not threaten the possibility for Member States to properly organise and finance their own healthcare provision , since that is necessary to guarantee healthcare for everyone .
That is why Parliament does well to draw a number of red lines .
I will name three of these .
First , this directive rightly regulates only the mobility of patients and not of healthcare workers .
The aim cannot be to create a market for healthcare services .
On this point , the report is perfectly in order .
Secondly , the Member States must be able to decide for themselves on the healthcare they provide and what can be reimbursed .
This is handled very well in the directive .
Thirdly , the reimbursement of ambulatory care must be simplified , but in the case of hospital and specialised care , Member States must obtain prior authorisation since that care is expensive .
A country that wishes to guarantee healthcare for all must be able to plan for care in this way .
On this point , Mr Bushill-Matthews , the report falls short : it still sets too many conditions for prior approval , making it difficult for Member States .
I wish to lend my support to those of my colleagues who have made clear that this is truly a crucial point for my group if it is to be able to approve this directive .
Finally , I would like to speak up in favour of a dual legal basis , for healthcare is indeed a public responsibility of the Member States towards their populations , and thus cannot be simply left to the free market .
I hope that these two red lines will make it to the finish line .

Mr President , why should a patient have to lose their sight while waiting for a cataract operation in the UK , for instance , when it could be done quite easily in another Member State ?
Why should a person waiting in agony for a hip replacement not be able to take advantage of the lack of waiting lists in other Member States - sometimes at a lesser cost to the country of origin ?
And why do some heart patients needlessly have to wait months for surgery to unblock arteries ?
If a clinician advises treatment and this cannot be provided at home , then we do need a legal framework to ensure that they can seek it elsewhere .
All too often - as has been said already - it is the poorest people who face discrimination and inequality in access to health care .
That is why I am delighted that the rapporteur has accepted my amendment to make it clear that Member States have a responsibility to authorise and pay for treatment in another country .
We must not restrict cross-border health care just to those who can afford it .
Neither must we exclude disabled people , which is why I am delighted that many of my amendments on this point have been accepted .
The rights and safety of patients must come first .
That , again , is why I am pleased that the rapporteur supported my amendments on the regulation of health professionals .
I would remind Members of this House that these proposals build in safeguards to what is already a right for EU citizens under a European Court judgment a few years ago .
Finally , I would like to wish John Bowis a speedy recovery .
His experience shows the importance of cooperation between EU Member States .
Mr President , I have had a problem with this directive for quite some time , because the title does not actually reflect what is going on within the directive .
Some of the speeches we have heard today about job creation schemes etc. reinforce my concerns .
A lot of the issues involved are , as we know , issues about choice and payment , and this is therefore as much about social security as it is about health care .
This week , we actually updated the regulation that is the part of our system that already ensures cooperation and already ensures that , if there is an urgent need , health care cannot be refused in another Member State .
I would urge Members to read what that regulation now says .
This directive is about choice .
It is about money following patients ' choices , and I would urge people not to confuse the two different systems , as certain of the amendments do .
In my opinion , because we have these two different philosophies we also need a double legal base .
( SV ) Mr President , the whole basis of this report is wrong .
It is based on Article 95 of the Treaty , which guarantees market freedom and hence does not relate to public health or to patients .
The right to good healthcare in all Member States should be a high priority , but instead the Commission 's starting point is a market in which healthcare is treated like any other commodity .
This directive gives priority to those citizens who can pay large sums of money for travel and accommodation and those who have a good knowledge of , and contacts within , the health care bureaucracy .
It is about high-earners and the well-educated , not about those with the greatest need .
Some people may think that the amendment tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety to the effect that Member States should be able to give prior authorisation before the care is carried out is a good one .
However , the problem is that this is full of restrictions , and a huge burden of proof is placed on Member States in order for them to provide this .
Public planning will be made more difficult and the national healthcare system is at risk of being drained .
It will ultimately be the Commission and the Court of Justice that decide whether the Member States ' prior authorisations are proportionate .
If the directive is based on Article 95 , which relates to the market , it will be the market and not good healthcare that is the governing factor .
( NL ) Over the past few months , hard work has gone into this report on patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
I thank the rapporteur , Mr Bowis , for all the work he has done and wish him a speedy recovery .
Cross-border healthcare is a fact , and patients ' rights need to be protected in this regard .
We must take care , however , that this does not go too far .
Healthcare must be left up to the Member States .
Collaboration at EU level must not be at the expense of the quality of care or of the principled ethical choices made by Member States .
Ethical diversity must be safeguarded , and thus I am glad that this question is addressed in the report .
I find the legal basis a very difficult point .
I consider it unfortunate that Article 95 has been chosen for this purpose .
The Committee on Legal Affairs also gave that advice .
In my view , this goes against subsidiarity in this area of policy and makes it difficult for Member States to make independent choices without the Court of Justice intervening .
( FR ) Mr President , on 2 July 2008 , the Commission presented a draft directive on the application of patients ' rights in cases of cross-border care , in an effort to overcome the existing barriers .
This issue is a priority for all Member States .
However , not all have the resources to guarantee a given level of quality and safety to patients , whether at the care level or even at the level of the professional quality of practitioners .
It therefore seems necessary to specify the responsibilities of the Member States in this area .
Faced with the diverse methods of organising care systems in the Union , we must not lose sight of the fact that health must remain an essentially national competence , and that every State is free to define its own health policy .
However , taking into account the mobility of European workers - although this accounts for only 3 % to 4 % of citizens and slightly less than EUR 10 billion a year - many uncertainties remain about the quality and safety of care , patients ' rights , data protection and means of redress in the case of harm .
However , we are unfortunately heading towards an inevitable downwards harmonisation , and it is in this respect that we will remain extremely vigilant in our support for this report , in order better to defend our fellow citizens ' social acquis .

( ES ) Mr President , firstly I would like to show my appreciation for Mr Bowis 's endeavours to secure broad agreement on this issue , and to send him our best wishes for a speedy recovery .
The draft document that we are going to vote on will mean a great step forward , since the Member States are embarking on a joint health care project .
It deals with a very complex issue given that , in the European Union , health is a competence subject to the principle of subsidiarity .
However , with this draft document , we have broken down that barrier , and we have done it because of the need to look after patients .
This is a great achievement indeed , given that , without going into considerations of the legal base , this directive recognises the unquestionable rights of patients and opens up a new range of possibilities for them to access better treatment .
It is a directive designed for patients and about patients .
It is a very complex directive that certain countries such as my own are distrustful of , a directive in which we are dealing with a universal health system for more than a million Community citizens .
In this respect , health systems such as ours quite clearly demand recognition of the fact that a visiting patient should not have more rights than an indigenous patient from the Member State where treatment is taking place .
For this reason , we have introduced an amendment to be included in the proposal , which insists that patients who travel from other Member States must comply with the rules and regulations of the Member State where treatment is taking place , especially with regard to the choice of doctor or hospital .
In this way , we are all quite clear that a situation whereby patients come in from other Member States , must not lead to any discrimination against citizens of the Member States where treatment is taking place .
Neither can we grant the right to unlimited travel for patients .
We also support the proposed exclusion of organ transplantation from the scope of this directive .
To conclude , I feel that we have taken an important step forward , and for this reason , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports this directive , although we do believe that it should have gone a bit further , specifically with regard to the position of European citizens who reside in other Member States , and especially those who suffer from chronic ailments .

( PT ) Mr President , my colleagues , Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Sacconi , have already very clearly explained our group 's position .
Accordingly , we feel it is essential to alter the legal basis .
Commissioner , healthcare is not a good .
We do not therefore understand why the Commission has not included Article 152 of the EC Treaty .
It is also essential to request prior authorisation for hospital and specialised care in order to protect patients .
Only with the obligation for prior authorisation can safe and high-quality care be ensured .
I will end by wishing Mr Bowis a speedy recovery .
His case proves that cross-border services are already functioning without this directive .
. - ( ET ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , lawyers have a saying that where there are two lawyers , there will be three opinions .
I do not wish to cast doubt upon European Court decisions , but I cannot agree that lawyers have until now decided over the policy on patient mobility .
All medical assistance , regardless of its distinctive features , falls within the scope of application of the Treaty establishing the European Union .
Indeed , the objective of the programme of social measures approved by us last year will not be realised unless we pass a significant part of it , i.e. patients ' rights in trans-border health care .
It is our duty as elected representatives of our people to create legal and political security in this very important area .
The directive under discussion will not abolish inequality in Member States ' health care upon passage , but it is a big step towards fairness and equal rights of patients .
It is unacceptable that we theoretically confirm fairness , but in practice we disregard it due to domestic financial restraints .
No matter how justified they are , financial restraints cannot legalise the disregarding of patients ' rights or endanger patients ' rights .
In conclusion , I would like to thank rapporteur Mr Bowis for his responsible and very competent work .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to send John Bowis my sincerest best wishes .
The litmus test of this directive is its legal basis .
If it is a matter of guaranteeing everyone the right to receive the best treatment anywhere , what does the legal basis of the market have to do with it ?
The right to health should form the legal basis .
What is more , the right to health should above all provide for the right to receive the best treatment in one 's own country , which would be subject to European quality standards , not hiding behind subsidiarity .
If the market forms the legal basis , however , you might think that it is intended to Bolkesteinise health and look after the interests of insurance companies or those who want to profit from health .
It therefore beggars belief that parliamentary amendments even on the key issue of the legal basis risk being deemed unacceptable , and that calls for an essential clarification also from the Commissioner before the vote takes place in this House .
Mr President , a great deal of work has been done to ensure that people who are sick get the treatment they need , wherever they are , whoever they are .
Unfortunately , a great deal of work has also been done to ensure that they do not get that help .
In this directive , prior authorisation by health authorities , rather than medical diagnosis , cuts out patients ' rights .
It puts us back where we started .
Prior authorisation is the reason patients went to the European Court in the first place , and the Court 's judgments are the reason we are here today with a directive .
Now we are back where we started : death by geography will remain the rule .
Health authorities , like those in my own country , Ireland , will again be able to deny authorisation to travel for treatment under this directive , just as they do under the current E112 that we set out to improve .
( NL ) Mr President , first of all , my very best wishes to Mr Bowis .
In this directive , the patient is at the centre , the vocal citizen who can and also wants to opt for the best treatment , preferably nearby , but if it is farther away , then also afar .
For this legislation we have to thank the very brave citizens of the European Union who turned to the Court of Justice in order to obtain good treatment and care in another Member State when their own country let them down .
The Court declared that they were right .
Today , we are setting down in law what the Court of Justice decided , and we are also formulating the specific conditions under which the right to cross-border care can be achieved for the vocal citizen .
Mr President , this directive is fantastic news for everyone living in border regions , fantastic news for people with rare diseases , fantastic news for people facing waiting lists because , by September , their hips will give out .
These people now have a choice .
We have made better arrangements for information , we have defined the rules for reimbursement more precisely , and we have laid down the European reference networks that ensure that the quality of care will be improved .
We have provided for dispute resolution via an ombudsman , although there were other options as well .
I would refer to the Dutch model of dispute resolution in healthcare that was launched recently .
We have the option of using trial regions , and we in the border region of Limburg , where I come from , would be glad to take part .
We have also noted that the healthcare systems in the Member States have been left unchanged .
Citizens are given the right to choose , and I consider that freedom of choice to be very important .

( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like firstly to thank Mr Bowis and the shadow rapporteurs for their work and wish Mr Bowis a speedy recovery .

I believe that this directive has been an attempt to develop a broader legal framework than the current regulations , which already protect the rights of citizens to receive healthcare in other Member States , by incorporating the case-law of the European Court of Justice .
However , it does not achieve this , since it generates more legal uncertainty with two channels for mobility that are not mutually exclusive : the regulations and the directive .
Furthermore , since there is no clear definition of fundamental rights , such as the portfolio of services , social security benefits , or the necessary , indeed indispensable , prior authorisation ; it only has one legal base , which is the internal market .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is unacceptable that such a basic universal principal as accessibility to healthcare should be established solely under the rules of the internal market .
This may undermine the healthcare systems in many Member States , and furthermore , we are not giving a true response to our citizens as regards this fundamental right , to which we are all entitled .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in ruling that patients have a right to be reimbursed the costs of treatment carried out abroad , the European Court of Justice has given us a clear mission .
In this regard , Commissioner Vassiliou , the Commission proposal is excellent .
It is a proposal worth standing up for .
I regret what has gone on in this House with regard to this directive over the last few weeks .
The spectres of the market have been evoked and absurd connections to the Services Directive have been created .
Some of the amendments - and I say this as someone who grew up in the former German Democratic Republic - make my blood run cold .
One example states that Member States may take appropriate measures to stem patient flows .
What manner of people are these ?
It would seem that new Iron Curtains are to be put up .
It is all the more remarkable that such proposals should come from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , of all people .
We are talking about social Europe , something that we talk about a lot these days - Members from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , in particular , like to do so .
This lunchtime we have the opportunity to pass this acid test and make it clear whether , for us , this is about patients ' rights or whether we prefer the blinkered perspective of the national healthcare bureaucracies .
( NL ) Health is becoming increasingly important in Europe , and I think that patients clearly expect greater certainty about their rights , but they also expect correct and sound information .
This proposal regarding patient mobility thus comes none too soon .
We have all been waiting a long time for it .
It is regrettable , therefore , that the man who devoted a large part of his career to this matter must now himself be absent for health reasons , and I wholeheartedly join in expressing good wishes for John 's speedy recovery .
I wish to concentrate primarily on a number of positive points that are in the interest of the patient .
The establishment of a point of contact in the patient 's home country where the latter can turn for all types of information , as well as of an ombudsman for patients , and certainly the increase in scale thanks to better cooperation between the Member States , definitely offer added value to patients , in particular to those who are suffering from a rare disease .
I think that , for the vexed question of prior approval for hospital care , a very creative compromise has been reached that is to the advantage of both the patient and the health insurer .
Yet in order to keep the reverse phenomenon , that of an excessive in-flow , under control , and that is important for my region of Flanders , the report explicitly states that a hospital can never be compelled to accept patients from abroad if , as a result , its own citizens may be faced with a waiting list .
As a resident of a border region between Flanders , the Netherlands , Germany and Wallonia , I am very pleased with the request to the Commission to designate certain border regions as trial areas for innovative projects relating to cross-border healthcare .
I think that the results of such a trial will be very informative for other regions .
I hope that the Euregion can serve as an example in this regard .

( NL ) I will begin with a word of thanks to Mr Bowis for his very energetic and dedicated efforts on behalf of public health and patient mobility , and I would like to wish him a speedy recovery .
Healthcare is a national competence , but there are points of contact with Europe .
Patients are aware of the treatment possibilities in other countries and wish to make use of services in other countries .
That is certainly the case for patients in border regions or where there are long waiting lists in their own countries .
There is nothing wrong with seeking care and treatment in other countries , but the practice does need proper regulation .
First , there should be no forced health tourism .
It should not be the case that insurers pressure patients to go elsewhere to receive cheap care .
Secondly , there must be some minimum quality guarantees .
Anyone who has patients treated abroad must provide good information and be sure that the quality is what it should be .
Thirdly - and this is very important - Member States must reserve the right to demand prior authorisation .
Health is not a free market .
In order to maintain our services , planning is necessary and hospitals must know what kind of patient streams they may expect .
As far as I am concerned , the most important thing is that this directive will contribute to ensuring that it is primarily treatment methods that cross the border .
There is great inequality between Member States , but that is not something you can solve by sending patients across the border , but precisely by exchanging treatment , and in this regard , too , this directive can make a contribution .
- ( CS ) Minister , ladies and gentlemen , for some years I have been criticising the fact that the European Court of Justice determines the right of patients to the payment of expenditure abroad .
The Court guarantees that citizens do not have to wait for authorisation from their health insurer and that they can go straight to a doctor when they need to and that they have a right to the reimbursement of at least the cost of treatment at home , as this should not be a barrier to the free movement of persons .
This is in the Treaties but the socialists have been fighting against this right for five years .
In the meantime governments have lost further cases with their citizens .
We have heard hundreds of times from lobbyists about the risk of insurance companies collapsing .
They are afraid that patients will travel to countries where they will not have to wait months or years for an operation like they do at home .
Patients will therefore have to obtain prior authorisation from their health insurers before receiving costly treatment .
However , both patients and doctors throughout the EU need a simple rule for when they must request authorisation .
Therefore I do not support the proposal to create 27 definitions of specialised and costly care for this purpose .
This is hypocrisy because it involves the level of costs that insurance companies would be willing to pay for the treatment of citizens abroad .
So why not establish it directly in euros ?
I have been promoting proposals to develop a system to improve the quality and safety of health care and to publish objective quality assessments of healthcare facilities .
This involves national or international hospital accreditations .
The compromise proposal may be more general but even so it provides an important stimulus for countries that still lack such systems .
I trust that all hospitals will soon obtain voluntary national or European accreditation involving quality checks .
Hospitals in the Czech Republic already have to do this .
I also believe that the Commission should not designate but only coordinate the border regions as pilot areas where cross-border healthcare projects can be tested .
I am sorry that socialists here are continuing to fight hypocritically and under false pretences against a clarification of patients ' rights in the EU .
( PL ) Mr President , it is not good when the Court of Justice decides on citizens ' rights , but it is very bad when this situation repeats itself and when , instead of Parliament and the Council , the European Court of Justice does this constantly .
Therefore I welcome the Bowis report , and wish its author a speedy return to health .
I can see in this report the chance for an improvement in healthcare standards in my own country of Poland .
I would , however , like to draw attention to three important elements in this report .
Firstly , I think that treating healthcare exclusively as a marketable service is a mistake .
Citizens are guaranteed the right to healthcare both by their national constitutions and by European Union law .
Therefore the legal basis should be changed .
Secondly , use of cross-border healthcare must be based on the informed choice of the patient , and not on coercion .
Thirdly , the decision to treat in another Member State must be based on need , and not on the size of the patient 's wallet .
I am certain that the European open space for healthy citizens must also be open for those citizens who are ill and need help in another Member State .
( SV ) Mr President , of the decisions that we take in the European Parliament , today 's is one of those that I am most proud of .
It is a decision about opening up Europe and guaranteeing freedom of movement for those who are sick and in need of healthcare , for those for whom freedom of movement may be a matter of life or death , a decision that gives everyone the opportunity to decide on their own healthcare , and it is not only those who are well-informed or wealthy who will have this chance , but we will make it possible for everyone to seek healthcare wherever they want to .
You Social Democrats want to force people to request prior authorisation .
In plain language , that means that you want to force those who are sick to ask for permission before they go to the doctor , at least if they do so in another EU Member State .
Why are you doing this ?
So that you will be able to say ' no ' , of course !
You want to be able to control , regulate and plan - to take the power away from the patients .
However , we do not need your prior authorisation in order for people not to have to pay out money themselves .
If I go to the doctor in Stockholm today I do not need to ask permission or to pay money .
The truth is that you opposed this proposal from the outset .
You have tried to restrict , impede and ruin it .
You are now doing the same thing again .
When we debated this issue in Sweden , you sought to ensure that people would not be able to seek health care wherever they wanted to in Sweden .
Now you do not want people to be able to seek healthcare wherever they want to in Europe .
You say that you support the proposal , but when we voted on it in the committee , you abstained .
Is there anything more cowardly ?
You do not even know how you will vote today .
You do not even know what you will be voting for .
We all have a choice today .
We have the choice to stand up either for patients ' rights or for the rights of bureaucrats and politicians to decide and to regulate .
I know which way I will be voting .
I will be voting for the focus to be on the patients .
That is something that I think everyone in this House should do if you want to go to bed with a good conscience tonight .
( SV ) Mr President , all patients should have the right to healthcare when they need it .
We Social Democrats believe that it is important for people to be able to seek healthcare abroad , for example when waiting lists are too long in their home country .
This is also why it was the Social Democratic government in Sweden that took the initiative for a directive in this area .
However , it must never be the size of someone 's purse that governs when they receive health care , and decisions on healthcare must be taken close to the patients , not by bureaucrats in the EU system .
The European Commission 's proposal for a directive gives a lot of power to EU bureaucrats .
Moreover , it takes no account of all those people who are not able to pay large sums of money .
Nevertheless , the Swedish centre-right Members here in Parliament have uncritically praised the Commission 's proposal .
We , on the other hand , have come up with proposals and have worked hard to make it easier for people without fat purses to be able to travel abroad to receive care .
We have also worked hard to clarify the fact that healthcare is the responsibility of the Member States and not something that EU bureaucrats should take decisions on .
We have not achieved as much as we would like .
I would therefore urge all Members to support our amendment to Article 8 ( 3 ) .
We will then also be able to support this directive and we will be able to have a swift solution for all of Europe 's patients .

( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Filipiová , I want to start by congratulating Commissioner Vassiliou on her initiative on the proposal for a directive and the rapporteur , Mr Bowis , on his excellent work and to add my wishes for his speedy recovery .
I know that it is no easy matter to achieve a result which will further promote cross-border healthcare if you take account , firstly , of the differences in the Member States ' social security systems ; secondly , of the different economic levels of the Member States ; and thirdly , of the different level of health services provided in each Member State .
This being so , the rapporteur has done an excellent job .
The report we are debating today raises questions of patient mobility , especially for the purpose of seeing and treating patients in specialised health centres .
What is certain is that this will not strengthen medical tourism , but will give European citizens the facility to obtain the best possible healthcare , knowing their rights and without the inconvenience of obtaining a refund on their costs , as the Member States will have set up a clear system of prior approval of such costs .
Let us not forget that this point has been the subject of numerous judgments by the European Court of Justice .
This report addresses important issues : the definition of healthcare remains with the Member States , costs are paid at the same levels as if care had been provided in the Member State , the question of healthcare for patients with rare diseases is addressed , regardless of whether they are covered by the patient 's Member State of origin , proposals on the introduction of the position of European ombudsman to examine patients ' complaints are a move in the right direction and , finally , it emphasises the need for an information campaign to advise patients of their rights .
Several issues remain to be addressed , such as , firstly , further mapping of the cost calculation mechanism ; secondly , the list of ailments which will be covered by the system ; thirdly , recognition of prescriptions , given that the same drugs are not available in all the Member States ; and fourthly , the promotion of e-health .
Be that as it may , the overall endeavour is a move in the right direction and it is a pity that the socialists have recanted today .
I trust that the debates will progress quickly and I have a feeling that the contribution by the European Parliament is a response to a vital demand of the times and of European citizens .
Mr President , most of my London constituents have little interest in or knowledge of what an MEP actually does or what purpose the EU serves .
This week , however , there are two plenary reports where the public can genuinely resonate with their content .
The first is the cap on roaming charges in the Telecoms Package , and the second is patients ' rights for elective medical treatment in other EU countries .
I , too , would like to support my London colleague John Bowis 's report .
He cannot be with us today , sadly , because of his ill health , and I wish him a speedy recovery , and he will , of course , be greatly missed in the next Parliament .
In the UK , NHS treatment is often delayed and very expensive compared with other EU countries .
A more flexible EU market , with reasonable authorisation safeguards in health care , is a win-win situation both for the general public and also for the national health budgets of the Member States .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are dealing with an important directive to secure substantially the right to mobility for European patients , the right to healthcare in the countries of the European Union .
Healthcare , however , cannot be considered as equivalent to any other service provided in the internal market , and citizens , as patients , cannot be likened to normal consumers ; the right to health is realized in the right to receive treatment and care , starting in one 's country of origin .
Patients ' right to mobility cannot be a pretext for certain Member States to avoid investing in national health services , essentially driving citizens to health tourism and not choice .
The directive would do better to tackle inequalities in access to and quality of services in the countries where patients live .
Healthcare is not a commodity , it is a social right .
The legal issue and the issue of prior authorisation are essentially a way of refusing the right to health .
Mr President , this report marks a turning point for health-care provision to EU citizens .
It clearly and decidedly puts the health of patients first , and it sets the scene for health systems in different Member States to compete for improvement on a healthy basis .
This legislation will undoubtedly serve to cause a substantial betterment of health care in Europe .
It will also bring equality to patient care , with all citizens , rich or poor , known or unknown , having access to better treatment abroad as necessary .
My initial concerns regarding possible detrimental effects on national systems of smaller and poorer Member States have been removed by the prior authorisation provision to be included as a safeguard .
I can now say with certainty that this legislation is good for both patients and health-care systems across all Member States , and it deserves our full and unanimous support .
I am astonished by the negative stance taken by my Socialist colleagues in this respect .

( DE ) Mr President , I completely disagree with Mr Matsakis , as the Commission proposal does not , in fact , provide legal certainty for patients who get treatment outside their home countries .
Furthermore , it also fails to clear up the grey areas for social security systems under Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 .
Only a clear system of prior authorisation for cases where expensive treatment is involved would guarantee reimbursement for patients .
The directive is also unclear when it comes to its legal basis - as other Members have already made clear - including in relation to the division of competences between the Member States and Europe .
The Member States ' healthcare systems are systems of solidarity that guarantee the same access to everyone , irrespective of how deep their pockets are or where they live .
EU legislation must not put these systems of solidarity in jeopardy .
In this regard , too , the Commission proposal is inadequate , and we will therefore need our amendments to be adopted if we are to vote for this proposal .
( PT ) Mr President , it is unacceptable that , using the pretext of the application of patients ' rights in healthcare , in truth the European Commission and the majority of Parliament want to call into question the national and public health service , as is the case in Portugal .
In calling for this proposal to be adopted on the basis of Article 95 of the EC Treaty , which provides for harmonisation in the internal market , they are actually trying to liberalise the sector , which is unacceptable .
This is a sector in which the logic of the market and profit in the interests of economic and financial groups must not prevail .
Health cannot be a business .
That is why we intend to reject this Commission proposal .
Regulations and agreements to provide cross-border healthcare already exist , and these can be improved without calling into question the responsibilities and rights of Member States over the ownership and management of their national health services , which we feel must be public , universal and accessible to all .
( DA ) Mr President , we have spent the entire morning talking about how incredibly important it is to create quality healthcare and provide adequate safeguards for citizens with this proposal .
There are , admittedly , many good things in the proposal , for example , many requirements regulating patients ' access to information and such things .
But let us now be totally frank .
We will only be able to guarantee patients ' safety if we ensure that prior authorisation is in place before patients travel abroad .
This will give patients a 100 % guarantee that they are entitled to as much treatment as they have cover for , but also that they will arrive at the right place and receive the relevant treatment .
For me , that kind of guarantee is absolutely crucial .
Prior authorisation will also serve as a tool to enable health authorities to ensure the safety of those patients who stay in their home countries .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , at last !
The Commissioner and Mr Bowis have done an excellent job .
The heated debate preceding this directive is astonishing .
The European Union and we here in this House have an extraordinary opportunity in this regard to ' reconnect to the people ' , as we so lyrically desire and have repeatedly emphasised .
But what happens ?
We hesitate , and many in this Parliament - including the Swedish Social Democrats - want to make things more difficult for patients and to hamper their chances of receiving healthcare abroad .
Why ?
I can only imagine this is a desire to save the systems rather than the patients in need of care .
I am pleased that we have got this far , Commissioner .
You have taken up your responsibility .
We now have the opportunity in this House to take up our responsibility .
May the Council also take up its responsibility !
Mr President , the provision and funding of affordable and quality health care is a responsibility of each Member State .
Europe 's role is a coordinating role .
There is , of course , a strong case for better coordination of our health services across the European Union and in particular in border areas , but this directive cannot seek to do that .
Its purpose should be to ensure that a citizen 's right to health care in another Member State is carefully framed , so that each Member State 's capacity to fund and organise its domestic services is not undermined by health tourism .
Ms Sinnott , I have to say , with her shroud-waving in this House today , is wrong as usual .
No one in Ireland has died as a result of being refused the right to travel to another Member State for care - in fact , there is a fund available for those who need such care .
Ultimately , it is the medical needs of patients that matter , not consumer choice .
Prior authorisation and a due legal base are essential and , unless these are incorporated , I cannot support this directive .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank all MEPs for their comments , suggestions and observations .
I can tell you that the opinions of the Council and the European Parliament coincide across a range of issues , even though there are still issues that we must discuss further together .
Mr Bushill-Matthews , who is standing in as rapporteur for Mr Bowis , mentioned in his introduction that this was a difficult and sensitive issue .
As Mr Maaten said , there is a need here to achieve a compromise not only in the European Parliament but also in the Council of course .
I am delighted that the JURI Committee has welcomed the proposal to increase legal certainty .
I must likewise agree with Mr Braghetto that the proposal represents an opportunity for national health systems .
The proposal will at the same time improve patient rights , as Mrs Roth-Behrendt said .
I must repeat of course that the directive also has to be workable in practical terms and it must therefore reflect the financial , legislative and organisational possibilities of the individual Member States .
It is also clear that in view of the many amendment proposals the Council will require some time to review it all .
The discussion between the Council and the European Parliament will continue .
There is a need to find the right balance between the various views and proposals , but I believe we will manage it in the end through mutual cooperation .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as we have seen once again today , Parliament 's debates on this matter are both rich and passionate .
Its discussions add a great deal to the Commission 's initiative , and the amendments on which it is to vote will also constitute a most valuable input on a number of key aspects .
On patients ' rights to quality and safe health care , many of you have confirmed the fundamental importance of securing clarity and assurances .
I fully agree , and very much hope that this ambition will be confirmed .
On the question of assumption of the costs of treatment abroad , clear concerns have been expressed about the inability of a significant number of patients to afford cross-border health care .
Indeed , this is an important and most valid point .
Inequalities of revenue clearly exist throughout Europe , and this has serious consequences in relation to access to a number of fundamental services , including health care .
This issue has to be addressed .
However , reducing such inequalities is a difficult challenge , and even more difficult against the backdrop of the current economic crisis .
It will require a significant and coordinated effort from the EU and the Member States at all levels .
Unfortunately , what we can do in the context of the draft directive is limited .
The Commission proposal leaves the door open for Member States to offer direct assumption of the costs of cross-border treatment , for example with a system of written confirmation of the amount that will be paid .
If Parliament wants this to be clear in the text , I can only welcome it .
The proposed directive did not seek to prevent this , but is careful to respect Member States ' responsibilities in organising health care .
That is why we were cautious to limit the financial impact of cross-border health care on national health systems and sickness insurance funds .
However , the two objectives are not incompatible .
It would be up to the Member States to reconcile them as far as possible to the benefit of the patients , in particular those with modest revenues .
Regarding the relationship of this directive with the social security regulation , we agree , I believe , on the need for clear articulation , which would mean that , once prior authorisation is requested by a patient , and if the conditions of the regulation are fulfilled - in other words , when there is undue delay - the regulation should apply .
It has to be crystal clear that this means the tariffs of the regulation shall apply so that patients can benefit from the most advantageous system .
Regarding prior authorisation for hospital care , the proposed provisions are based on two kinds of consideration .
Firstly , case-law : the Court has ruled that such a system could be justified under certain circumstances .
We have codified this in Article 8 ( 3 ) .
Secondly , it would not be appropriate to go beyond such provisions with a looser - or indeed unconditional - system of prior authorisation , legally or de facto generalised in all Member States .
We all know that patient mobility will remain a very limited phenomenon .
This means that its budgetary impact will also be limited .
Therefore , there is no need to construct unnecessary barriers for patients .
Prior authorisation for hospital treatment has to remain a safeguard mechanism , applicable when justified .
Against this background , systems of prior notification as proposed by the rapporteur could amount to indirect - and indeed unnecessary - control of patients , impeding rather than facilitating the process .
I understand that the rationale behind this suggestion was not to achieve such an outcome , but believe that this would actually restrict patients ' rights as defined by the Court .
Such administrative mechanisms run the risk of being both cumbersome and arbitrary .
I am concerned at the suggestion regarding the definition of hospital care .
This definition is indeed a key point for patients ' rights as it sets the boundary for the prior authorisation system .
We have proposed to define the concept of hospital care through a Community list based on the shared understanding of experts , who would take account of the development of technologies .
This would allow for a reasonable and modern approach to the concept of hospital care .
Some of you are calling for national lists to be drawn up independently , and most Member States are calling for that as well .
A definition based on national lists would actually lead to discrepancies as to what constitutes hospital care in each Member State , with a considerable risk of eroding patients ' rights .
If we were to go down this road , we would need to have such lists based on clearly defined criteria and subjected to a review process .
Otherwise , patients ' rights , as defined by the European judges , would be undermined .
Some of you have said that , if we adopt this proposed directive , only a few patients would profit from it , and that they would be the very few informed patients .
On the contrary , I believe that under this directive we are giving the opportunity and the right to every single patient , before he or she leaves home , to be fully informed in order to be able to make an informed choice .
I understand the concerns raised regarding the difficulty of getting clear information on health professionals when seeking health care abroad .
This is simply a question of patient safety .
Here , we need to agree on practical solutions which also respect a number of key principles , such as the right to personal data protection and the presumption of innocence .
I am sure that common ground can be found on the basis of your preliminary suggestions .
Reference was made to Amendment 67 on relaxation of the rule for affiliations to social security systems .
Unfortunately , this cannot be accepted .
Regarding the legal basis for the proposed directive , many of you would like to add Article 152 to Article 95 .
I understand that this is an important issue for some of the political groups , but it is difficult to have definite views at this stage of the examination of the directive .
It is important to assess this issue in the light of the evolution of the text , in order to decide what the appropriate legal basis is .
Clearly , if the content of the final text justifies it , the addition of Article 152 to Article 95 could certainly be considered .
I remain open to considering this at any future stage of the codecision process .
( Applause )
Some of you have again raised the issue of the possible excessive inflow of patients from other Member States , and of how the receiving health system would be protected .
My reply is the same as the one I would give to those who fear excessive outflows in the absence of prior authorisation for hospital care , which is that the intention of this proposal is not to promote patient mobility .
As I have said , mobility of patients is a limited phenomenon and we do not expect this to change .
Therefore , it would be simply disproportionate to give carte blanche to Member States to take measures to refuse patients in order to control inflows .
Member States have to ensure that patients from other Member States are not discriminated against .
Any form of control of incoming patients would have to be assessed as to whether it would amount to an acceptable exception to the principle of non-discrimination on the basis of nationality set out in the EU Treaty .
Regarding patients suffering from rare diseases , I understand that you are looking for the best approach in order for them to benefit from the health care they need , but sometimes the best is the enemy of the good .
Today , you will vote on Mr Trakatellis ' report , which concerns the recent strategy that the Commission has already set out on rare diseases , and includes the proposed Council recommendation .
As you know , for these conditions , quick diagnosis and access to treatment are complex and not always possible or available at home .
Therefore , in order to bring the benefits of European cooperation to patients with rare diseases , they really need to be included in this directive on patients ' rights in cross-border health care .
I think that there is broad agreement on the need for European cooperation on centres of reference for rare diseases , for example .
I would therefore urge you to keep rare diseases in the scope of the directive .
Regarding the proposed exclusion of organ transplantation , I simply cannot agree .
Transplantation is a medical procedure and it is difficult to justify why patients should not have the right to benefit from it as cross-border health care , as ruled by the Court .
However , the issue of organ allocation is a different matter .
I have therefore asked experts in the Commission to look into this question to see how organ allocation could be dealt with in a different context .
Today , we can take an important step forward towards the adoption of this directive .
Now that we are just a matter of weeks away from the next European elections , allow me to pay tribute to this Parliament and to its administration for all the efforts made to make this vote today possible , for which I thank you all .
Let me also once again thank Mr Bowis and the shadow rapporteurs for their efforts and hard work and wish him a speedy recovery .
We hope to see him back soon to take up his duties and a normal life .
( Applause )
deputising for the rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to thank all colleagues for - if they will pardon the pun - a very healthy debate .
I should particularly like personally to thank - and my apologies for not mentioning this earlier - the rapporteurs from the six committees , who have produced such valuable opinions , for their comments and their insights this morning .
I must also thank all colleagues across the House for their warm tributes to John Bowis , both professionally for his work , and personally , through their good wishes for his speedy recovery , which I shall be delighted to pass on .
Like all reports , this one is based on compromises , and it is not always possible for everybody to agree on everything .
I recognise and respect the fact that there are still some difficulties for some political groups and , indeed , some delegations , and so there are still a number of amendments to be decided in plenary later this morning .
I should therefore like to thank the Commissioner in particular for her concluding comments , which hopefully will make it easier for some colleagues in other groups to decide how to vote .
I sincerely hope that , as a result of those comments , the overall report will receive widespread positive support across and within political groups , because making patient needs a priority should surely be above party politics .
I recognise that any agreement today will come too late for a formal first-reading agreement during the Czech Presidency , but I understand that there is already substantial political agreement within the Council in principle , thanks to the work the Presidency has already done , and I wish to thank it for that .
I know that John would wish this agreement to be translated into action sooner rather than later , and so , indeed , would many patients across the EU who have already waited long enough .
On behalf of the rapporteur , I call on the Commission , the incoming Council Presidency and , indeed , on the incoming MEPs in the next mandate to make an early second reading a real priority in the second half of this year , so that any remaining difficulties can be rapidly resolved .
We do not want to lose momentum now .
This report will not only bring real benefits to real people across the EU but will show that by working together at EU level people can benefit individually wherever they may live and irrespective of their means .
The vote today will light the road ahead .
Let us move down that road together as fast as we practicably can , because , after all , like the rapporteur , colleagues might never know when they may suddenly need such cross-border health care themselves .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I would like to thank the rapporteurs from the various committees for the remarkable job which they have done .
This report marks an important step forward in terms of improving patient mobility within the EU .
In a Europe where the freedom of movement is a fundamental value , ensuring patient mobility is something normal and absolutely vital in order to offer medical assistance of the highest possible standard to those who need such services .
This could also lead , in the long term , to an improvement in national health care systems thanks to a certain degree of competition between them .
However , in spite of the significant improvements , there are still some problems which are not resolved by this proposal .
I think that more clarity is needed about the terms for reimbursement and the regulations which form the basis for the preliminary authorisation system , when this is necessary .
I also regret that the mobility of medical staff has not been included in this proposal as the mobility of patients and that of medical staff are closely linked .
To be able to respond effectively to patients ' needs , we also require some rules which will allow medical staff to be mobile , while maintaining at the same time a balance at national health care system level so that no state will end up with a shortage of medical staff .
in writing . - The proposal for a cross border health-care system must be first and foremost a system which respects patients ' rights , which is based on public health as well as internal market principles and which does not discriminate against patients based on ability to pay for medical treatment .
From my own perspective , I believe that the National Health Service in the UK must have the right to insist on the prior authorisation by patients wishing to benefit from medical treatment abroad .
UK patients that cannot afford to travel abroad for medical treatment must not be discriminated against by those who can afford the up-front medical costs but who plan to reclaim these costs from the NHS on their return to the UK .
I see this practice as unfair as it allows patients to get priority treatment abroad , thereby ' jumping the queue ' within the NHS system .
The new opportunities which patients in Europe can enjoy are an important step in harmonising healthcare systems in Europe and in ensuring good-quality medical treatment for all European citizens .
The proposal for a directive stipulates the principles common to all healthcare systems : setting up model European networks , providing information points for patients in every Member State and e-health .
This report offers all Member States significant benefits , which includes , by implication , Romania .
The directive meets the needs of patients better as they can receive medical assistance in another Member State in a situation where this cannot be provided in a hospital in their country of origin or there is a delay in providing it .
The costs will be paid by the country of origin .
Another important aspect relates to the exchange of good practice and the mobility of specialist medical staff , as well as to providing citizens with free access to information about cross-border assistance .
Member States must ensure that citizens are familiar with the necessary procedures and eligibility criteria , as well as with the travel costs and medical standards at the treatment centre abroad .
This is precisely the reason why I support setting up information centres so that citizens can choose both the method and the location where they are treated .
in writing . - Member States have a responsibility to their peoples to plan and deliver health care .
Health is not a commodity to be bought and sold on the internal market .
This proposal is a disgrace .
It shows the Commission is blindly pursuing its discredited and obsolete liberalisation agenda .
It just wants to privatise everything it can and to further centralise power in its own hands .
It discriminates against less wealthy people in wealthy countries , and against all but the super-rich in less wealthy countries .
It is a charter for the destruction of public health services in Member States .
The European Commission should hang their heads in shame and should withdraw this proposal immediately .
The proposal for a directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare attempts to create a consistent Community framework for offering certainty to patients in this area where , until now , the guidelines have been laid down by the European Court of Justice .
Although the Court 's principles are fully applicable , certain ' grey ' areas have now been clarified by the above-mentioned report .
During the process of transposing into Community legislation judgments made by the European Court of Justice on the right of patients to receive medical assistance in another Member State , the proposal for a directive maintains the necessary balance regarding Member States ' responsibilities in this area .
The directive 's provisions also aim to facilitate access to medical assistance services by calling for the need to create a direct reimbursement system between the funding body from the country of origin and the host hospital .
Another interesting point in the report refers to the reciprocal recognition of medical prescriptions .
The text only offers recommendations regarding the possibility of a pharmacy in the country of origin honouring a medical prescription issued by a doctor in another country , with it being up to Member States to decide which medicines will be available on a prescription basis .
in writing . - ( DE ) The agreement that has been reached to improve patient mobility is a good thing , overall .
Simplification of the cross-border provision of healthcare services represents an important step towards a real free movement of people .
Economically speaking , too , a better use of the capacity of specialist clinics will bring benefits with it .
Putting all these positives to one side , however , we must not overlook the immense challenges that a better linking up of the national systems involves .
First and foremost , there needs to be greater certainty in terms of cost issues .
There must be no disadvantaging of the Member State carrying out the treatment due to a lack of clarity about whether the patient or the sending state is to pick up the tab .
The system of rules for settlement must be laid down precisely and account must be taken of different national circumstances .
Furthermore , domestic provision must be safeguarded and it is not the intention that that domestic provision should have to suffer as a result of greater patient mobility .
I am pleased to see this confirmed in the text .
For the future , the cross-border provision of health care services is a further milestone on the road to European integration .
When it comes to implementation , however , strict attention must be paid to ensuring that better patient mobility does not lead to health tourism .
in writing . - ( FI ) In a Member State like Finland , where , for poor people , geography and language are barriers to acquiring health services beyond the country 's borders , a directive such as this one might increase the inequality of access to services .
Only the rich can choose alternative services in other countries , and in so doing they undermine the public health care system that is the safety net of the poor .
Public money is leaking into services abroad for the rich .
That is why I cannot support the adoption of the directive .
It is , moreover , preposterous that the directive 's legal basis should be the viability of the internal market and not the rights of patients .
Patient safety ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Sartori , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a Council recommendation on patient safety , including the prevention and control of healthcare associated infections - C6-0032 / 2009 - .
The rapporteur cannot be here and will be replaced in the initial introduction by Mrs Grossetête .
Mr President , yes , I am replacing Mrs Sartori , who is in fact detained in Italy , and I pass on her full apologies because she was particularly keen to be present here today .
We are going to speak mainly about medical procedures because , sometimes , they can have harmful consequences for patients ' health , whether because of the undesirable effects of medicines , because of medical error , or because of infections contracted in the place of medication .
Of these risks , we can mention more particularly nosocomial infections , which affect one in every 20 hospital patients , in other words 4 100 000 people a year .
The European Commission figures on this issue are , moreover , very worrying .
Adverse events occur among 8 % to 12 % of hospital patients in the Member States of the European Union .
This gives an annual number of between almost 7 million and 15 million hospital patients , to which can be added the some 37 million patients who call on primary healthcare .
Nosocomial infections alone affect on average one in every 20 hospital patients , making a total of over 4 million patients a year .
In total , every year , nosocomial infections cause the deaths of around 37 000 people in Europe .
In order to meet the objective of reducing these infections by 900 000 cases a year by 2015 - in other words a 20 % reduction - the Member States and the European institutions are being called on to introduce the necessary measures .
The report recommends in particular : promoting the education and training of health staff and paramedical staff , with particular attention being paid to nosocomial infections and the resistance to antivirals of the viruses that cause them ; improving knowledge of this problem amongst patients by asking the Commission to draw up a document for patients on the basis of a handbook for the prevention of nosocomial infections produced by the World Health Organization - the WHO - in 2003 ; supporting research in this area , with particular attention being paid to new technologies , nanotechnologies and nanomaterials ; and increasing the presence of nurses and specialist infection control nurses .
Finally , it is important , as the text emphasises - and Mrs Sartori has been very insistent on this point - to improve patient training on the issue .
It is imperative that the Commission be asked to draw up a patient-oriented document for the prevention of nosocomial infections and that it be presented to Parliament and the Council .
The Commission should also make provision for three-yearly monitoring of the progress achieved in this area by the Member States and by the European Union .
A survey carried out in France , for example , shows that 83 % of the people questioned have heard of nosocomial infections , and that these risks are the main source of concern for French people when being admitted to hospital .
On the other hand , the general public does not feel it is properly informed of the causes and the consequences of nosocomial infections .
In the next few years , the effort to prevent nosocomial infections must lay greater emphasis on information for health professionals and for the population as a whole .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the area of patient safety and healthcare quality is one of the main priorities of the Czech Presidency in the area of public health .
We are aware of the importance of continually improving patient safety and related improvements in healthcare quality in relation to cross-border healthcare .
The main aim of the Council 's draft proposal on patient safety and the quality of health care , including the prevention and control of hospital-acquired infections , is to define an integrated approach under which patients can transfer safely to high quality health care centres and where all factors having an impact on this will be taken into account .
This initiative arose based on findings of an alarming growth in the occurrence of adverse events throughout Europe , with hospital-acquired infections being among the most frequently-occurring adverse events .
This is a major challenge which is connected with the increasing expectations of the public in this area , the ageing population in Europe and the constant advances in medicine and medical science generally .
Hospital acquired infections are also attracting ever more attention from the media and politicians .
These were the reasons behind the decision of the Czech Presidency to organise the ministerial conference which took place in Prague on April 15-16 under the banner of ' Bacterial Threats to Patient Safety in Europe ' .
It focused especially on hospital antibiotic programmes , the influence of health care system parameters on the occurrence of antibiotic resistance and hospital-acquired infections and also management and responsibilities in this area .
But let us return to the draft proposal .
The Czech Presidency is aware that the organisation of health systems falls fully within the competency of Member States .
Of course this initiative , in my opinion , will provide a suitable stimulus for the further development of national policies aimed at greater protection for the health and lives of citizens .
Generally speaking , the Council agrees with the need for better cooperation and coordination in this area at all levels , i.e. local , regional , national and EU , as well as the need to share relevant information .
The creation of a system for reporting the occurrence of adverse events therefore constitutes a significant measure .
The system will ensure immunity of course , in order to encourage reporting .
Emphasis is also placed on more training of health workers in the area of patient safety and the creation of common definitions and terminology as well as comparable indicators which will allow easier identification of problems .
This will enable subsequent assessment of the effectiveness of measures and interventions aimed at increasing patient safety and easier communication of experience and information between Member States .
The Czech Presidency is at present completing negotiations on the draft proposal in the working bodies of the Council and it will try to get it accepted by the EPSCO Council in June this year .
Of course , it was precisely due to the importance of this issue that the Council decided also to consult the European Parliament as its opinion contributes significantly to the ongoing discussion .
I firmly believe that the Council and Parliament share the common aim of increasing patient safety in the EU .
In this spirit the Council will also carefully consider the amendment proposals contained in your report on the draft proposal .
In conclusion I would again like thank everyone taking part in preparing the EP report and the rapporteur Amalia Sartori , who drew up the report .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like first of all to thank the committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for its work on this dossier , and especially the rapporteur , Ms Amalia Sartori , for her efforts on what is a health-care priority of the highest order .
Patient safety is about reducing adverse events which occur in all health-care settings - in hospitals , in primary care , in long-term care or in the community .
It is estimated that , in EU Member States , between 8 % and 12 % of patients admitted to hospitals suffer from adverse effects whilst receiving health care .
These figures are unacceptably high .
They paint a disturbing picture that affects not only patients but also their families and friends .
In addition to this , adverse events are a huge burden on health-care budgets and on the economy as a whole .
Health-care-associated infections are a specific example of a very common adverse event .
The total number of hospitalised patients acquiring at least one health-care-associated infection in the EU every year has been estimated at EUR 4.1 million - equivalent to 1 in 20 hospitalised patients .
Approximately 37 000 deaths are estimated to occur every year because of these infections .
Clearly , we must strive to improve significantly this situation .
Member States have all recognised the patient safety challenge they face and have taken measures to tackle the problem .
However , we know that among the 27 Member States there are varying levels of awareness , resources and expertise available to counter the problem .
It is likely that patients in all Member States are not benefiting from current research findings and the systematic exchange of best practice and expertise .
Therefore , I feel that patient safety is another area where the EU can provide real added value to make all European patients safer , while of course respecting Member States ' responsibility for delivering health care on their territories .
That is why the European Commission put forward its communication and a proposal for a Council Recommendation on patient safety , including the prevention and control of health-care-associated infections .
I look forward to hearing your views .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , the numbers quoted by Mrs Grossetête and the Commissioner are truly overwhelming and show that many patients are exposed to worrying incidents in hospitals , the most frequent being health care-associated infections .
The number of infections could obviously be reduced considerably ; first of all , greater discipline is needed in hospitals because , on the one hand , there are people who visit patients in hospital and there is always the risk of transferring bacteria and , on the other hand , hygiene rules need to be applied strictly by both patients and staff and staff need constant information and training on healthcare-associated infections .
However , I believe that the crux of the matter today is that we should collect accurate data , because there are differences from one hospital to another and from one clinic to another , even in the same country ; for example , we need to know if healthcare-associated infections are more frequent in surgery patients or in internist clinics , we need to know the strain and the resistance of bacteria ; all these data are very important if we are to be able to establish the causes and thus achieve an effective reduction in healthcare-associated infections .

We therefore need to collect detailed data in order to address healthcare-associated infections .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I think that this recommendation is a very good example of the added value that the European Union can bring to health care where , although we have limited competences , bringing together experts from Member States can really make a difference to peoples ' lives .
As Mr Trakatellis said , the figures that the Commissioner spoke about , on adverse reactions to medical care and on health-care-associated infections , are quite shocking .
Nobody should go into hospital and come out more ill than they were in the first place and many of us will know people who have had this problem .
It is a problem right across the European Union , and that is why it is extremely important that your initiative on health-care-associated infections should go ahead .
I think that we have a lot to learn from each other , and we can certainly avoid a lot of problems for our citizens if we work together to tackle this issue and bring the best heads in Europe together .
The second point I want to talk about is one mentioned very briefly in our parliamentary report , and that is needle-stick injuries .
I know the Commission has been looking at this issue for a long time now , and there is a cooperation between employers and trade unions on this issue , but we still have a situation where an estimated one million workers in the health services across Europe are affected by needle-stick injuries .
This could be avoided if the needles they were using were replaced with a safer kind .
I hope , Madam Commissioner , that you will be returning to the Commission and that in the new Parliament session you will bring forward a proposal on needle-stick injuries , which is very important for many health-care workers and is a very avoidable problem in our health-care system .


on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , approximately 10 % of patients admitted to hospitals and about 15 % of patients receiving primary care in the EU suffer some kind of adverse event , ranging from a mild , fully recoverable condition to a life-threatening or fatal occurrence .
In other words , about one in four of our patients suffer damage because of the treatment and not because of their disease .
This statistic is even more dramatic when we consider that the number of health-care-associated deaths in Europe is almost twice the number of deaths caused by road traffic accidents .
Ms Sartori 's report can do much to improve matters , but , as always , the success of any policy depends very much on its application , and in this respect national governments have the responsibility to prove , by their deeds , whether they really care about their citizens .
Health-care systems , especially in the 12 newer Member States , need in many cases a complete overhaul , with attention required to the structural improvement of hospitals , the modernisation of equipment and up-to-date training of health personnel .
Such changes can occur only with the help of the EU , both in terms of finance and expertise , and such help must be made readily available for the sake of patients ' safety .
( ET ) Open health care is a primary benefit and right .
The 37 000 deaths per year caused by infections acquired as a result of health care services is too high , and as citizens of the European Union we cannot permit or accept this .
Based on the principle of subsidiarity , European Union institutions and above all the Commission must take on an important role in the promotion of the dissemination of information and best practices .
I must emphasise the importance of offering specific and rapid solutions for the decisive and permanent reduction of nosocomial infections in Europe .
In this area , I support the rapporteur 's recommendations in this report .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank all MEPs for their comments , suggestions and observations .
I have to say that I was delighted to hear that in principle the opinions of the European Parliament and Council coincide over this issue .
The Council will of course carefully consider all of the European Parliament 's amendment proposals and based on this it will assess whether or not to incorporate them into the final version of the draft proposal .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , today 's debate illustrates Parliament 's high level of interest and concern regarding patient safety .
It also sends a signal that this is an area of great potential for EU added value .
For the most part , the Commission welcomes the proposed amendments : for example we welcome the proposal for Member States to designate competent authorities for patient safety at the various levels of state and local government administration .
This reflects the fact that some Member States have devolved systems of health care .
We also agree that the scale and cost of data collection should not be disproportionate to the expected benefits .
In relation to proposed amendments specific to health-care-associated infections , we welcome the provision for adequate protection for health-care staff .
We also support the highlighting of the morbidity and mortality burden of health-care-associated infections and the need to recruit more infection-control nurses .
However , I must raise some reservations and objections concerning the reduction of targets .
Some suggested that Member States should provide the means necessary to bring about a 20 % reduction in the number of persons affected by adverse events , including an overall reduction in the EU of 900 000 cases each year .
The Commission does not think it is appropriate to set such targets at EU level as Member States are at different stages and it would be very difficult to set suitable , realistic and achievable targets that would be appropriate for them all .
I have taken very careful note of what Ms McAvan said about needle-stick injuries and I will think about a proposal for a special initiative .
Minister Filipiová made a reference to the responsibility of Member States in this aspect .
Our initiative on patient safety and health-care-associated infections fully respects the Member States ' competence to finance structure and deliver health services as they see fit .
The purpose of our proposal is to help Member States to put in place the proper and adequate strategies to reduce or avoid adverse events in health care , including health-care-associated infections , by pooling the best available evidence and expertise in the EU and lending Commission support to achieving economies of scale in this area .
Once this patient safety recommendation is adopted in the Council , it will signal an unprecedented political commitment from Member State governments to prioritise patient safety in their health-care policies .
Action to reduce adverse events of all types , including health-care-associated infections in all health-care settings and in all EU Member States , is a goal we all share .
This proposal can play a big part in achieving this goal .
Mr President , I wish first to thank all the Members who have spoken on Mrs Sartori 's report .
I would like to thank them for the proposals they are making .
I would also like to say to Mrs Vassiliou , who appears not to share the quantified objectives set out in Mrs Sartori 's report , that we are , of course , taking her remark into account , but it is important , in any case , for us to do our utmost to ensure a high level of protection , both for patients and for health staff .
Also , whilst it is not desirable to have a quantified proposal , taking into account the diversity of the care delivered in the European Union , I believe that it is all the same important for us to do our utmost to ensure the highest possible levels of safety .
That is the added value of the European Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Rare diseases ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Trakatellis , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a Council recommendation on a European action in the field of rare diseases - C6-0455 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , this Council recommendation is very timely , because concerted action in the field of rare diseases is an absolute necessity , both at European Union level and at national level .
Although the incidence for each rare disease is very low , millions of people are affected in the European Union because these diseases are measured in thousands .
However , the proposal as received by Parliament was insufficient in its current state and it was not possible to produce a viable programme out of it .
This is because it does not describe , at least in general terms , both the necessary funding by the European Union and the cofinancing by Member States or other organisations .
Thus it is not possible to promote certain essential aspects on rare diseases , namely the creation of networks of centres of expertise , cataloguing of diseases , collection of data , the special research required and so forth .
The text asks for an implementation proposal from the Commission five years after the adoption , which is a long period during which nothing can be done in practice as there is no funding provided .
Therefore , as rapporteur , I propose that the Commission be asked to provide the implementation proposal at the latest by the end of 2012 , since by this date the required data from Member States on expert centres and expertise on rare diseases will be at hand .
In this implementation proposal , specific mention should be made for funding and cofinancing in the following areas :
Firstly , the collection of epidemiological data and compiling a catalogue of rare diseases , as this is necessary in order to have a clear picture of the field of these diseases in the European Union .
Secondly , the formation of relevant networks .
Thirdly , the creation , in addition to existing expert centres , of new centres in Member States which lack such centres , the creation of special training courses in the existing centres for professionals to acquire the necessary expertise , the mobilisation of experts and professionals in order to create the necessary conditions for advancing existing knowledge and for research on diagnostic tools and tests on rare diseases and especially on genetic ones .
We should be viewing this Council recommendation as a roadmap to create helpful conditions in the field of rare diseases . We should also understand that it is of a general nature , but I would like to stress once more that , in order to be efficiently and successfully applied , the proposal needs to be more precise and to make provision for a specific timetable and funding .
An important aspect in combating rare diseases is patient mobility .
This has already been examined in the Bowis report and I believe that patient mobility is absolutely justified here , because there are no special centres or experts able to undertake the treatment of patients in all the Member States .
Consequently , it is absolutely vital here to make provision for patient mobility and for mobility of professionals , so that some can obtain expertise and others can pass on their experience .
Finally , I should say that , for rare genetic diseases , research and innovation are absolutely necessary in order to increase the number of diagnostic tests .
Most of the report concerns treatment , diagnosis , the acquisition of expertise and the creation of centres and networks .
One point also concerns prevention .
Prevention of genetic diseases is possible nowadays through a combination of in vitro fertilisation and pre-implantation tests .
Because it is a recommendation , it is not binding on the Member States .
The report states that it will only be carried out in the Member States whose legislation so allows and by the free will and choice of the persons who wish to follow this genetic advice and , therefore , I do not see that it clashes with the principle of subsidiarity as regards existing data .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , rare diseases are dangerous and very complex diseases that threaten life or cause chronic invalidity .
Despite their low prevalence the number of patients in the EU with these diseases is relatively high , and joint action is therefore necessary at an EU level .
These are also reasons why the area of rare diseases is an EU health strategy priority .
The Czech Presidency believes that after the Council adopts the draft proposal on European action in the area of rare diseases there will be significant advances and improvements in the diagnosis of rare diseases , which is currently problematic due to the nature of rare diseases .
Conditions will also improve for a much-needed sharing of expertise and experience in this area .
Due also to these reasons the Czech Presidency has taken an active approach in negotiating the draft , carrying forward the work of the French Presidency and the discussions at the EPSCO Council in December 2008 .
I believe that the European Parliament and the Council share similar views on this matter .
The initiative is necessary as it should improve the current situation for millions of patients suffering from these diseases and it should lead to an improvement in their chances of receiving adequate care and comprehensible information .
This should be achieved , for example , through the creation of common definitions of rare diseases , further development of EU activities based on the Orphanet network , coordination of European research including cooperation with third countries , the creation and support of centres of expertise and the development of European reference networks for rare diseases .
The Council also recognises the key role played by independent patients ' organisations in developing and implementing national policies in the area of rare diseases .
The Czech Presidency is at present completing negotiations on the draft proposal in the working bodies of the Council and it will try to get it accepted by the EPSCO Council in June this year .
However , due to the importance of this issue the Council has decided to consult the European Parliament also in this case , and it will carefully consider Parliament 's opinion .
I would like to end by once again thanking everyone who took part in preparing the European Parliament report and particularly the rapporteur Antonios Trakatellis for drawing it up .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , I should like to thank all the honourable Members who were involved in the work by Parliament on the proposal for a Council recommendation in the field of rare diseases .
I should like , in particular , to thank the rapporteur , Rector Antonios Trakatellis , for coordinating the discussions and , of course , for his report .
Rare diseases , which individually affect a very small number of people and the majority of which are genetic diseases , can lead to death or chronic disability .
However , even though the incidence of each individual rare disease may be very low , as a whole these diseases affect approximately 6 % of the total population of the European Union in some aspect of their lives .
This means that , in the European Union , between 29 and 36 million people are affected or are likely to be affected by a rare disease .
However , because each disease is rare , it is impossible for each Member State to have the expertise needed to diagnose it and treat the patients .
This is therefore an excellent example in the health sector where Europe can add particular value , which is why the Commission has approved the strategic action .
The European strategy is supplemented by the proposal for a Council recommendation on action within the Member States .
The aim of this draft recommendation is to help Member States deal with rare diseases more effectively , more efficiently and more globally .
One important sector for action is in collecting expertise via the European reference networks .
These networks can add value to action by the Member States on rare diseases and in other cases .
They can also facilitate the exchange of know-how and expertise and , where necessary , direct patients as to where they should go when this expertise cannot reach them .
The Commission 's proposal for a directive on patients ' rights to cross-border healthcare includes special provisions to support patient mobility and provide a legal framework for the European reference networks .
There are still many ways in which European action can support the Member States in combating rare diseases , such as by improved identification and recognition of diseases , by supporting research into rare diseases and with mechanisms such as regulation of orphan medicinal products .
My thanks therefore to Parliament for its support on the broad spectrum of issues covered by this report .
I await your debate with a great deal of interest .
Mr President , patients affected by rare diseases suffer misdiagnoses and , often , receive no treatment .
The rarity of these diseases creates challenges both from a scientific and an economic viewpoint .
Now , having been the rapporteur on the regulation on orphan medicinal products , ten years ago , I know how these patients are too few to be a local or regional issue and how , on the other hand , the diseases are too numerous to be taught to health professionals .
Expertise is therefore rare .
The response , of necessity , involves Europe , and our Committee on Industry , Research and Energy supports Mr Trakatellis in his desire to strengthen research and prevention .
How can we deny , for example , a couple whose two children are affected by cystic fibrosis and who wish to have a third child , advances in research to prevent the latter being affected by the same disease ?
This is why patients need more coordination , more safety and more clarity .
These are essential issues that meet Europe 's citizens ' expectations of a Europe for health .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , helping patients who suffer from rare diseases has long been a major concern of the European Parliament .
Patients who suffer from rare diseases - this has been said - need European support .
National efforts in this area do not suffice .
Because these diseases are so rare , there are not centres and experts for them in every Member State .
For research - and this is a very important point - you need a certain number of patients for the disease to be researched at all and for it to be possible to develop new therapies .
The same applies to the development of new drugs .
Mrs Grossetête talked of the Regulation on orphan medicinal products , which is very important .
The Commission 's initiative , Commissioner , is also very important .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats support you wholeheartedly on this and we also support the many improvements that have been made by Mr Trakatellis in this report .
I have to say , however , on behalf of my group , that there is one amendment in Mr Trakatellis 's report that goes against this fundamental aim of helping patients .
Amendment 15 talks of how genetic diseases should be avoided and eradicated through measures such as genetic counselling and the selection of embryos .
This wording has shocked many people , and not only the ethics experts and the representatives of disabled groups , but scientists , too .
The European Society of Human Genetics is calling on us to reject Amendment 15 .
They are making comparisons with the eugenics of the first half of the last century .
Politics should not exert pressure .
Genetic counselling , likewise , should not be dominated by a political goal .
We should therefore reject Amendment 15 .
We should vote in favour of this report - provided that Amendment 15 is rejected - as it is a sound report .
Otherwise , it will be highly problematic .
We should be helping people with rare diseases , not giving them the feeling that they are actually surplus to requirements .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) I am grateful to Mr Trakatellis for his fine report .
If there is one area where cooperation in Europe is useful and provides added value , it is certainly the area of rare diseases .
In the case of rare metabolic diseases , muscular diseases and also rare forms of cancer , it is practical and useful to work together in order to exchange information on treatment techniques and to join forces .
These are all very important .
The information must also be made accessible , and the Trakatellis report provides for all these matters .
I would like to draw your attention to three matters .
First , patients must have a voice in Europe .
In recent years we have seen increasingly well organised patient groups that also know their way around Europe , around Brussels .
That is all very important and informative for politicians , for many of these rare diseases are , logically , largely unknown .
It is good , therefore , to determine how these patient organisations are financed , and it is extremely important to ensure that these organisations are financed independently and are not solely dependent on the pharmaceutical industry .
That is why I am arguing in favour of financing for these patient organisations .
Secondly , the development of medicines for rare diseases , the so-called orphan medicinal products , is of crucial importance .
That is why we have directives , but it would be good to devote some attention to seeing whether this is actually working well .
Thirdly , this is a controversial subject that has also been tackled by Mr Liese .
Many rare diseases are hereditary .
Research and embryo selection can prevent much suffering , but it is important that the Member States retain the power to decide as to the eventual treatments such as pre-implementation and embryo selection .
We support Amendment 15 , but we wish to delete the reference to the eradication of illnesses .
That term summons up very unpleasant associations , as Mr Liese has already said .
We also consider it important for the treatments to be voluntary and that they should take place within the boundaries established by national governments .
If these conditions are met , we are in favour of the amendment and call on everyone to support it , but the reference to the eradication of illnesses should be deleted .
Under these conditions , we can agree fully with the report and are enthusiastic about the work of Mr Trakatellis .
Thank you for your attention .


Mr President , I would like to thank our rapporteur , Mr Trakatellis , and to apologise for my late arrival in this debate , whilst welcoming the group of visitors , who are the reason for my slightly late arrival .
During a hearing on rare diseases that I organised in Parliament last year with Eurordis - the European patients ' association - I pointed out that it was up to us , that it was up to Europe , to place the bar very high for these patients who are pinning all their hopes on research , and this is what our rapporteur has done here by considerably enhancing the Commission 's text .
The small number of patients involved in each country and the fragmentation of knowledge across the Union make rare diseases the example par excellence for which concerted action at European level is an absolute necessity .
Our unanimous desire is to have better knowledge of these diseases , to improve their diagnosis and their treatment and to give better care to patients and their families .
There remain , of course , the questions of the timetable and funding .
Various options are available , and we are exploring them .
Besides the funds granted by the European Union or by the States , it is also useful to find other sources of funding .
One option that is working well in many Member States is public-private partnership .
I would be annoyed with myself if I did not mention here the considerable financial support also provided by citizens ' actions : the Téléthon in France and Télévie in French-speaking Belgium .
The latter has allowed no more and no less than a doubling of the budget for scientific research - a miserly budget , I might say in passing : EUR 13 per year per citizen , compared with EUR 50 in France and EUR 57 in Germany , to take but two examples .
I shall conclude , Mr President .
Millions of patients in Europe are watching us .
The will is there .
It is up to us to ensure that this is more than just a catalogue of good intentions .
Just one more thing : the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe supports Amendment 15 .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it goes without saying that we support helping people with rare diseases .
That said , Amendment 15 is completely unacceptable from an ethical point of view .
There must never again be a debate in Europe about whose life is worth living and whose not .
There must be no political and social pressure on parents in Europe to consciously decide against having a disabled child .
The selection of embryos would represent an opening of the ethical floodgates .
For that reason we must reject this amendment .
It is not enough just to remove the word ' eradicate ' , which is actually , it is sad to say , in line with fascist language use .
Doing so would mean that we would still be faced with the selection of embryos .
It would be insufferable if this amendment and its idea of selecting embryos were to become a stepping stone to a new ethics in Europe .
We must stand up resolutely against genetic discrimination .
Amendment 15 must therefore be rejected in its entirety .
Otherwise , our group will , unfortunately , be forced to come out against this report even though the rest of it is highly positive .
( NL ) The Trakatellis report refers to a number of shortcomings in the Council 's recommendations , and these observations are , in my opinion , correct .
I , too , am convinced , by the way , that a coordinated approach by the European Union in the area of rare diseases is necessary .
Yet neither the recommendation nor the report mentions the aspect of rare diseases that are coming in from the developing world .
Thus , for instance , we are seeing the return of tuberculosis , a disease that , until recently , had completely , or nearly completely disappeared from Europe and that is now being imported again through mass migration .
Here , too , therefore , urgent action is needed in the form of specifying risk areas , exchanging information , conducting spot checks where the Community 's external borders are crossed , etc .
It is naturally of the greatest importance that public health policy should be given primacy over political correctness .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are aiming to work together to attain the best conditions for the provision of health care in Europe .
Especially in rural areas of the European Union close to national borders - such as my home in the greater cross-border region between Germany , Belgium , Luxembourg and France - the advancement of patient mobility , which we were just debating , is a particularly important building block for improving the provision of health care and making it more efficient .
In everything we do , however , we must adhere to and retain the ethical standards of the Member States .
This applies to DNA analysis just as it does to artificial insemination , and it also applies to rare diseases , the subject of Mr Trakatellis 's report .
Rare diseases need a stronger political framework in order to improve research and treatment , as companies prefer to invest in large markets .
In fighting for people 's health we must not seek to eradicate rare diseases by , for example , selecting embryos .
The matter at hand here , after all , is healing people .
This one element represents a complete wrong turn for a report that otherwise takes a sound approach , and it is a turn that is morally perilous .
In Amendment 15 , it is not healing that is the focus , but selection .
Who is to decide which life is worth living ?
Do we believe that prevention means preventing life ?
I do not think so .
In my own country , and many other Member States besides , pre-implantation diagnosis is prohibited , and for good reason .
That official European documents can use terms such as eradication and the selection of healthy embryos unabashedly is something that I find shocking and contrary to our stated goal of the acknowledgement and integration of those with disabilities and diseases into our society .
I ask you all to vote against Amendment 15 as a matter of imperative importance so that what is otherwise such a sound report by Mr Trakatellis will also be able to obtain a good majority .
( ET ) I find that coordinated actions at the level of the European Union and the Member States in the area of rare diseases are absolutely crucial .
I support the rapporteur 's position that this recommendation by the Council and the plan of action in its present form are insufficient , and that it is not possible to create a functioning programme in the European Union on that basis .
There are no specific recommendations and definite deadlines for implementation .
It will definitely not be possible to achieve a breakthrough in this area without efforts and funding from the European Union and Member States .
I believe that rare diseases must undoubtedly receive special attention , and we must consider the specific needs of those several million citizens , to make it possible to guarantee them a dignified life in future .
I do not concur with the claim by the previous speaker , Mr Claeys , that tuberculosis comes into Member States from third countries .
I do not agree with that .
Tuberculosis comes from poverty and homelessness , and in Member States with lower standards of living this disease is common today .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank all MEPs for their comments , suggestions and observations .
I was delighted to hear that in principle the opinions of the European Parliament and Council coincide over this issue .
Of course , I cannot but agree with the rapporteur Mr Trakatellis 's assertion that the draft applies to diseases which may be rare but which afflict thousands of people .
I think it is important to say that in this area better coordination and cooperation between the Member States can deliver benefits for patients due to the specialised centres where financial benefits may accrue through the economies of scale that Commissioner Vassiliou has just been talking about .
The Council will of course carefully consider all amendment proposals from the European Parliament and based on this will assess their inclusion in the final version of the draft proposal .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today 's debate demonstrated the high level of interest in this important sector of public health .
European action in the field of rare diseases is an issue which has obtained general consent in all the institutions and I am grateful for Parliament 's support for this initiative .
Rare diseases are incontrovertibly recognised as a public health sector to which 27 different national approaches would be inadequate and inefficient .
This recommendation will allow us to address the particular problems associated with rare diseases and to try to improve the lives of people affected by them .
In addition to the patients themselves , this action will also affect their relatives and friends .
We shall achieve this in large part by recommending to the Member States that they develop plans and strategies on rare diseases and by creating European reference networks .
As regards Rector Trakatellis 's proposal that we prepare and present a report on the results of the recommendation by the end of 2012 , we have no objection and shall bear it in mind .
Allow me now to turn to two or three references which were made by the honourable Members .
First of all let me refer to Amendment 15 and to say that I wish to stress that ethical issues are outside the competence of the EU .
This is particularly the case in this instance , due to legal differences in the Member States with regard to screening and the ethical choices that have to be made on the basis of that information .
There was reference to the need for funding .
Funding for the treatment of rare diseases is for Member States to consider .
The Commission hopes that these proposals will help to support the importance of such investment , as well as helping to make best possible use of the funds that are available through European cooperation .
Regarding additional Community funding , the limits on the current health programme are due to the overall financial perspective set by Parliament and the Council .
If Parliament feels that more Community funding is needed for rare diseases , then Parliament must address these through the budgetary procedures .
Reference was made also by Mrs Corbey on the help we need to give patients ' groups .
The Commission agrees with the importance of patients ' groups .
We work closely with them and in particular with Eurordis .
I recently hosted the launch of a book providing 12 000 patients ' testimonials .
That engagement of citizens is a vital part of work in this area .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to close by pointing out that , with improved access for patients to specialist healthcare , with support for research and development of effective treatment and with cross-border cooperation , we hope that patients will find the specialists they need more easily .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , I am most grateful to my fellow Members for their comments , to the Council for its comments and to Commissioner Vassiliou for her speech .
She demonstrated that she is very open-minded and prepared at least to adopt the amendment in which we call on the Commission to table a proposal by the end of 2012 , so that we can proceed quickly in the field of rare diseases in Europe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in a few minutes .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) The prevention and treatment of any disease , including rare diseases , requires the utmost commitment of the public institutions , but treatment and prevention cannot come at the extremely high cost of sacrificing the life of any human beings , even if for the benefit of others .
That would be fundamentally at odds with the spirit of the European Union , which was founded on the recognition of the equal dignity of members of the human family .
Genetic diagnosis of embryos to choose the best and healthy ones while killing the others is unacceptable discrimination against humans .
Some Member States allow it , but the European Union absolutely cannot encourage either laws or practices that allow it .
For this reason , notwithstanding my unwavering desire to fight every disease , I am opposed to a text whose worthy parts stand in contrast to the seriously negative content of Article 4 , as it would be amended by Amendment 15 .
1 .
2007 discharge : European Parliament (
2 .
2007 discharge : Court of Justice (
3 .
2007 discharge : Court of Auditors (
4 .
2007 discharge : European Ombudsman (
5 .
2007 discharge : European Data Protection Supervisor (
6 .
2007 discharge : EUROJUST (
7 .
2007 discharge : European Medicines Agency (
8 .
2007 discharge : European Aviation Safety Agency (
9 .
2007 discharge : FRONTEX (
10 .
2007 discharge : European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (
11 .
2007 discharge : European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (
12 .
2007 discharge : European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ( Cedefop ) (
13 .
2007 discharge : Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union (
14 .
2007 discharge : EU general budget - Council (
15 .
Financial management and control of EU agencies (
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
- Before the vote :
( FR ) Mr President , before the vote , before their vote on Mr Casaca 's report , pursuant to Annex 1 , Article 1 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , I call for the following , and I am reading a part of Annex I , Article 1 : ' any Member who has a direct financial interest in the subject under debate shall disclose this interest to the meeting orally ' .
In Mr Casaca 's report on discharge , we are going to vote on pension funds .
In this Parliament , there are over 400 Members who are in the pension fund .
I invite the President to ask all Members who are in the pension fund to say so orally , in plenary , immediately , because they have a direct interest in what is to be discussed .
( Applause )

Mr President , I rise to draw attention to Rule 28 ( 2 ) of our Rules of Procedure , which says that any Member can ask the President of Parliament a question and receive an answer within 30 days .
I put a question to the President of Parliament on 19 March .
Today is 23 April .
Not only have I had no answer , but his office refused to respond to my e-mails .
I would like you to ask the President of Parliament why he shows such contempt for the rules of this Parliament and for the rights of Members , and I would like you to ask him to give me an answer within the next 24 hours ; otherwise I shall get up tomorrow and ask the same question .
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , it is obvious that the first phase is that the Members who are in the pension fund must make this known , and at the same time , it means that they should abstain from voting on Mr Casaca 's report , given that there are , in this report , items that give rise to a conflict of interest with their personal interests .
I call on you , therefore , to apply the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
( DE ) Mr President , the matter at hand is written statement 0001 / 2009 , which obtained the required majority .
I would like to thank all my fellow Members on behalf of all the authors of the written statement .
This has nothing to do with the votes .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should just like to point out that I consider to be totally unfounded the interpretation of our Rules of Procedure as suggested by Mr Cohn-Bendit , who refers to private and personal interests , which clearly have nothing to do with the application of the rules of this Parliament .
According to that interpretation , when the Members voted on the new Statute for the Members of the European Parliament , which also included references to every Member 's parliamentary allowance , then no Member would have been able to take part in that vote and I therefore ask that this request be refused as it is totally unfounded .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Cocilovo is absolutely correct in that , when it comes to the pension fund , we are indeed dealing with private interests .
This is a private scheme .
I would very much like to support what Mr Cohn-Bendit said .
Since it is apparent that 478 MEPs are too cowardly to own up to their interests , I will point out that you can find all the names at http : / / www.openeurope.org " .
The list goes from Mr Mölzer , right-wing radical , via Mr Rübig , a conservative , right through to Mr Bösch , Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
( DE ) Mr President , of course we can continue the debate .
Mr Cohn-Bendit 's motion has been carried , after all , and many comments have been made .
I would ask that we concentrate on what we are due to vote on , which is to say Mr Casaca 's report .
Irrespective of whether this is deemed to be a private or a public fund , this report is about a very specific matter , namely Parliament establishing , firstly , that it has no legal claim to have its deficits subsidised and , secondly , that , furthermore , no such subsidising of deficits will take place .
There is no money for the fund .
That is the crucial point , and I would ask that we vote on it .
Mr President , can I reply to Mr Cohn-Bendit 's point and Mr Hans-Peter Martin 's point ?
I think that there is a simple solution .
I can quite happily declare myself as a participant in the voluntary pension scheme , along with 399 other Members , and I intend to vote against my own interests and in favour of the taxpayers ' interests .
The simple solution is for the other 399 Members to do the same .
( PL ) Mr President , speaking as a participant in the pension scheme I would like to say that , apart from the fact that I am declaring this , I do not imagine that over 400 Members are now going to stand up and inform us of this fact , because if we do we will make any voting today completely impossible .
I would like to suggest a common sense solution to this situation .
There is a list of participants in the scheme - we could include this and I think this would suffice .
Thank you very much . That is enough , ladies and gentlemen .
We shall proceed with the session .
Mr Titley , your complaint will be immediately passed to the Office of the President with your request that they should respond to it immediately .
As regards the question asked by Mr Cohn-Bendit , in accordance with our Rules of Procedure , any member of the House is naturally entitled to declare at any time , a personal interest in relation to any matter being discussed here .
Therefore , there is nothing further to say on this matter , he who wishes to say something may say it , and he who does not wish to , may remain silent .
As such , I consider this matter resolved .
Welcome
I would now like to welcome a delegation from Iraq , on the occasion of their visit to our Parliament .
I would like to extend a cordial welcome to them within the framework of our interparliamentary meetings .
( Applause )
Mr Khalid Al Atiyah , First Vice-President of the House of Representatives of the Republic of Iraq , chairs this delegation .
It gives me great pleasure to emphasise the encouraging progress made in Iraq on matters of security and the rule of law , to which the provincial elections held last January bear witness , and we hope that the many problems and difficult years that this country has experienced will very soon be overcome .
They can rest assured that the European Union and this Parliament will always be at their side to help them to consolidate the peace , democracy , and stability to which Iraq , like any other nation on earth , has a right .
I hope that the meetings held within our Parliament will be fruitful , and that your stay amongst us will allow the bonds that unite our two Parliaments to be strengthened .
( Applause )
1 .
Common rules for access to the international market for coach and bus services ( recast ) (
2 .
Common rules concerning the conditions to be complied with to pursue the occupation of road transport operator (
3 .
Common rules for access to the international road haulage market ( recast ) (
( DE ) Mr President , given the hundreds of votes that we now have , perhaps you could just announce ' adopted ' or ' rejected ' rather than reading out the individual figures .
Yes , Mr Gahler , I would like very much to do as you wish , and I have in fact done that in the past .
I am not doing it today because the Association of European Journalists has asked that we detail the votes .
If we do not , the result cannot be duly recorded , and they rightly state that if they do not know the result of the vote , they cannot make a political assessment as to the position of the House .
4 .
Energy performance of buildings (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would just like to say that , on the voting list for Article 7 , Amendment 57 , only if the first part is adopted will Amendments 106 and 117 fall .
Concerning Article 9 , Amendment 102 , if all of them are adopted , Amendment 60 will fall .
Otherwise we have to vote on the corresponding part of Amendment 60 .
Thank you Mrs Ţicău , we take due note of your observation .
- Before the vote on Amendments 109 and 124 :
rapporteur . - Mr President , we have to vote on Amendments 109 and 124 too - the corresponding part .
5 .
Credit Rating Agencies (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , one moment just to tell you that this is an important report because it introduces a European regulation on rating agencies , and is therefore an element of the response to the crisis .
I wish to tell you that , this morning , COREPER adopted the compromise text that has been tabled for your vote .
For Parliament 's vote to comply , it is better for you to reject the amendments , except in the case of the votes on Amendment 172 , corresponding parts .
I wish , also , to thank the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Pittella and Mr Klinz , and all of those who worked on this important issue .
6 .
Rights of passengers when travelling by sea and inland waterway (
7 .
Rights of passengers in bus and coach transport (
Regarding Amendments 81 and 12 :
( DE ) Mr President , I believe that we had a large majority for Amendment 81 , with the result that Amendment 12 lapses .
Can you just confirm that again , please ?
Yes , you are correct Mr Jarzembowski : Amendment 12 falls .
( DE ) Mr President , this second amendment can absolutely be viewed as complementary .
There is no contradiction . The two amendments do not preclude one another .
( Uproar in the Chamber )
Could the rapporteur , Mr Albertini , give us his opinion ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with what our coordinator , Mr Jarzembowski , said : Amendment 12 falls .
8 .
Term of protection of copyright and related rights (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , I am sorry to trouble colleagues in a long voting session , but it has been newly marked on the voting list that Amendment 80 to a recital falls if Amendment 37 is passed .
The first half of the amendment is exactly the same but the new bit - the second part - is consistent .
Amendment 81 , which is the corresponding amendment to the article , is not marked as falling when the corresponding article amendment , 55 , is passed .
Therefore , I would request that we vote on Amendment 80 as an addition to 37 , if Members like it - which is a different matter - as it looks like we are also doing with Amendment 81 .
Thank you , Mrs Bowles .
It is appropriate that we should hear the opinion of the rapporteur , Mr Crowley .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I do not think this can be added as an addition .
It should be taken separately .
9 .
Intelligent Transport Systems in the field of road transport and interfaces with other transport modes (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , with the utmost respect , I believe you would gain a lot of popularity , and it would be received with a lot of admiration , if you could speed up the voting procedure .
( Applause )
Thank you very much for the advice , Mr Alvaro .
Of course , it is obvious that you have no experience of this .
10 .
Second ' Marco Polo ' programme (
11 .
European rail network for competitive freight (
12 .
Patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare (
- Before the vote :
( NL ) I wish to raise a point of order based on Article 168 ( 2 ) .
Our group has submitted an amendment on the change in the legal base , and a number of other groups have done likewise .
The change means that now only Article 95 on the internal market , and thus only economic interests , are included as a legal base and not Article 152 on public health , in which the patient is taken as the starting point .
In principle , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety asked for an opinion from the Committee on Legal Affairs , but the opinion was requested solely on the basis of the original proposal from the Commission .
In the Bowis report , it is now clear that a change has been made whereby patients ' rights are also mentioned in this report , and therefore the legal base has also changed .
These amendments have , however , been declared inadmissible and therefore the fundamental change which Parliament wishes to make - in other words from an exclusive market orientation to including patients ' rights - is in trouble .
I would like to ask that the report be referred back to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
Mrs Liotard , we will now vote on Amendment 158 , which is a motion for rejection , and once we have that result I will respond to your observation .
I should like to make a proposal regarding the amendments dealing with the legal base : the Presidency must decide on the admissibility of these amendments , specifically , Amendments 159 , 119 , 116 and 125 , but the decision naturally has to depend on the final configuration of the directive , which will be modified in the course of voting .
Therefore , I propose that the vote on the admissibility of these amendments should take place at the end , since at that point the Presidency will have the facts it needs to decide whether or not they are admissible .
Otherwise , we would have to decide now without sufficient information .
Therefore , if the honourable spokesmen agree , voting will be taken on these amendments at the end .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I agree with that proposal , but , just for the sake of clarity , could you mention those amendments covered by the legal base - 159 , 119 etc . ?
The ' etc . ' should also include the recital , which is Amendment 126 .
We will therefore vote on 80 amendments from the appropriate committee , and we are aware that Mr Bushill-Matthews wishes to table an oral amendment to Amendment 100 .
- Before the vote on Amendment 100 :
rapporteur . - Mr President , apologies to colleagues for introducing it at this late stage , but the reason is one of simple clarification .
Amendment 100 refers to the responsibility of Member States to exchange information about disciplinary and criminal findings against health professionals .
This is absolutely appropriate , but it has been brought to my attention at the last minute that this could be construed as saying that if such health professionals were involved in any traffic offences , for example , then Member States would have a responsibility to share information about that .
That clearly is not the intention of the amendment and so , for clarification , the wording proposed would now read : ' Member States shall , immediately and proactively , exchange information about disciplinary and criminal findings against health professionals where they impact upon their registration or their right to provide services ' .
So this is purely a matter for clarification .
So far , in voting on this report , we have voted on a series of amendments affecting Articles 15 , 16 and 17 .
The adopted amendments affecting those articles are the following : 102 , 103 , 104 , 105 , 106 , 107 , 108 , 109 , 110 and 135 .
During the debate , Commissioner Vassiliou said that she would be prepared to review the legal base if she felt there were reasons to do so , which would depend on the amendment of the directive .
We must decide on the admissibility of Amendments 159 , 119 , 116 , 125 and 126.1 , in order to ensure that the final text adopted by Parliament corresponds with the legal base .
Taking into account what the Commissioner has said , and the fact that the appropriate committee voted on these amendments , that is , the appropriate committee and as such , the chair of the appropriate committee , considered them to be admissible ; since he allowed them to be voted on , and also taking into account all that we have voted on today in relation to Articles 15 , 16 , and 17 , I note that the directive has changed direction .
Taking all of this into account , the Presidency considers the amendments admissible , and we shall now proceed to vote on them .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I accept your ruling - it is your right to make such a ruling - but because earlier Ms Liotard said that we would need to have a dual base , because , otherwise , if it was only the internal market , that meant we would only be voting on economic issues , without trying to open up the debate again .
I would just correct her to say the single legal base that we currently have is not just economic : it is about freedom of choice for patients ' rights .
Therefore , our group will be voting against a dual legal base , both for these original amendments , and indeed the recital .
I would encourage other colleagues to put the patients first .

Mr President , very briefly , I am trying to be helpful , but am getting hungry .
These are important votes and it is a very full agenda and I have every sympathy with you .
I have just been down to the press room and I note that eight journalists are actually listening to the vote - others may be watching on the screens , where every single vote is being broadcast .
I therefore think that to read out the result of every vote is not necessary .
( Applause )
Mr McMillan-Scott , up until now we have accommodated the speakers .
From now on , we are going to move things along more swiftly and thus satisfy everyone .
- After the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , it was because of the last intervention - which was very well-intentioned - that you omitted your normal practice , which was to thank the rapporteur .
I am sure that you would wish to do that , especially in his absence .
It is indeed an appropriate moment to thank the rapporteur , Mr Bowis , for his work , and to wish him a speedy and happy recovery .
13 .
Patient safety (
14 .
Rare diseases (
15 .
2007 discharge : Commission (
16 .
2007 discharge : Seventh , Eighth and Ninth European Development Funds ( EDF ) (
17 .
2007 discharge : Economic and Social Committee (
18 .
2007 discharge : Committee of the Regions (
19 .
2007 discharge : European Training Foundation (
20 .
2007 discharge : European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) (
21 .
2007 discharge : European Police College (
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , since Parliament has decided to grant discharge to the European Police College against the recommendation made by myself and the committee , I would simply like to urge my colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats to accept the amendments tabled by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
There is no reason to justify why we would choose not to grant discharge or to delay discharge now that we have granted it .
So that we can keep things consistent , I propose that our group support the Socialist Group 's proposals and vote in favour of the next four amendments .
22 .
2007 discharge : European GNSS Supervisory Authority (
23 .
2007 discharge : European Railway Agency (
24 .
2007 discharge : European Maritime Safety Agency (
25 .
2007 discharge : European Agency for Reconstruction (
26 .
2007 discharge : European Environment Agency (
27 .
2007 discharge : European Food Safety Authority (
28 .
2007 discharge : European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions (
29 .
2007 discharge : European Agency for Safety and Health at Work (
30 .
2007 discharge : Fundamental Rights Agency (
31 .
2007 discharge : Community Fisheries Control Agency (
32 .
Deforestation and forest degradation (
33 .
Action Plan on Urban Mobility (
34 .
The Intelligent Transport Systems Action Plan (
Voting time ( continuation )
Explanations of vote
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make a proposal : as there are a number of you who have requested several explanations of vote , when I give you the floor , please provide all your explanations , in sequence , in one speech .
Oral explanations of vote

Mr President , every day more and more of my constituents find it nigh impossible to make ends meet .
Then I pick up a report like this and I discover that EUR 1.6 billion of European taxpayers ' money has been spent on this edifice that is the European Parliament , then I discover that EUR 9.3 million has been lavished upon the political parties in the European Parliament , and then I look and see a reaffirmation of a commitment to a 30 % reduction in carbon emissions by 2020 , but not a single mention of the most outrageous emission of all - that which flows from the unnecessary travel to this place , 12 times a year .
This report is appalling in what it exposes as regards the conduct of this Parliament .

Mr President , let me put Mr Allister 's comments into context : the European Parliament costs each citizen GBP 1.74 - I say ' pounds ' for the benefit of Mr Allister - per year .
By comparison , the House of Commons costs each of its citizens GBP 5.75 per year ; the House of Lords GBP l.77 for each citizen of the United Kingdom .
In other words , this Parliament is far cheaper to operate per citizen .
However , that does not mean we must rest on our laurels .
Of course we should be vigilant , and of course we should cut costs .
The point made by Mr Allister about the 12 part-sessions a year costing so much money in Strasbourg is , of course , a correct observation .
But this decision does not lie in the hands of the European Parliament : it lies in the hands of the Member States , who , unfortunately - in Edinburgh , under the chairmanship of John Major - made it a legal obligation for the European Parliament to come here 12 times a year .
I would call on the Member States to reconsider that decision .
Mr President , this is on the question of the discharge to the Council .
It raises again this gentlemen 's agreement , which dates from before direct elections , that Parliament and the Council , as two branches of the legislative authority , each retain fully the responsibility for their own internal budget without each other looking at each other 's budget internally or criticising it .
I think the time has come for us to re-examine this gentlemen 's agreement , not least because the budget of the Council now includes not only its administrative budget as an institution , as a co-legislature with us , but also contains a budget which potentially will get bigger in the future for executive functions in the field of common foreign and security policy .
The gentlemen 's agreement was never intended to apply to executive functions .
It was never intended to shield that from parliamentary scrutiny , and I think it is high time that we enter into talks with the Council to reconsider that agreement .
( FR ) Mr President , I abstained from the vote on the 2007 discharge of the European Parliament 's budget because of some paragraphs in this report that are inspired by the disinformation and untruths published in the media , especially here , relating to the Members ' voluntary pension fund .
Mr Cohn-Bendit can sleep soundly because , as a taxpayer , he will not be asked to guarantee the rights of those fund members who are already retired , nor those of their widows nor of their dependants , nor those of the Members who will cease working here on 14 July .
If he thinks that the Members who belong to the voluntary pension fund should not take part in the vote on the discharge , he would do well to put his own house in order .
Moreover , he gladly participates in the vote on credits from our budget that are used to finance his allowances , although it has just become known , as required for the sake of transparency , that , for example , he has only once in five years set foot in a meeting of a committee of which he is a member .
His legendary diligence for the legislative work of this House - it is not enough to blare out drivel and hold press conferences - should encourage him to be more discreet , but as he is a relic of 68 , one certainly cannot expect any better of him .
Furthermore , Mr President , no statements , even though they emanate from the group chairmen , are going to change any part of the legal responsibilities of this Parliament , which are written in stone .

Mr President , we have just voted through the funding for a vast array of Euro-agencies and quangos - the Medicines Agency , the External Borders Agency , the Aviation Safety Agency , and so on - and it seems to me that these are objectionable on three grounds .
There is the Euro-sceptic argument against them , there is the legal argument against them and there is the democratic argument .
The Euro-sceptic argument I do not expect will have much traction in this House .
It is the very obvious point that these things do not need to be done at Brussels level .
The legal argument again I do not expect to have much traction : it is that a lot of these agencies , although they would have been given legal force by the Lisbon Treaty or European Constitution , have no proper legal base at the moment .
But the democratic argument I think might have some echo of authenticity even with federalist colleagues and it is this .
When a parliament like this contracts out the day-to-day administration of its policies to organisations that we barely visit , that we almost never see - we get the odd committee visit maybe once a year - and we expect them to be carrying out the policy with our signing the cheques obligingly every year , we have diminished our democracy .
Hayek said that the devolution of power to external agencies , while a regular feature , is nonetheless the first step by which a democracy surrenders its powers .
Colleagues here , federalist or Euro-sceptic , should all be aware of the danger .
( ET ) I truly have a lot of comments .
I have never done this before , but I considered it important to do so today .
I would namely first like to speak about Mr Grosch 's report , which I voted for , and also supported the recommendations of the transport commission , because I believe that one rephrased and updated regulation should be passed in place of the two present regulations that pertain to bus services .
This step will help ensure clarity and reduce bureaucracy .
( ET ) Next is Silvia-Adriana Ţicău 's report , which I also supported , because it also makes it possible to ensure even more uniform implementation of the new regulation on road transport .
I believe that , considering the international nature of this area , we should plan to enable Europe-wide queries from registers , in order to better protect clients from unfair competition .
( ET ) I too supported Mr Grosch 's report , because it is devoted to transport and helps improve the efficiency and legal security of the internal market for road transport , reduce administrative costs and permit fairer competition .
I believe that in the framework of the integration of the common European market , we should in coming years also abolish restrictions on access to the internal markets of Member States .
( ET ) Mrs Ţicău 's second report , on the energy efficiency of buildings , earned my support , because it will help realise the challenges that Europe faces in the area of energy supply and energy demand .
This means that it will help save 20 % of energy consumption through increased energy efficiency .
Investments in energy efficiency will help revive the European economy today , because they will create almost as many jobs , and maybe even more , than investments in traditional infrastructures .
Increasing energy efficiency is the most effective means for the European Union to achieve the objective of reducing CO2 emissions , create jobs and reduce the European Union 's increasing dependence on external energy suppliers .
( ET ) Mr Gauzès ' report - I am not sure if I pronounced his name correctly - concerns rating agencies , and I supported this report , because shortcomings and errors in ratings and supervision over them have contributed to the rise of the present financial crisis .
The fact that there are only a few ratings agencies , their area of operation is global and their head offices often lie outside the EU causes me to wonder how effective European legislation can be in this area .
I agree that cooperation between the EU and third countries must be intensified for the solution of this problem , and that that is the only means to achieve a harmonised regulative basis .
( ET ) About the report concerning the rights of passengers when travelling by sea and inland waterway - regulation in this area is very welcome , because this step would also help to increase the rights of Europeans travelling with these means of transport , and guarantees our consumers equal rights when using different modes of transport .
( ET ) Mr Albertini 's report on the rights of bus travellers earned my support because measures that protect bus travellers will help to finally eliminate the inequality that prevails in the European Union , and ensure the equal treatment of all passengers , as is already the case with users of air and rail transport .
Since this piece of legislation concerns both transport operators and passengers , and provides for many new obligations for transport operators , it is reasonable that a slightly longer period of implementation be granted to service providers in order to achieve a better result .
( ET ) Mrs Jensen 's report on intelligent transport systems - their implementation has proved their effectiveness , making transport more efficient , safer and more secure , as well as helping to achieve the political objective of making transport cleaner .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of the report .
( ET ) Mr Ulrich Stockmann 's report on the Marco Polo II programme is worth supporting because it makes it possible to reduce highway congestion , improve the environmental protection methods of transport systems , and promote the combination of modes of transport .
I am , however , concerned that every year there are fewer and fewer applications for financial assistance and thus planned projects that could be financed in the framework of this programme .
( ET ) I supported Mr Duchoň 's report because rail transport has a very important role in the framework of European transport , even today , despite the continual reduction in goods transport .
I also supported the report because I agreed with the rapporteur that this piece of legislation must be prepared in such a manner that in the future the railway network becomes efficient for all users .
( ET ) This morning we also discussed and just voted on certain reports from the health care package .
I supported the protection of patients ' rights in cross-border health care , because I am of the opinion that elected representatives in the European Parliament have too long been satisfied with lawyers making law in this area - law should be made by politicians , i.e. Members of Parliament elected by European voters .
This is the last opportunity to deal with and pass this directive .
( ET ) Mr Trakatellis 's report on rare diseases is like an addition to the report on patients ' rights , which I supported , although I did not support recommendation 15 in that report , because that recommendation belongs in the last century , and politics should not influence genetic research .
( ET ) The report concerning urban traffic and the action plan in that area earned my vote , because urban transport plays a very important role in EU freight and passenger transport .
As a result , the preparation of a separate urban transport strategy is altogether justified .
( ET ) Lastly , I would like to mention Mrs Anne Jensen 's report on the action plan for intelligent transport systems , because this action plan focuses on geographical consistency .
Today we mark the anniversary of the greatest of all Englishmen and perhaps the greatest dramatist and writer mankind has produced .
It is a characteristic of Shakespeare 's work that , whatever experiences we carry to them , they always illuminate our experiences more than our experiences illuminate the plays .
I can do no better today than to quote John of Gaunt 's dying speech from Richard II , which not only beautifully describes our budgetary problems in Britain but also our situation here in Europe .
First , on the budget :
' This land of such dear souls , this dear dear land [ ... ]
Is now leased out - I die pronouncing it - like to a tenement or pelting farm . '
But then listen to his description of the Lisbon Treaty or European Constitution :
' England , bound in with the triumphant sea ,
Whose rocky shore beats back the watery siege
Of envious Neptune , is now bound in with shame ,
With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds .
That England that was wont to conquer others
Hath made a shameful conquest of itself . '
If there is a better description than that , I have yet to hear it .
I was unaware that you possessed such a talent for rhapsody .
You recited it very well .
Mr President , when we vote on issues in the European Parliament we should always be sure that we take the moral lead .
It is quite right for us to be talking about energy efficiency .
Frankly , I have no problem with that at European level , national level or local level .
I think more of it can be done at local government level , but it is good to share best practice and ideas at the European and national level .
However , in taking that lead , we have to show moral leadership .
How can we talk about the energy efficiency of buildings when we continue to operate out of two Parliament Chambers , one here in Strasbourg and one in Brussels ?
What about the CO2 emissions of the Parliament in Strasbourg , when we are talking about tens of thousands of tons of CO2 emissions every year ?
It is time to stop the hypocrisy , to show leadership and to close down the Strasbourg Parliament .
Mr President , let me start by paying tribute to my colleague , John Bowis , and I am sure we all wish him a speedy recovery .
Thank goodness that he was able to take advantage of a health-care system from another country .
He , a British citizen , was able to take advantage of the excellent health-care service in Belgium .
These are a few steps in the right direction for citizens right across the EU to be able to make a decision on where to go for health-care services .
If patients are given information about the recovery rates for different diseases in a number of different countries , and they are given the choice , then they are able to choose in which country they would recover best .
To take advantage of those health-care services is a positive step in the right direction .
I have often criticised some of the initiatives that we discuss in this place , but I think this is a positive move .
We look forward to offering choice and greater service to patients right across the European Union .
- ( CS ) I would also like to explain my vote on the Crowley report - Term of protection of copyright .
I voted against the report , which has not been properly considered but which should effect the price paid by consumers for music over the next 45 years .
I would like to help ordinary artists and to do this we need legislation in the area of regulating contractual terms and collective management and establishing a social care system , pension schemes or changes to licence tariffs .
Impact studies show that only 2 % of revenues are shared among ordinary artists , with the rest going to recording companies and the biggest artists .
Subsequent redistribution will harm promising small artists , with consumers and taxpayers also paying hundreds of millions of euros more .
The proposal complicates matters for libraries , archives , art schools and independent film makers .
There is no clear impact on audio-visual artists .
All legal authorities are warning against the proposal and I therefore voted against it .
( FR ) Mr President , as regards Mrs Jensen 's report , that is , the report on the proposal for a directive on the deployment of intelligent transport systems , I voted in favour .
The objective of this directive is to guarantee the interoperability of the information and communication technologies used in transport systems .
Innovation in the transport area must be encouraged , in particular where it can improve vehicle safety .
The fact is , innovation will lose its usefulness if we do not guarantee that it can be applied across the whole European area .
This directive should allow us to contribute to a reduction in the number of deaths on European roads , by reducing both the risk of collision and the seriousness of any accidents .
I would remind you that the European Union has set itself the objective of halving the number of deaths on roads by 2010 when compared with the levels in 2000 .
In this respect , I regret that the directive on cross-border cooperation in the field of road safety , which we adopted several months ago now , has still not been adopted by the European Union transport ministers , as it would also allow lives to be saved by facilitating the enforcement of penalties against motorists who break the law in a Member State other than the one in which their vehicle is registered .
( FR ) As regards Mr Duchoň 's report on rail freight corridors , I would like to say that the European Parliament has just adopted this report on the European rail network for competitive freight .
I voted in favour of this report , which should allow increased and improved transport of goods by rail .
European action in this area was necessary .
The way rail freight transport currently operates is in fact unsatisfactory , offering too few guarantees , in terms of reliable timetables , to the companies that wish to use rail to transport their goods .
Now , we have to make rail freight more attractive to companies because , if some goods go from being transported by road to being transported by rail , it means that fewer greenhouse gases are emitted and there are fewer trucks stuck in traffic jams on the roads and motorways .
I now hope , therefore , that the transport ministers of the Member States will follow the path opened up by the European Parliament towards a better performing European rail freight network .

( DE ) Mr President , I voted against Mr Trakatellis 's report as a result of the scandalous Amendment 15 , which confuses the curing of diseases with the murder of unborn human beings and reeks of eugenics .
We need to be clear on this : human beings have a right to life from the moment the egg and the sperm fuse until their natural death , and this amendment fundamentally brings that right to life into question .
An unborn human being would no longer have a right to life , simply because he or she has a disease .
That is the precise opposite of medicine - it is murder .
For that reason , Mr Trakatellis 's report is unacceptable and this amendment is a scandal that discredits this Parliament , which has otherwise time and again served bioethics and the protection of unborn human life well .

( DE ) Mr President , for the first time since becoming a Member of this House , I voted in the vote on discharge against discharge of the Commission and I should like to explain my reasons : my basic concern is the manner in which the European Commission handled the accession of the two new countries , namely Romania and Bulgaria .
We have a great many problems to contend with in Romania and Bulgaria , with widespread corruption , with a lot of money , a lot of European money that has gone missing .
The European Commission did not start freezing this money until 2008 .
We lost a great deal of money in 2007 and now have to contend with control systems which are barely even there or control systems which only function intermittently .
In Romania we have extensive corruption and problems with the judiciary to contend with .
All this has to be blamed on the pre-accession process .
I want to give a sign , to say to the European Commission that , in future , it must deal with accessions differently and to also say to it that , had it been observed in other countries in the past , it could be progressing much more successfully now had it wanted to .
I should like to call on the Commission to help both countries put financial control systems in place that are worthy to be called as much and to help rectify the systemic weaknesses in these two countries .
Otherwise we shall have a permanent problem here , a permanent pain in the neck for the whole of Europe .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( DE ) The European Parliament voted today on Mr Casaca 's report on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Parliament for the 2007 budgetary year .
The report also addressed the question of the pension fund of the European Parliament .
The European Parliament pension fund is a voluntary pension fund .
The pension fund has now got into financial difficulties and a deficit has accrued .
The Free Democratic Party in the European Parliament is opposed to using tax revenue to clear the deficit .
It is irresponsible to expect European taxpayers to pay for these losses .
Any such plans should be averted .
The Free Democratic Party in the European Parliament voted against discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Parliament 's budget .
The possibility of using tax revenue to clear the deficit has not been totally excluded .
in writing . - British Conservatives have been unable to approve discharge of the 2007 European budget , section I , European Parliament .
We are insistent that the parliamentary budget must deliver value for money for the European taxpayer and we are , therefore , supportive of most of the rapporteur 's report .
In particular , we note with approval the progress that has been made in the implementation of the Parliament 's budget , as recorded by the Court of Auditors ' report 2007 .
We also support the rapporteur 's remarks regarding the Members ' voluntary pension fund .
However , in line with our traditional approach , we will continue to vote against granting discharge until we see real progress towards the achievement of an unqualified statement of assurance from the European Court of Auditors .
in writing . - Today , the Green Group voted in favour of the Casaca report on EP discharge 2007 .
We want to stress that with the adoption of this report in plenary , the presidium of this House should take up its responsibility and act immediately on the text adopted as far as the voluntary pension fund is concerned , and that clear decisions should be taken to the effect that under no circumstances will the voluntary pension fund be bailed out with extra money from Parliament 's budget , either directly or indirectly , and that the list of participants in the fund will be made public without further delay .
It should be made clear that , in so far as Parliament has to guarantee the pension rights of its Members , it should also have full control of the fund and its investment policies .
We expect these decisions to be taken before the end of April 2009 .
in writing . - I abstained as I am a member of the Pension Fund .
in writing . - We have voted against the Casaca report on the 2007 Discharge of the European Parliament for of three reasons .
Firstly , we oppose the situation whereby the MEPs ' voluntary pension fund is being funded by taxpayers ' money .
Secondly , we oppose the situation whereby taxpayers ' money can be given to a private pension fund where the list of participants and beneficiaries is kept secret and is not published .
Thirdly , we completely opposed to using even more taxpayers ' money to cover the pension fund 's current deficit as a result of speculative investments .
We do support paragraphs 105 and 109 of the Casaca report , which remedy some objections we have concerning the voluntary pension fund of the MEPs , but because the Casaca report does not change the existing situation , we have voted against giving the discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Parliament 's budget for the financial year 2007 .
in writing . - We voted against the Casaca report on the 2007 Discharge of the European Parliament for three reasons .
Firstly , we are against the situation that the MEPs voluntary pension fund is being funded by taxpayers ' money .
Secondly , we are against the situation that taxpayers ' money can be given to a private pension fund where the list of participants and beneficiaries is kept secret and is not published .
Thirdly , we are completely against using even more taxpayers ' money to cover the pension fund 's current deficit as a result of speculative investments .
We support paragraphs 105 and 109 of the Casaca report , which remedy some objections we have concerning the voluntary pension fund for MEPs , but because the Casaca report does not change the existing situation , we have voted against giving discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Parliament 's budget for the financial year 2007 .
in writing . - ( NL ) Unfortunately , I had to miss the beginning of the vote , but I fully share the tenor of the reports on discharge and , in particular , the Casaca report .
It would be irresponsible if we , especially in these times , were to make up the deficit in the pension fund with tax money .
A possible deficit in the fund is a matter for the fund and its members , not for the European taxpayer .
Parliamentarians are held up as an example and must be careful in their use of Community funds .
That applies to their incomes , pensions and expenses .
I am therefore pleased that Parliament has granted its approval to this report .
in writing . - ( SV ) I refuse to grant discharge to an institution that squanders more than EUR 1 billion on extra pension insurance , two thirds of which is funded by public money .
Members of the European Parliament who are involved in this extra pension fund must accept a reduction in these luxury pensions , just as low-earners have been forced to accept a reduction in their pensions .
The discharge relates to 2007 , but we cannot wait a year to express our criticism of a decision made in 2008 concerning extra payments to the pension fund .
in writing . - ( SV ) I abstained from the vote , as I left the voluntary pension fund on 21 April 2009 and therefore did not want to affect the result of the vote .
in writing . - We , as MEPs , are meant to represent and serve the people of Europe .
All of our constituents are suffering from the consequences of the economic crisis , especially in the loss and diminishment of their pensions .
In my own constituency of Munster , Ireland , many workers face a very uncertain old age because the pensions that they have paid into have lost a great deal of value , or in some cases they have lost their pensions completely with the closure of their companies .
In voting on this report , I am happy to declare that I have an interest , as Parliament 's rules demand .
As a Member I pay into a pension fund .
However , I do not see this as a conflict of interest .
To me it seems unreasonable for MEPs to expect immunity , and we should equally bear the burden of the economic crisis .
As an MEP I uphold the citizens ' interests before my own .
in writing . - I voted against the Casaca report on the 2007 Discharge of the European Parliament for three reasons .
Firstly , I am against the situation that the MEPs ' voluntary pension fund is being funded by taxpayers ' money .
Secondly , I am against the situation that taxpayers ' money can be given to a private pension fund where the list of participants and beneficiaries is kept secret and is not published .
Thirdly , I am completely against using even more taxpayers ' money to cover the pension fund 's current deficit as a result of the speculative investments .
I do support paragraphs 105 and 109 of the Casaca report , which remedy some objections I have concerning the voluntary pension fund of the MEPs , but , because the Casaca report does not change the existing situation , I voted against giving the discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Parliament 's budget for the financial year 2007 .
This proposal clarifies the rules on becoming a road transport operator .
New rules are proposed with the aim of increasing the safety and excellence of this activity , and also ensuring common financial management criteria for these undertakings .
The obligations to have a trained manager responsible for managing the undertaking 's transport activity and to prove the undertaking 's financial standing are signs of this new approach to this activity .
Other important elements of this text are the points on personal data protection , the creation of a register with public and confidential sections , and also the end of so-called ' letter-box ' companies .
The requirements for accessing the profession , namely repute , financial standing and professional competence , correspond to a clarification of this activity , which we hope will allow it to prosper in a more transparent manner , affording customers better protection and safety .
in writing . - I oppose the compromise reached between the rapporteur and the Council on the rules for access to the international road haulage market .
We believe that creating new frontiers and new restrictions on cabotage in the transport sector is not the solution to the problems the road transport sector is facing as a result of the economic crisis .
Moreover , from an environmental point of view , we cannot accept restrictions such as the requirement that the goods carried in the course of an incoming international carriage have to have been fully delivered before a cabotage operation can be carried out .
This is entirely at odds with the reality of road transport and stands in the way of efficient organisation of freight transport .
This will lead to more empty trucks .
However , I strongly support a very strict approach concerning access to the occupation of road transport operator .
If we have strict rules concerning access to the profession we do not need to fear for an open European transport market .
in writing . - I accept the need to improve the energy efficiency of buildings , and I am persuaded that the EU can play a positive role in this respect .
In fact , I think this report does not attach enough importance to the energy efficiency of buildings in the wider context of addressing environmental concerns such as climate change .
Making buildings more energy efficient is relatively simple , relatively low cost and relatively beneficial .
Making buildings more energy efficient would also have a massive positive impact on carbon emissions in the EU .
However , the European Commission has consistently sidelined energy efficiency as a flagship policy in favour of hammering the motor industry .
I am convinced that making car manufacturers the scapegoats for climate change is a deeply flawed and counterproductive policy .
Sadly , in my constituency of north-east England , Nissan has recently announced job losses and a scaling back of production .
It would be naïve to ignore the role of EU regulation in the current crisis afflicting the car industry .
This crisis could largely have been averted with a more balanced EU environmental policy that attached appropriate importance to the energy efficiency of buildings .
I voted in favour of Mrs Ţicău 's report as I believe that improving the energy performance of buildings is vital for protecting the environment , as well as for reducing the energy losses sustained by consumers .
At the same time , Europe 's citizens must not bear all the costs alone for improving the energy performance of buildings .
The EU and Member States must earmark the necessary financial resources for this purpose .
They must create by 2014 an Energy Efficiency Fund financed by the Community budget , the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) and Member States with a view to promoting public and private investments in projects aimed at improving energy efficiency in buildings , applying reductions in Value Added Tax ( VAT ) for goods and services relating to energy efficiency and renewable energy , and extending the eligibility criteria for financing from the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) the improvement in the energy performance of buildings , not only residential .
Other instruments include direct public expenditure projects , loan guarantees and subsidies , as well as social grants .
The price and reliability of energy supply are critical factors in EU competitiveness .
Increasing energy efficiency is one of the most cost-effective ways for the European Union to deliver its CO2 emission goals , create jobs , reduce costs for business , address the social impacts of energy price rises and reduce the EU 's growing dependency on external energy suppliers .
The energy performance of buildings currently represents around 40 % of energy consumption and , by recasting this directive , it will be possible to improve the current situation .
All relevant actors must be made aware of the benefits of improving energy performance and must have access to relevant information on how to go about it .
It is therefore vital that the financial instruments to support the improvement of the energy efficiency of buildings should be accessible to local and regional authorities .
in writing . - I welcome the initiative to ensure the effectiveness of energy performance of buildings .
Clearly there is a balance to be had between the necessity of action to prohibit CO2 emissions where we can , and economic costs .
The idea of energy certification of such buildings is one of the key issues which can help drive consumption in an informed way .
in writing . - We are completely in favour of more stringent rules regarding financial activities and credit rating agencies .
However , we chose to vote against the report by Mr Gauzès today .
This is because the report is insufficient and does not put enough emphasis on the right issues .
There is a strong need for public credit rating agencies which do not work for profit , since this is the only way to avoid conflicts of interests in the rating process .
This question was not raised in the report in a satisfactory manner .
I support without hesitation Mr Gauzès 's report .
He has again shown his qualities as a negotiator .
It is fortunate that a compromise could be reached quickly on this text .
By providing itself with a regulatory framework for rating agencies , Europe is in the forefront and showing the way , whilst the United States has still not reacted practically in this area .
Part of the credibility of and the confidence in the capital markets relies on the ratings produced and published by these agencies .
The regulatory framework that we are establishing today should be able to improve the conditions in which these ratings are prepared , provided they are used in a supervisory framework for regulated activities .
However , it was important for the compromise not to take the form of solutions that merely aimed at prohibiting any reference to ratings in any context whatsoever , where the latter had not been established in the framework of this regulation .
Besides it being somewhat detrimental to the major freedoms , such as freedom of expression and of trade , such an approach would probably have favoured non-European markets , to the detriment of those domiciled in Europe , and would probably also have favoured private and confidential financial transactions , to the detriment of public transactions subject to rules on transparency .
The chosen solution , therefore , has my full approval .
in writing . - ( SV ) The situation in the world economy is still turbulent , and , as recently as yesterday , the International Monetary Fund announced that the financial crisis may well get even worse yet .
It is hardly likely to surprise anyone that this is a time of festivity for those with a zeal for regulation and control .
However , to start outlining extensive control systems for the operation of the finance market even before the investigations have been carried out and the analyses are complete is a dreadful mistake .
Several important players , including the Bank of Sweden , believe that the Commission has succeeded , in a less than credible manner , in demonstrating a market failure that justifies further regulation of the credit rating agencies .
This clearly does not worry the EU .
The legislators in Brussels are prepared instead for the turbulence on the world markets to give the EU cause to boost their own positions .
If there is a system in the world today that is global in the true sense of the word it is the finance markets .
Additional control of the credit rating agencies , for example , should , therefore , if and when it is judged necessary , be initiated and planned at the global level .
Since this House is seeking solutions within the framework of EU cooperation , I have chosen to vote against the report .
in writing . - I am completely in favour of more stringent rules regarding financial activities and credit rating agencies .
I did however choose to vote against the report by Mr Gauzès today .
This is because the report is insufficient and does not put enough emphasis on the right issues .
There is a strong need for public credit rating agencies which do not work for profit , since this is the only way to avoid conflicts of interests in the rating process . This question was not raised in the report in a satisfactory manner .
This is only one example of the failings of this report .
in writing . - ( DE ) We are now erasing grey zones on the financial markets and imposing stricter requirements , and not before time .
However , this only treats the symptoms , not the causes .
Deregulation over recent years has allowed new - and , thanks to their complexity , obscure - money market products to sprout up .
In this sense , I voted in favour of stricter financial supervision , even though that alone will not suffice by a long chalk .
If we want to prevent such houses of cards from being built in future , the only thing to do is to ban the risky financial products .
However , a supervisory authority of our own would certainly create more bureaucracy , but would not bring about more economic reason and an end to the casino mentality .
in writing . - While the credit rating agencies have to accept some degree of blame for the failures in the securitisation of sub-prime mortgages which led to the financial crisis , it is with some regret that the UK Conservative delegation has voted to accept the plans to regulate the CRAs drawn up in the Gauzès report .
CRAs should not be seen as a scapegoat , given that equally at fault were the banking and regulatory culture that relegated risk strategies to the back rooms .
We hope that the EU , the United States and the CRAs can work together to create a system that operates properly .
For this to happen , a heavy-handed regulatory approach needs to give way to one that accepts the element of risk in all investments and which allows a degree of acceptance of ratings undertaken outside the scope of what we have today voted .
Above all , it needs to be flexible enough to adapt to new circumstances and to let the market breathe .
in writing . - ( SV ) I did not participate in this vote on account of my special connections with the credit rating industry .
in writing . - The G20 recommendations to the Working Group on Financial Services clearly call for greater transparency and regulation of credit rating agencies .
This report , which was a response from the European Parliament to the G20 , is the right balance .
However , there is some question that remains on the level of competence that CESR will have to demonstrate if they are to play a central role in such regulation .
in writing . - ( IT ) Thank you , Mr President .
I voted in favour .

Council ( EC ) Regulations No 11 / 98 and No 12 / 98 led to the creation of the single market for the international carriage of passengers by bus and coach .
This liberalisation has contributed to the steady increase in the volume of traffic relating to the sector , which , has undergone continuous growth from the mid-1990s to today .
This positive trend , however , has not been accompanied by the protection and upholding of passengers ' rights : passengers have pointed out many problems , including cancellations , overbooking , loss of luggage and delays .
Unlike passengers who choose other modes of transport , bus and coach users remain unprotected because of a gap in Community legislation .
I therefore welcome the proposal of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which seeks to establish their rights by means of the document on which we are about to vote .
In particular , the proposal is especially interesting since it holds carriers liable in the event of death or injury , introduces compensation and assistance in the event of cancellations and delays , recognises the rights of people with reduced mobility or other disabilities and establishes bodies responsible for overseeing this regulation and handling complaints .
It is an important step towards equal rights for all passengers .
in writing . - The European Union has created a successful internal market with unprecedented movement of capital , services and people .
However , creating this freedom of movement is not enough in itself .
We must protect the citizens of EU countries as they travel throughout the Union , and we must ensure equity of access to our transport services .
We have seen the success of EU policies for passenger access and compensation rights in the air transport sector , and I warmly welcome the fact that the EU has come forward with similar proposals for other transport sectors .
However , it is important that we respect at all times the specific nature of each different transport sector .
While the same principles of rights and fair access and equivalent rights should hold for all forms of transport , we must take into account the characteristics of each one .
Otherwise we will fail both the passenger and the operator .
I am happy that in this passenger rights package , covering sea , inland waterway and coach and bus transport , the European Parliament has produced legislation that is fair and balanced and that will prove to be extremely effective in protecting and promoting the rights of passengers in the EU .
in writing . - Conservatives welcome the overall aim of improving passenger rights , access for the disabled and creating a level playing field for international bus users , and for this reason voted in favour of the report .
However we would have liked to see an exemption to regional services as the UK has liberalised markets that have moved beyond public service contracts to open competition .
In addition , the proposal does not appear to recognise the local nature of bus services operating in border areas .
Conservatives also have concerns about the proportionality of certain aspects of the proposed regulation , particular the liability provisions .
Unlike the rail and aviation sectors , the bus and coach industry consists of a significant number of small and medium enterprises with limited resources .
Mr Albertini 's report aims to help create the conditions for a clearer framework on the use and operation of bus and coach transport .
By resolving issues linked to the rights of persons with reduced mobility and also by laying down clearer rules in the event of death or injury to passengers , and also in the event of loss or damage of luggage , this report helps to increase the security of both passengers and undertakings .
Solutions are also indicated for cases of compensation and assistance in the event of cancellation , delay or interruption of a journey .
The conditions are thus created for better information to be provided to passengers , before , during and after the journey .
Their rights are also clarified , as too are the responsibilities of operators , in order to make them more competitive and safer .
I voted for Brian Crowley 's report on the term of protection of copyright and related rights , because it promotes European performers and European music .
The European Parliament 's proposal introduces extended benefits for performers , who will be protected during their entire lifetime , on a par with the situation in the US and in line with European principles valuing creativity and culture .
I feel that extending the term of protection from 50 to 70 years will encourage investment in musical innovation and result in greater choice for consumers , allowing Europe to remain competitive with the world 's major music markets .
Portuguese managers in this sector regard this as an extremely important issue for the European and Portuguese music industries .
They confirm that the Commission 's proposal to extend the term of protection for performers and record producers over recorded works will meet a need , allowing Europe to remain competitive with the world 's major music markets .
There is obvious support from performers and producers as nearly 40 000 performers and musicians have signed a petition calling for the European Union to reduce the disparity with other countries , which already have longer terms of protection .
It is hoped that extending the term of protection will encourage reinvestment in a very wide variety of new music , resulting in greater choice for consumers .
It should also be noted that the record industry makes a huge contribution in terms of employment and tax revenue and is a major exporter of intellectual property .
For these reasons , as raised by the managers mentioned above , I voted for the compromise text put to the vote today .
This approval will allow a consensus to be established between the Council and Parliament and will facilitate the adoption of the directive by the Council .
in writing . - I voted for Amendment 79 to turn the proposal on extending the term of sound copyrights beyond 50 years back to the committee .
In my opinion the Commission 's draft needs to be better prepared , and therefore Parliament should take more time in order to make its decision .
In its present version the Commission 's draft seems to provide an objective ground to establish artificial monopolies in cultural works .
I fully agree that many artists benefit too little from their work .
However , the solution is not to indulge the production companies more , but to really shift benefits from them to artists and performers .
in writing . - It is not fair that composers of songs or the designer who does the artwork for the CD get protection of their rights for their life plus 70 years , while the performer currently only has 50 years from publication .
The term has not kept up with life expectancy , meaning that musicians lose the benefit for their work just as they retire and most need the income .
Talented musicians are being short-changed by the current system .
38 000 performers asked for our support to redress this discrimination .
This is about the equalisation of rights for ordinary working musicians .
I regret that there have been many false claims about this legislation .
At a time of economic downturn we need to support our creative industries and artists who contribute to our GDP , jobs , growth and global exports .
This law will do much to help poor musicians who deserve to be treated equally .
I hope the Council and Commission can accept the Parliament vote to bring in this law before the end of this parliamentary term .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Dutch Labour Party ( Socialist Group in the European Parliament ) supports the amended proposal because it contains a significant number of positive elements for artists , such as protection for the integrity of the artist and the fund for session musicians .
We voted for the amendments that are intended to give artists 100 % of the income that derives from the extension of the term .
The compromise reached is a step in the right direction , but is certainly not yet optimal .
The Dutch Labour Party has serious concerns , however , about the position of more minor artists who , in exchange for making a record , must forego whatever income from the recording exceeds their advance .
We therefore hope that the Commission will soon come up with proposals to improve the position of artists vis-à-vis record companies , including with regard to contracts relating to the first 50 years of associated rights .
in writing . - Although I strongly support the idea of copyright extension , this proposal has become unfit for purpose .
The EU has shown its inability to address the problem in a logical and efficient way , and so I have voted to reject it .
Establishing the second Marco Polo programme is an important step as it ensures the necessary financial assistance for those measures intended to increase and improve the environmental performance of the freight transport system .
This proposal follows on from the evaluation of the effectiveness of the first Marco Polo programme , which concluded that , to date , only 64 % of the modal shift target has been achieved , a long way from the estimated targets .
It is hoped that the new Marco Polo programme will benefit from improved financial conditions in order to pursue the targets set , which will now also include projects involving motorways of the sea as well as projects involving measures to reduce traffic congestion .
I believe that this programme , which seeks to encourage and support projects shifting road freight transport to the sea , rail and inland waterways , must be fully able to help reduce congestion and pollution and ensure efficient and more environmentally-sustainable transport .
in writing . - ( DE ) The report by the Committee on Transport and Tourism does not take sufficient account of the real interest of rail transport as a whole in better use being made of the capacity available .
Infrastructure operators are to be obliged to retain capacity reserves for occasional traffic in their annual network timetable .
This preliminary requirement leaves infrastructure operators no flexibility to take decisions on such measures in real time .
The Commission 's original proposal has even been tightened up , as capacity reserves must guarantee adequate quality for international facilitated freight traffic paths .
The extent to which requests for paths by railway companies are actually used cannot be approximately estimated for planning purposes .
These capacities are removed in advance from the timetabling process , with the result that other , later path requests cannot be satisfied .
If the already marginal network capacities are not used by freight companies , they will ultimately be eradicated to the disadvantage of all users .
This regulation would achieve precisely the opposite of the actual objective , which is better use of available capacities .
In order to limit the negative impact on passenger traffic and freight traffic requested in the short term , a regulation is needed which allows the infrastructure operators to decide if such a measure is suitable , taking account of the demands of passenger rail traffic or how better account can be taken of the needs of freight rail traffic .
in writing . - ( NL ) More and more cross-border , long-distance freight transport is being shifted from rail to road .
Important reasons for this are that more motorways are being built , direct rail connections to businesses companies are being abandoned and road transport has steadily become cheaper in relative terms .
These causes are generally forgotten .
All our attention is focused on two other reasons .
One is that coordination between railway companies in the various Member States is insufficient , as a result of which freight wagons must wait for unnecessarily long periods before they are linked up to a locomotive that will move them further along .
There is now a solution to this problem in the form of shuttle trains with a regular timetable .
The other critical point is that this transport is slow because it has to wait for passenger trains , which have priority .
The Duchoň report was intended to abolish the priority for passenger transport .
On busy stretches , this can mean an imposed obligation from the EU to override regular timetables by dropping a number of trains .
Voters will soon realise that this deterioration in service is thanks to Europe .
Instead of limiting passenger transport , a solution is needed to deal with bottlenecks and shortages in railway capacity .
It is good that the text has been toned down in this respect .
in writing . - ( DE ) Freight traffic is concentrated mainly on the roads at present and the proportion carried on rail and water or by air is declining .
In times of ever-narrowing margins and extreme competition , overtaking manoeuvres by lorry drivers , coupled with overtired drivers and overloading , are a fatal cocktail of risks .
In addition to the risk of accident , freight traffic , which has a tendency to break down , is untenable from the point of view of congestion , noise and environmental pollution .
It is high time to get freight on to the railways , but for that we shall need better technical solutions and logistics models for coordination and organisational networking .
This report is a step in the right direction , which is why I voted for it .
The creation of a true internal rail market is hugely important to the objectives of the European policy on sustainable transport , or , in other words , to the future of Europe and its transport .
It is also important in terms of allowing this sector to become an integral part of the measures which will help to ensure that the Lisbon Strategy is a success .
Rail freight is also a very important factor in the various areas of operation of transport .
The creation of a European rail network for freight , with trains running smoothly and crossing easily from one national network to another , will hopefully enable improvements to be made in the use of infrastructures and facilitate more competitive freight .
I believe it is vital to support measures which aim to improve the situation in the rail freight sector , with the prospect of this sector becoming fully integrated and integral to the whole future European transport network .
in writing . - I congratulate the rapporteur and the European Commission for their courage in trying to prioritise rail freight throughout the EU .
Personally I would have liked a more radical proposal , one that would have put in place a strategy that included priority pathways on certain routes and a recognition from the rest of the railway industry that rail freight is important , needs developing and must be supported .
Two areas are stifling rail freight in Europe .
Firstly , the real lack of interoperability , particularly in signalling ; and secondly , the Railway industry itself - in particular , passenger operators and infrastructure providers who collude with each other to ensure that rail freight is placed at the bottom of the pile when it comes to pathing and timetabling .
At least this report is a start in ending that comfortable marriage of convenience that exists and giving rail freight operators at least a chance in developing their business .
If we allow the status quo to remain , there will be no rail freight left in twenty years ' time .
We must act now to make rail freight viable , attractive and competitive , or we will never be able to get freight off the road .
in writing . - I applaud the work of my colleague John Bowis on this dossier , which represents a landmark in patients ' rights .
Conservatives support patient mobility within the EU and see it as a way of strengthening public healthcare provision .
It is perhaps instructive that this issue first came to prominence because of a case in the UK 's National Health Service .
A woman who chose to travel to France for a hip replacement when her local health authority kept her waiting too long was denied reimbursement back home .
But she took her case to the European Court of Justice , which established an important principle - that patients have the right to travel to another EU Member State for treatment and then be reimbursed by their national public healthcare provider .
I am no fan of the ECJ , which is a major factor in the EU 's constant accumulation of new powers , but this ruling was immensely significant .
I hope many of my constituents who have been badly let down by the Labour government 's mismanagement of the NHS will be able to benefit from the ideas in this report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against the report on cross-border health services as it meets neither the EU objective on a high level of health , in accordance with Article 152 of the Treaty , nor the demand of European citizens to be able to enjoy safe , quality healthcare , close to home .
The report does not make prior authorisation the rule for being able to receive treatment in another Member State of the EU .
Prior authorisation allows the financial equilibrium of the social systems to be managed , whilst giving patients guaranteed conditions for reimbursement and the information they require before receiving any hospital treatment abroad .
It is not acceptable , either , that improvement in the quality of health care should be achieved by making treatment providers compete , or to argue the principle of the free movement of patients : the latter depends above all on their state of health .
The amendments adopted are too vague , opening the way to problems being settled by the European Court of Justice .
This directive only reinforces health inequalities between Europe 's citizens , as only those who can pay health costs in advance will be able to choose quality services .
The fundamental issue is that this report was adopted without altering the Article 95 basis or , in other words , with health in the internal market being regarded as a good , which is unacceptable .
It would therefore have been better to reject the Commission 's proposal , as we argued .
However , unfortunately , the majority did not agree with our position .
As a result , patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare do not safeguard the exclusive competence of Member States with regard to deciding how to organise and finance their healthcare systems .
This also includes their competence with regard to establishing prior authorisation systems for the purposes of hospital treatment abroad .
The right of citizens to health , and also the rights of those working in the sector , are not guaranteed .
What we needed to do was increase solidarity and coordination between the social security systems in the various EU Member States , particularly by applying , reinforcing and more appropriately responding to the rights and needs of health service users .
We therefore voted against the report .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the directive on patient rights in cross-border healthcare , because it provides patients with greater legal security .
Especially in areas of the European Union close to borders , such as my home town in the large region of Germany , Belgium , Luxembourg and France , or in rural regions with a shortage of medical services , the promotion of patient mobility is an important component in improving and increasing the efficiency of health services .
The German health services sector will profit from cross-border patient mobility , if patients from other EU Member States make greater use of our high standard of medical services , for example in rehabilitation .
However , the sovereignty of the Member States must be retained .
The Member States themselves are responsible for providing medical care and for organising their health systems .
In keeping with the principle of subsidiarity , the directive should only regulate areas which concern the cross-border mobility of patients .
Our high quality and safety standards in Germany must not be compromised .
Ethical standards , which the Member States comply with for good reason , such as , for example , in artificial insemination , DNA analysis or assisted suicide , must not be called into question .
I welcome the objectives of this report which seek to facilitate the healthcare of patients in a Member State other than their own and to clarify the post-treatment reimbursement procedures that are currently lacking in European legislation .
Safe , effective , quality treatment should therefore become accessible to all European citizens via cooperation mechanisms between Member States .
However , I would insist that the Member States have sole competence to organise and fund health systems .
Prior authorisation for hospital treatment is the instrument that is key to being able to exercise this power .
It goes without saying that the exercise of this right must respect the principles of proportionality , need and non-discrimination .
As for the legal basis , I would argue for a twin legal basis in order to guarantee respect for national competences .
In fact , the Commission 's proposal included many attempts to encroach on this area via the back door .
The final text must strike a fair balance between patients ' rights and the Member States ' national competences in the health sector .
in writing . - On behalf of the British Labour delegation in the European Parliament I welcome many of the positive aspects of the Parliament 's report on the proposal for a directive on cross-border healthcare .
In particular , we support the amendments which make it clear that national governments will remain fully responsible for organising their national healthcare systems and setting out the rules of treatment .
However , we remain concerned that the rules as drafted are not clear enough .
Patients travelling to another EU country for treatment must know whether they will be reimbursed and have all the necessary information on the type and quality of healthcare in the host country .
The Labour delegation therefore calls for the directive to make it clear that Member States can establish a system of prior authorisation .
We also support a dual legal base of Articles 152 and 95 to make sure health issues , rather than internal market concerns , are the priority .
The Labour delegation abstained on the final vote to indicate that these two concerns need to be addressed at second reading .
in writing . - I abstained on this report because it does not give enough of a guarantee on the protection of the integrity and funding of Britain 's National Health Service , nor will it provide certainty or clarity for the minority of patients who can afford to travel to take up healthcare in another EU Member State .
The Tory MEPs in the European Parliament have one objective in mind with their proposal to reintroduce their discredited health voucher system by the European back door ; under their proposals the wealthy few would get vouchers to take NHS money out of the UK for private treatment in the rest of Europe .
People paying their taxes expect to see their money invested in the NHS to pay for healthcare at home , not being diverted to other EU health systems .
It is no surprise that , only recently , Tory MEP Dan Hannan advocated a privatised approach to healthcare .
In a recent debate on cross-border health payments between Britain and Ireland , the Tory shadow health minister Andrew Lansley said that NHS resources are always precious and attacked the payment of GBP 180 million of NHS money to Ireland .
However , the Tories have failed to back our proposal for a clear prior authorisation system , which is crucial to protect precious NHS resources and NHS services .
in writing . - ( EL ) I voted against the Bowis report and the Commission proposal , because their very legal basis proves that financial interests and an uncontrolled market take precedence over patients ' rights to better and more complete healthcare .
This proposal negates predictions of a social Europe and solidarity and will give rise to situations in which only the most affluent will have access to the much-advertised facility of cross-border healthcare .
It will result in the dismantling of national healthcare systems and will drive out patients looking abroad for healthcare .
Healthcare is and must remain the responsibility of the Member States .
Dealing with healthcare as a marketable commodity instead of a public service is unacceptable .
Moreover , the draft directive proposes a system of compensation for the costs of cross-border healthcare which is superfluous , given that compensation for healthcare costs was introduced in 1971 under the regulation on cooperation between social security systems .
in writing . - I abstained on this report because I desperately want people to receive the treatment they urgently need .
However , the issue of pre-authorisation is of concern to me .
Prior authorisation in this directive negates patients ' rights .
It is the reason patients went to the courts in the first place , and those court judgments are the reason we are here today voting on cross-border health .
By including pre-authorisation in this directive , we are back where we started .
Death by geography will remain the rule and patients will face the same obstacles as they do now when seeking authorisation to travel for treatment .
I also deeply regret that this report fails to retain a legal basis that puts the health of patients first .
Instead it has been a wasted opportunity where the health of patients is used as a commodity for profit .
in writing . - The key amendments on prior authorisation failed .
These amendments were essential to the preservation of the NHS in Scotland and the UK as a whole .
We lost the vote on the dual legal base , which would have allowed public health to be included rather than the legal base solely being the single market .
Due to the loss of both these key areas and the fact that this is first reading , I had no option but to abstain .
in writing . - ( NL ) Patient mobility is a fact , but the necessary legal certainty for patients and healthcare workers is not yet here .
For this reason , the Commission 's proposal for a directive is a good thing .
I also value the efforts of Mr Bowis to reach a compromise on this fiendishly difficult subject .
Thanks to his efforts , substantial improvements have been made to the Commission 's proposal .
Nevertheless , I was unable to support the final report because two points relating to the competence of Member States to organise and finance their healthcare system were not included .
We appealed for the incorporation of a legal base that allows Member States to charge foreign patients the true cost and to have them co-pay for the care they receive in our country .
Furthermore , we were always in favour of allowing Member States to refuse patients in certain circumstances , for instance where there are serious waiting lists .
This is particularly important in Belgium , a small country with a relatively large inflow of foreign patients .
The text as adopted today in this plenary does not offer sufficient guarantees to this effect .
For these reasons I abstained in the final vote .
in writing . - ( EL ) The anti-grassroots policy of the EU and of the bourgeois governments is lowering the standards of public health services , resulting in stress for patients , waiting lists , a lack of various services , heavy taxes , a lack of cover for uninsured persons and immigrants and so on .
The drastic reduction in social benefits , the commercialisation and further privatisation of health systems and the attack on insurance rights are making it easier for large business conglomerates to reap huge profits from the lucrative health sector .
The directive on ' patient mobility ' promotes the single health market , the application of the freedoms of the Treaty of Maastricht and the mobility of patients and of health professionals in order to safeguard the commercialisation of health .
A refund of part of the costs of care abroad is a trap to obtain grassroots consent to the commercialisation of and multi-track healthcare and to class discrimination to the right to life .
Patients ' rights can only be safeguarded under a purely free public health system which covers all the health requirements ( specialist and otherwise ) of the entire population , regardless of their financial or insurance status .
Only such a system , which can develop within the framework of a grassroots economy , from grassroots power , can guarantee the quantitative adequacy of and qualitative improvements to services and effective protection for the health and lives of the workers .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour .
Sector studies have comprehensively shown how 10-12 % of users who go to hospitals in Europe to be cured of their illness each year become ill through hospital-acquired infections .
When converted into figures , these percentages are even more frightening : it is calculated that the number of patients within the European Union who have contracted hospital-acquired infections is around 5 million people .
Going back to the speech made by my fellow Member , Mrs Sartori , safety and health care efficiency can be improved by setting out a programme that , above all , takes account of these fundamental points : 1 ) increasing the number of nurses specialising in infection control ; 2 ) implementing training for healthcare and paramedical workers , focusing especially on nosocomial infections and the antibiotic resistance of the viruses which cause them ; 3 ) enabling new discoveries coming from research on these diseases .
I voted for the proposal on patient safety .
Although the quality of healthcare in Europe has improved substantially due to advances in medical science , medical procedures can sometimes damage patients ' health .
Some adverse effects are caused by avoidable medical errors or infections arising during treatment .
This report contains the following important proposals : improved gathering of information at local and regional level ; better information provided to patients ; increased numbers of nurses specialising in infection control ; encouragement of education and training for healthcare workers ; and greater focus on hospital-acquired infections .
I fully support these measures .
in writing . - I welcome the proposed initiative to improve healthcare for people suffering from rare diseases .
Due to the particular nature of diseases such as rare cancers , auto-immune diseases , toxic and infectious diseases , there is not enough expertise and resources available for them , yet nevertheless they affect 36 million EU citizens .
Strengthening cooperation between specialists and research centres across Europe and information and service exchanges is a natural way for the European Union to assist its citizens .
It is a direct way of providing benefits to you .
This proposal urges Member States to set up new centres and training courses to maximise the potential of scientific resources on rare diseases and pool together existing research centres and disease information networks .
I support these measures and encourage more Member State cooperation , which will allow greater mobility for patients and experts to serve you , the citizen .
I voted for the report on rare diseases , because I feel that concerted action in the field of rare diseases at the European Union level and at the national level is an absolute necessity .
Although the incidence of each rare disease is very low , millions of Europeans are affected because there are many rare diseases .
I feel it is vitally important to support independent organisations , provide access to information on rare diseases , create specialist centres in the various Member States , create training courses at existing centres , and mobilise experts and professionals .
Adequate resources need to be provided to ensure immediate action in the field of rare diseases .
in writing . - I will be voting for the report by Mr Trakatellis .
I recognise the fact that there are many rare diseases that are orphaned from research as medical institutes engage in a form of triage , ignoring the plight of those suffering from unusual diseases that offer little in the way of profits compared to those potentially available from common diseases .
This is particular true of rare genetic diseases that are hereditary .
I believe we should encourage research in these areas by underpinning an element of the research costs .
In doing this I declare an interest in that one of these diseases is to be found within my family .
in writing . - ( DE ) The explicit call in Amendment 15 for rare diseases to be eliminated through genetic counselling of carrier parents and for healthy embryos to be selected through pre-implantation diagnostics ( PID ) is not merely contrary to current laws in Germany .
In light in particular of German history , it would appear to be unacceptable and intolerable as a matter of principle to demand or recommend the eradication and selection of disabled persons , even if they have not yet been born .
Alarmingly , these proposals and wordings reveal a total lack of respect for the value of every human life , regardless of whether we are talking about sick or healthy people .
The addendum tabled replaces the call for therapeutic treatment of rare diseases with the objective of preventing the birth of sick people .
This is not compatible with the spirit and letter of European and international declarations of human rights .
The actual objective of convincing European policy should be to help people affected or at risk of disease , not their early selection on the basis of quality criteria .
The report and individual amendments , especially Amendment 15 , are not in keeping with my Christian values .
That is why I voted against the report .
in writing . - There are many issues in this resolution which I support .
However , I could not support the overall report because of the inclusion of issues which I believe to be , and indeed are , matters of subsidiarity - that is , the competence of the Member State - and therefore not issues about which the European Parliament should adopt a view .
The subject of eugenic practices is one such subject which , through the adoption of Amendment 15 , was included in this resolution .
I did not support Amendment 15 .
This subject is a matter for subsidiarity , and not for the European Union , which does not , and should not legislate on eugenic practices .
So I could not support the overall report .
in writing . - British Conservatives have been unable to approve discharge of the 2007 European budget , section III , European Commission .
We are insistent that the parliamentary budget must deliver value for money for the European taxpayer and we are , therefore , supportive of the rapporteur 's report .
In particular , we support the rapporteur 's criticism of the Commission 's failure to ensure that Bulgaria and Romania achieve adequate standards of financial control .
However , we must point out that for fourteen consecutive years the European Court of Auditors has been unable to give an unqualified statement of assurance for the general European accounts .
The European Commission bears ultimate responsibility for the accounts and therefore , in line with our traditional approach , we will continue to vote against granting discharge until we see real progress towards the achievement of an unqualified statement of assurance from the European Court of Auditors .
I voted , along with the rest of Romania 's contingent in the PPE-DE Group , against Jean-Pierre Audy 's report on the discharge for implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2007 as Amendment 13 was not accepted .
The ECA report for the 2007 financial year still refers exclusively to the projects from 2000-2006 as 2007 was , for the most part , a preparatory phase for implementing the 2007-2013 programmes .
As a result , the impact of the new regulations provided for the 2007-2013 programming period , which are simpler and stricter than those applied up until 2006 , cannot be evaluated yet .
I would like to stress the need to simplify the procedures for implementing the Structural Funds , especially management and control systems .
The system 's complexity is one of the causes of the irregularities from Member States .
I would also like to emphasise the need for the simplification measures proposed by the Commission during the review of the regulations applicable to the Structural Funds for the 2007-2013 period as a response to the current financial crisis .
Such simplification procedures are crucial for reducing the administrative burden at national , regional and local level .
It is important to make sure that such simplification procedures help reduce the error rate in the future .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Dutch People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) has voted against the granting of discharge to the European Commission .
The VVD is of the opinion that the Commission has made too little progress in promoting the introduction of the national declaration in the Member States .
To date , only four countries have done so , one of which is the Netherlands .
Moreover , the VVD is of the opinion that the Member States of the EU still make too many mistakes in allocating European money , as has become clear from the audits carried out by the European Court of Auditors .
The Court of Auditors issued an adverse audit opinion , among other things with regard to rural policy , cohesion and structural policy .
The VVD considers that the audit systems in these areas must be improved .
Progress over the past five years has been too slight .
Mr President , I voted for the Commission 's discharge in connection with the implementation of the EU budget for 2007 .
At the same time , I must mention that I voted against texts in this report which were aimed at introducing the compilation of quarterly reports on the management of resources from the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund , especially in the case of Bulgaria and Romania .
I voted against them because I firmly believe that in cases where we require more control , it is a good idea to implement this simultaneously and to the same degree for all Member States , and not only for one or two of them .
I also share the concern of Parliament and the rapporteur , who indicates that the resources for Bulgaria which have been frozen or withdrawn by the European Commission amount to almost EUR 1 billion .
As the report stated , these losses and frozen resources were basically imposed due to irregularities regarding invitations to tender and eligibility of expenditure , failure to use investment funds for their intended purpose and to a lack of administrative capacity , amongst other reasons .
I would like to conclude by sharing with you my concern that Bulgarian citizens will be deprived of instruments promoting European solidarity and they will undeservingly pay for the mistakes of their government .
in writing . - I voted to support the 2007 discharge for the European Commission , but I did so with some reservations .
Five years ago President Barroso promised a clean bill of health before the end of his term , in terms of budgetary control and formal Statements of Assurance .
Despite some progress , there are still gaps in this process .
Thus far , 22 countries have submitted an Annual Summary , meeting the basic minimum requirements of financial regulation , but not all are satisfactory .
Only 8 countries have stepped up to the mark in providing a more formal analysis or Statement of Assurance , and sadly Ireland is not one of them .
We need to make sure that when it comes to the discharge of the 2008 budget , significantly more progress is made .
The PD-L ( Romanian Liberal Democrat Party ) contingent in the PPE-DE Group voted against the report on the discharge for implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2007 , which makes reference to the management of European funds by Romania and Bulgaria .
The report on the discharge , which refers to irregularities involving access to PHARE funds prior to 2007 , has retained the provision for drafting a special report on the management of Community funds in Romania and on measures recorded in the fight against corruption .
Consequently , the PD-L group in the European Parliament voted against the report .
This special report is not justified insofar as there is already a cooperation and verification mechanism available , approved by the European Council in December 2006 .
Drafting an additional report weakens the credibility of the cooperation and verification mechanism already in operation .
In fact , even the European Commission 's reaction , via its spokesman Mark Gray , confirms the futility of such a measure as long as there are already tried-and-tested mechanisms available for detecting any irregularities in the management of Community funds .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted against the granting of discharge because the Committee of the Regions in its current form cannot be taken seriously by anyone .
Among other things because of the opaque definition of the term region , the Committee of the Regions is an extremely heterogeneous entity on which , in addition to European nations , urban agglomerations , for instance , are represented .
It is also very odd that the regions have , in recent times , organised themselves into political groups without having received any democratic mandate from the voters to do so .
in writing . - British Conservatives are opposed to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
I dispute the notion that the EU can bestow and regulate fundamental rights .
I am also especially opposed to the Charter of Fundamental Rights because it has been adopted by the EU despite the fact that neither of the vehicles intended for the Charter 's implementation - the EU Constitution and the Lisbon treaty - has been ratified .
Setting up an agency to oversee the Charter of Fundamental Rights was a colossal waste of taxpayers ' money and an exercise in vanity .
In fact , the same could be said for many of the EU 's agencies , which duplicate work done at national level and unashamedly promote the EU 's federalist agenda .
Many people in my constituency see the huge sums wasted on this and other agencies as a kick in the teeth , especially at a time of economic crisis when they are giving up increasing amounts of their money in tax to fund the EU 's profligacy .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted against the granting of discharge , given that the European Fundamental Rights Agency is a superfluous institution , which , moreover , is hostile to the right of freedom of expression .
I voted for the motion for a resolution on the challenges of deforestation and forest degradation , as I believe that deforestation results in very serious environmental damage which is hard to reverse , such as , for example , disruption of water conditions , desertification , impact on the climate and loss of biodiversity .
There needs to be greater coherence between forest conservation and sustainable management policies and other EU internal and external policies .
For this reason we need an evaluation of the impact on forests of EU policies on energy ( especially biofuels ) , agriculture and trade .
I also believe that financial support for developing countries is absolutely vital to halt tropical deforestation .
Reducing deforestation will play a very important role in the mitigation of and adaptation to climate change .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour .
Managing transport on the basis of the needs and requirements of citizens is one of the fundamental points for discussion of European Union policy .
By means of the CIVITAS programme ( promulgated in 2002 ) , intended to promote the wide-scale distribution of urban transport , and the White Paper : ' European transport policy for 2010 : time to decide . ' ( promulgated in 2001 ) , which proposed the creation of a more optimal urban transport system , the Commission has already proposed a genuine action plan to optimise the quality of European transport .
It has devised a system to gradually separate the increase in the demand for mobility from economic growth , so as to control environmental pollution in a more or less effective manner while keeping in mind the protection of the European production system . .
The Commission , having acknowledged the situation , is therefore undertaking to guarantee all Community citizens a transport network that is simultaneously efficient and extremely safe .
There are five points on which we will need to focus our attention : 1 ) protecting the rights and duties of passengers ; 2 ) enhancing road safety ; 3 ) encouraging safety ; 4 ) limiting road transport in order to stop congestion of land transport .
The current rapid growth in cities , combined with the concentration of European populations in urban centres , are facts which this European Parliament report tries to analyse in order to contribute to the vast amount of work that needs to be done in this area .
Bearing in mind respect for the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality , this report presents proposals which I regard as important .
The most significant point of this position adopted by Parliament is the attention that it draws to the scattering of measures , which may therefore lack cohesion , not only as a body of legislation , but in particular in terms of their implementation .
I agree with the need for a coherent approach , which includes encouraging the optimisation of various modes of transport in urban centres by improving urban scheduling .
Moreover , I support continued research and innovation in this specific field , and collaboration by the Commission with the Member States , contributing where necessary to the exchange of information on good practices to be applied in the various countries .
Finally , I want to underline the importance of European industry in the development of technologies which could improve the management , safety and energy efficiency of urban transport for European cities .
Thank you Mr President .
I voted in favour of the Jensen report , which provides a comprehensive policy framework and defines actions for the coordinated deployment of Intelligent Transport Systems ( ITSs ) at EU level .
Road traffic congestion , increased CO2 emissions and road fatalities are identified as the major challenges that Europe 's transport has to overcome and I feel that ITS is a key instrument for making transport more efficient , safer and secure and environmentally cleaner , thus contributing to the development of sustainable mobility for citizens and the economy .
I agree that ITSs can improve the living conditions of Europe 's citizens and will also contribute to improved road safety , and reduce harmful emissions and environmental pollution .
I firmly believe that Intelligent Transport Systems will increase traffic efficiency , thereby reducing traffic .
Although several applications have been developed or introduced for different transport modes ( railway , maritime and air ) , there is no similar coherent European framework for road transport .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Climate and energy package and maritime transport package ( signature of acts )
Mr Deputy Prime Minister and representative of the Presidency of the European Union , Mr Nečas , Commissioner Rehn , honourable rapporteurs and committee chairmen , ladies and gentlemen .
Today we have the pleasure of jointly signing two important packages , the climate and energy package and the package for an integrated maritime policy for the European Union .
This is the high point of the consistent work which we have carried out with the Council and the Commission .
In adopting these two legislative projects , the European Union is proving that it is able to act decisively in order to jointly overcome the challenges in the core sectors of sustainable development , environmental protection and safety at sea .
This public signing will help to emphasise the importance of European legislation to European citizens .
In the climate and energy package , Parliament and the Council have laid the basis for the European Union to achieve its climate targets by 2020 and to continue to play a leading role in the fight against climate change .
The climate package includes important legal frameworks which will help , for example , to improve the emissions trading system or efforts by Member States to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases and also to promote renewable energies or carbon storage techniques .
The rapporteurs Mrs Doyle and Mrs Hassi are here with us , or so I assumed ; at least I can see Mrs Hassi .
This package will give the European Union the necessary credibility in the run-up to the international conference due to take place in Copenhagen in December and during negotiations on a comprehensive and binding agreement .
As far as maritime transport is concerned , Parliament and the Council reached agreement on eight dossiers during the course of conciliation .
That is the result of intensive work lasting over three years .
This outcome is also proof of the strong pressure exerted by the European Parliament to ensure that disasters at sea , such as the accidents involving the Erika in 1999 and the Prestige in 2002 , are prevented in future by improving safety at sea .
Today we can see that many of the proposals by the Temporary Committee on Improving Safety at Sea set up by the European Parliament have become law .
Thanks to these specifications , the inspection and surveying of ships , the supervision of maritime shipping and the insurance of ships owners have been improved , mandatory insurance has been introduced and investigation requirements and liability in the event of an accident have been strengthened .
I am delighted to see that the rapporteur Mrs Doyle has now joined us .
To close , allow me to express my thanks to the Czech Presidency , the Commission , the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and the Committee on Transport and Tourism and , above all , their chairmen and rapporteurs , who all worked intensively on these important legislative acts . My thanks in particular to you , honourable members , for attending the signing today of these important legislative projects .
I am particularly delighted that two group chairmen have honoured us with their presence here at noon today .
Thank you for that .
I should now like to invite the President-in-Office of the Council to take the floor .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for inviting me to this session of the European Parliament on the occasion of the ceremonial signing of the climate and energy package and the maritime transport package , two key measures that EU Member States have agreed to with the help of the Commission , this Parliament and other partners .
I would like to begin by saying a few words on the climate and energy package on behalf of the European Council .
The package confirms the leading role of the EU in the global fight against climate change while at the same time respecting the actual possibilities and economic conditions of each Member State .
The climate energy package has important symbolic value , as it illustrates the fact that the representatives of half a billion citizens , 500 million people , have managed to agree on some very clear-cut actions , strategies and aims in this important and sensitive agenda despite today 's difficult economic circumstances .
It also has value as a positive example for our partners in the world .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all four rapporteurs in particular for preparing , negotiating and conceiving this collection of clear-cut measures , as well as the entire Parliament for its active and positive contribution , the Commission for providing support and preparation throughout the approval process and the French Presidency for its exceptional level of engagement .
The package paves the way for us , as Europeans , to negotiate global agreements on the climate change strategy which should be concluded in December this year at the Copenhagen conference .
The EU is a leader in the area of climate protection and this long-term pre-eminence should not be squandered but rather transformed into another quality .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would now like say a few words about the significance of the Third Maritime Safety Package , which constitutes a further and equally important outcome of cooperation between the Council and the European Parliament .
The European public was seriously alarmed when the oil tanker Erika broke in half on the Brittany coast in 1999 with 20,000 tonnes of oil on board , causing enormous environmental damage , and when three years later the tanker Prestige leaked 120 tonnes of oil onto the coast of Galicia in Spain .
We all remember the tragic media images of the affected coastline areas where thousands of volunteers who were brought in to tidy up the mess looked on powerlessly as birds and other creatures and plants suffocated in the black tide .
We clearly had to do our utmost to prevent a repeat of similar natural disasters on this scale .
We clearly had to act together .
The EU clearly had to send out a signal that ships in very poor condition , uninsured and failing to comply with basic safety rules , were not welcome on European shores .
In November 2005 the European Commission responded by submitting a series of eight ambitious legislative proposals , the so-called Third Maritime Safety Package .
The package will bring tangible results for Europe in the form of better prevention of maritime accidents , more frequent inspections and a clear division of responsibilities that focuses on ship operators .
Besides the considerable effect on the environment - an asset that belongs to all of us - the results of this European legislation will be appreciated not only by citizens and firms in coastal states , as one might expect , but also by export-oriented inland states such as my own country , a considerable part of whose output is transported out of Europe by sea .
The inland states share a vital interest in ensuring that tankers like the Erika or the Prestige no longer sail along Europe 's shores and that maritime transport is conducted efficiently , safely and in an environmentally responsible manner .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to conclude by thanking the European Parliament rapporteurs , the French Presidency and the Commission for their hard work on the maritime package .
Without their efforts and engagement this successful outcome , with its clear benefits for the European public , business and the environment , would not have been possible .
Thank you Minister .
I should now like to ask you and Commissioner Rehn and the rapporteurs to come to the table where I and Minister Nečas will sign the acts in your presence .
( Signature of acts )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Conclusions of the G20 Summit ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the conclusions of the G20 summit .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 2 April 2009 the meeting of the G20 heads of state and government was held in London to discuss further steps towards the recovery of the global economy and the prevention of future crises on such a scale .
At their meeting the heads of state and government promised to do everything necessary to restore confidence , economic growth and employment , to amend the financial system in order to renew credit flows , to strengthen financial regulation , to restore confidence to the market and to fund and reform our international financial institutions in order to enable them to provide effective help in tackling this crisis and to prevent future crises .
At the same time the heads of state and government made a commitment that in the interests of boosting prosperity they would promote global trade and investment and reject protectionism and that they would prepare the economy for inclusive , environmentally-friendly and sustainable growth and recovery .
The EU played a very significant role through its proposals and attitudes .
In many areas , if not in the most , the EU and the European members of the G20 were the prime movers , or among the prime movers , of the work in the preparatory groups and they significantly influenced the breadth of the agreed consensus and the final form of the agreed proposals .
This applied to the areas of financial market regulation and supervision , complete transparency in the financial system , the rejection of protectionism , the pressure to complete the Doha Development Agenda and the approach to economic recovery including the emphasis on the need to clear out the financial sector by removing worthless assets and creating a basis for a sustainable global economy in the future .
Last but not least was the commitment of the EU countries to provide a financial injection to the IMF , which not only influenced the willingness of other countries to take on similar commitments , but above all played an important if not key role in the decision to stabilise economies that were unable to help themselves .
This is to be done not through ad hoc solutions and bilateral assistance but through systematic use of the international institutions that exist for this purpose .
In this way we will strengthen these institutions financially and also restore their respect and authority .
I would therefore like to take a look from a distance at what the London G20 Summit might mean for the world economy and for the EU in particular .
I will begin with a flashback to the year 1933 .
In June 1933 representatives from 66 countries met in London in order to try to create a common plan to restore the world economy in the middle of a great economic crisis .
The London Monetary and Economic Conference , which had the objective of reviving global trade , stabilising prices and restoring the gold standard as the basis of the monetary system , was organised by the League of Nations and met under a similar global economic situation to the one we are experiencing today .
Within a month , however , the conference ended in failure with a subsequent loss of confidence , further economic collapse and a chain of currency devaluations through which countries sought to strengthen their own economies at the expense of others .
European states turned in on themselves and the US economy retreated into an isolationism which would last for many years .
As the recession turned into a deep depression , unemployment and social tension grew and the political consequences of the tension led to the Second World War .
In the weeks leading up to the London summit of 2009 it was hard not to recall the parallels with the London summit of 1933 .
Fortunately it seems that the world has learned from its experience , at least for now .
After many months of frustrated hopes and expectations , low confidence in the markets and deepening recession it was almost a political imperative for the G20 summit to end in success .
It was a task of nightmare difficulty in view of the widely varying expectations of the different groups and countries and in view of the fact that some of these expectations were not entirely realistic .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is too soon to say whether the G20 meeting was a success .
Nevertheless , the weeks that have passed since the summit give grounds for cautious optimism that it really was a turning point in this global recession and that it may also become a key historical event in global economic cooperation .
It may even stand the test of time and be accorded similar historical importance to the Bretton Woods Conference of 1944 , which determined the shape of global economic cooperation for a quarter of a century and continues to influence it even after 60 years .
However , the historical importance of the ideas put forward at the G20 summit will become clear only when all commitments from the summit have been fulfilled , if indeed they ever are fulfilled .
Despite this necessary circumspection there are four reasons why the London G20 meeting can be regarded as a successful start to economic recovery and to a new and more sustainable form of global economy and global economic decision-making .
The first reason is that the G20 really did boost confidence in the economy and in the markets .
So far the increase in confidence has not been dramatic but a full return of confidence will naturally take time .
The most important thing from the perspective of boosting confidence was the way the G20 participants behaved .
Faced with a profound global collapse they maintained unity and they reached a broad consensus .
In the current period of uncertainty it was also vitally important that the G20 participants confirmed some of the fundamental economic paradigms : the core or the heart of our global recovery plan must be the jobs , needs and interests of people who are not afraid to work , and this applies across the whole world , not only in the rich countries but also in the poor countries .
At the heart of our global recovery plan must be the needs and interests not only of people alive today but also of future generations .
Recovery must not be at the expense of our children and grandchildren .
The only reliable basis for sustainable globalisation and growing prosperity is an open world economy build on market principles , effective regulation and strong global institutions .
Secondly , the G20 summit sent a very strong signal - clearly the strongest in 60 years - that the world was returning to multilateralism in economic decision-making on matters of global consequence .
In the summit conclusions the heads of state and government reaffirmed their conviction that prosperity is indivisible and that if economic growth is to be sustained then countries must share in that growth .
If there is one lesson to be taken from the current global crisis , it is that we all share the same fate in economic terms .
We are all in the same boat , large and small countries , open countries and closed-off countries .
The interconnectedness of our economies has brought enormous benefits , particularly over the past 10-15 years , in the form of a long period free of major conflicts and in the form of unprecedented economic prosperity and the fastest global economic growth in human history , as well as opportunities for hundreds of millions of people to escape from extreme poverty .
It has brought an expansion of markets for our producers , low inflation and low unemployment .
We must not give up these advantages at any price .
It is therefore absolutely essential to coordinate our policies , both in good times and in bad , and the G20 summit confirmed this fact .
Thirdly , the heads of state and government achieved consensus over matters where consensus seemed almost inconceivable just a year ago or even nine months ago .
The commitments from London capped off three months of intensive discussions at a working level and they marked a real breakthrough .
If they are fulfilled and put into practice then they will definitely provide a good basis for prevention so that we can avoid similarly destructive crises recurring over the coming decades .
Fourthly , the summit changed the shape of the space for global economic cooperation , leading to a new division of powers .
The largest newly-emerging economies achieved full recognition of their role in the global economy .
The developed countries and the rapidly developing economies also jointly acknowledged that the stability and prosperity of poor countries and the most vulnerable social groups everywhere in the world are in the interests of everyone .
This marks a strategically significant change .
It means that Europe will have to fight with a new vision and with sophisticated policies in order to retain its position in global economic decision-making .
The size of the EU economy and the inheritance of the past will not in themselves suffice to maintain Europe 's important strategic role in global economic decision-making in the future .
Nevertheless , from an EU perspective the results of the London summit were an undoubted success .
The summit backed all the priorities agreed to by EU Member State leaders in the conclusions of the European Council of 19-20 March 2009 .
The London G20 summit rejected protectionism , made a commitment to a responsible and sustainable economic policy , supported multilateralism and backed all the priorities concerning financial sector regulation which EU Member States have collectively identified as fundamental .
As has already been said , EU members were the prime movers or among the prime movers in the G20 negotiations over a range of issues .
However , a number of questions remain open after the G20 summit .
Firstly , in the area of financial regulation and supervision , despite the enormous progress in recent months , a number of issues remain unresolved and are still being worked on .
At the EU level , of course , there is a clear roadmap and timetable for the next two months and a division of roles between the European Commission , the European Central Bank , the European Financial Commission , ECOFIN and the June European Council .
The programme includes , among other things , the immediate task of taking strong measures in the area of accounting standards that would enable European banks to operate under comparable competitive conditions to those of American banks .
Secondly , in the area of global trade the G20 leaders confirmed in London their earlier commitment from the Washington meeting not to create new trade barriers .
The G20 summit also confirmed the commitment to complete the Doha Development Agenda " with an ambitious and balanced outcome ” .
However , this commitment had already been adopted at the G20 summit in November last year , where the heads of state and government even promised agreement over the Doha Development Agenda by the end of 2008 .
It therefore remains to be seen how serious the commitment is this time .
Nevertheless the G20 leaders in London made a fresh declaration that from now on they would give their personal attention to the Doha Development Agenda and they guaranteed that political attention would be focused on Doha at all forthcoming international meetings that are relevant from this perspective .
It must be one of the key priorities of the EU to press for the completion of these agreements .
Thirdly , the G20 summit participants made a commitment to provide USD 1.1 trillion through the IMF and multilateral development banks to help restore credit flows , economic growth and employment in the world economy .
All that remains is to clarify and agree on the details of this commitment .
The commitment covers short-term , medium-term and long-term stages and the short-term stage includes the EUR 75 billion promised to the IMF by EU countries for restoring balance of payment stability for countries in acute need of such assistance .
The details of this commitment also remain to be worked out and the finance ministers of our countries must work on the form and mechanisms of this commitment .
Concerning the medium and long-term commitments to strengthen multilateral institutions , there is a commitment to provide the IMF with an unprecedentedly large multilateral loan of USD 500 billion .
Besides this , the London summit produced a commitment that the G20 countries would support a new SDR ( special drawdown rights ) issue , in other words an issue in the IMF 's own currency which can be used by IMF member states for mutual payments .
The commitment speaks of SDR 250 billion .
Like multilateral credit , an SDR issue involves relatively complex technical arrangements , including approvals from official IMF bodies , negotiations with participating countries and ratification of agreements by the national parliaments of member countries .
All of this could take several years and it is therefore necessary to remain firm but realistic in our expectations .
The above commitments also involved an agreement that the G20 countries would do everything in their power to ensure rapid implementation of the April 2008 reforms to IMF decision-making structures , which are currently delayed by slow ratification in national parliaments .
The G20 countries also asked the IMF to speed up the next round of reform in member shares and voting rights so that it is ready by January 2011 .
The EU countries must pay sufficient attention to this forthcoming reform because it may result in many EU Member States , large and small , losing the possibility of their national representatives participating directly and indirectly in IMF decision-making and losing direct access to information . There will also be reform aimed at strengthening the role of the IMF in global economic decision-making .
For many EU Member States this issue has so far been of little interest but their attention must remain firmly focused on it in the coming months .
Fourthly , there is one remaining area requiring serious and careful discussion and a solution .
This is the area of global inequality and the question of the whole global currency system in the future .
These issues were deliberately excluded from the London summit agenda and as such they remain on the list of areas to be dealt with in the future .
It is worth mentioning in this context that it was precisely the inability to agree on a global currency order which scuppered the London summit of 1933 .
This issue is no simpler today than it was then .
The EU must devote an appropriate amount of attention to it , because a solution to this issue remains an important ingredient for sustainable economic recovery and for preventing devastating global crises .
Ladies and gentlemen , in conclusion I would like to thank Great Britain , the country hosting the G20 presidency , for organising the summit and above all for organising the entire process of discussion and negotiation at a working level in the weeks and months leading up to the summit .
The organisers did an excellent job and they deserve our applause since they made a significant contribution to the progress achieved and to the breadth of the final consensus .
There is hope that the London G20 summit will usher in a new and successful era of global economic cooperation .
I firmly believe that it has a decent chance .
The conclusions of the G20 summit are an excellent starting point for bringing the global economic crisis to an end as quickly as possible .
An opportunity has also opened up to change the shape of the future interconnected global economy in order to be better prepared for long-term sustainable production and coordinated economic decision-making .
Much unfinished business remains and there are many commitments that have to be fulfilled .
The coming months and years will show to what extent the London summit merits a place in the history books .
In any case , the G20 summit marked a shift of strategic positions in the global economy .
It is important for the EU to enter this new era with a clear and realistic vision and with policies that will ensure that Europe retains the same strategic role in the future as it has enjoyed in the past and which its 500 million citizens deserve .
( FR ) Mr President , I am well aware that nothing can be done against the Council , but even so , our work has been greatly delayed .
We have an agenda full of important discussions .
Five minutes are set aside for the Council , and it speaks for 20 minutes .
I believe this shows disrespect for the MEPs .
You know our Rules of Procedure as well as I do , Mrs Berès .
I can use the gavel for all the Members , but I can only invite the Commission and the Council to be concise , as you have so notably been .
Commissioner , I beg you .
You have no time limit , but please be aware that I have a piece of paper in front of me which says that five minutes would be acceptable .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the results of the London G20 Summit are substantial .
They provide a clear message of global unity to work together to get the world economy out of the current crisis and back on the path of economic growth and job creation .
The G20 focused on three broad lines of action , and I am here today substituting for my colleague , Joaquín Almunia , who is driving those action lines further in a major IMF meeting today in Washington , and is thus unable to participate in this part-session .
Let me provide you with the Commission 's concise assessment of the outcome , and of subsequent actions concerning these three broad action lines .
First , it is clear that the leaders agreed to do whatever it takes to restore growth , and for the moment the first and foremost priority is to restore the channels for credit flows .
In this respect it is necessary to deal with impaired , toxic assets , thus endorsing the principles that the G20 finance ministers adopted in March , which is fully in line with the approach taken by the European Union .
It was also agreed to implement the announced economic stimulus measures without delay , and the EU 's coordinated fiscal stimulus of over 3 % - maybe closer to 4 % - of GDP is substantial for Europe itself and provides a key contribution to the G20 short-term macroeconomic response to the crisis .
The outcome of the G20 should ensure an adequate balance between short-term fiscal expansion , which is , of course , necessary , and long-term fiscal sustainability , which calls for an orderly withdrawal of the stimulus when the time comes .
Here also , the European consensus on the need to protect medium-term fiscal sustainability contributed to the balanced line adopted in London .
Trade protectionism is a potential threat in any global recession .
It was therefore important that the G20 confirmed the commitment to keep trade and investment open and to avoid any kind of protectionism .
The second line of action is an ambitious plan to reshape global financial regulation , and it was agreed that , in future , regulations need to apply to every bank , everywhere , at all times .
The G20 took a major step towards the global regulatory convergence that Europe has long been calling for .
We succeeded in obtaining the following objectives : improved requirements for bank capital and liquidity buffers , as well as measures to limit the build-up of leverage ; regulation of hedge funds and private pools of capital ; agreement on better regulation and supervision of credit derivative markets ; more ambitious regulation for credit rating agencies ; the establishment of global colleges of supervisors for all large cross-border banks ; and endorsement of the new principles of the Financial Stability Board on executive pay and bonuses in financial institutions .
Decisive action was also agreed on non-cooperative offshore tax havens .
Thus , in the future there should be no hiding place in any part of the world for fiscal free riders .
We welcome , in particular , the reference to the end of banking secrecy .
We also welcome the recent announcement by several countries to move towards the OECD standards on the exchange of information for tax purposes .
Overall , concerning financial regulation , more progress has been made now than over the whole of the last decade .
Thirdly , it was agreed to reform the international financial institutions to ensure strong institutions for the global economy and provide appropriate representation for emerging and developing countries .
It was agreed to substantially increase IMF resources , and the EU and its Member States have been steering the process and showing the way in this regard .
Some countries have followed the EU and Japan 's lead in pledging resources to the IMF , but more pledges are necessary , in particular from the United States and China .
Next , it is essential that the decisions taken by the G20 are delivered rapidly .
We should also keep in mind to build a more balanced world economy and to avoid past mistakes .
A fundamental adjustment of the global growth model - I am referring to the huge US budget deficit and the big Chinese trade surplus - may be needed in order for the global economy to return to a sustainable growth path .
The leaders agreed to meet again before the end of this year , probably in September .
Effective coordination will be necessary to allow Europe to continue to steer the G20 process , which should be our continuous objective .
To conclude , tackling the current crisis requires both effective and coordinated fiscal stimulus and reform both of financial regulation and the international institutions .
Let us recall that this crisis originated from excesses and greed in the financial markets , especially on Wall Street .
For Europe , it is a matter of returning to the basic values of the European model , which requires combining entrepreneurial initiatives , respect for productive work and striving for solidarity .
In other words , our common challenge now is to save the European social market economy from the systemic errors of financial capitalism .
Mr President , Mr Nečas , Mr Rehn , ladies and gentlemen , we are suffering the first ever worldwide recession .
This recession demands a coordinated response at international level .
That is the only way that we can all come out of it .
The agreement reached at the G20 summit will help us find the right road to growth and jobs .
In London , the world leaders tripled the funds allocated to the IMF , granted extra credits to the development banks and reaffirmed their support for free international trade .
This programme , which aims to restore credit , growth and employment , should give us the time needed to stabilise the markets and , above all , to restore confidence in the global economy .
We must however be vigilant and not be tempted by easy solutions .
We absolutely must lay the ghost of protectionism to rest .
If we close our borders to trade and exchange , we will merely repeat the errors made by our predecessors in the 1929 crisis .
Today , more than ever , it is more trade that we need , not less .
If we could manage , then , to create a real transatlantic economy without barriers with our main commercial partner , the United States , we would have already created an extra 3.5 % of growth .
That is what we should work on .
We must stimulate growth , not just to protect existing jobs , but also , and above all , to create new ones .
My fellow Members on the left are calling for more social spending and for more social security .
They want supposedly to protect jobs by closing off our economies .
A transparent economy that allows each person to express their talents is an innovative and sustainable economy .
It is a social market economy that we need .
We must learn the lessons from the mistakes of the last few months , and one of the main problems in the financial sector was the lack of financial regulation and supervision .
The fact is , we will not be able to restore the confidence of our fellow citizens in the economy until we have restored confidence in our financial system .
To do so , we must extend regulation and supervision to all financial institutions and to all instruments , including hedge funds .
We must fight against tax havens , get rid of banking secrecy and increase supervision of credit rating agencies .
In a globalised economy , where the markets never sleep , our only defence is transparency .
Investors must know that the same standards apply throughout the world .
Finally , we also have a responsibility towards the developing countries .
This crisis must not , in fact , ruin all the work we have put into this issue over the years .
That is why we must continue to exert pressure so that the WTO adapts quickly to the 21st century and to the new rules .
The world 's poorest nations need help to become real players in the global economy .
In this way , the global economy will be able grow by USD 150 million a year .
It is the developing countries that will receive most of this money .
This is why we support the G20 commitment to allocate 850 billion in additional resources to support growth in the emerging markets and the developing countries .
Ladies and gentlemen , we will only come out of the economic and financial crisis by changing , by changing international governance and by changing our tolerant attitude towards those who do not comply with the rules .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , the essential question is , of course , what to do now .
What must Europe deliver when the G20 meeting is resumed in September this year ?
I have here the very latest prognosis from the IMF .
I regret to inform Commissioner Rehn that it states that , even including all we have done , economic development in the euro zone will go down this year by -4.2 % in growth and , in Germany alone , the rate will be -5.6 % .
We have transposed that in our macroeconomic calculations , and I can tell you , colleagues , that this means that , in spring 2010 , we will have 27 million unemployed in the European Union .
This means in essence that , in two years , unemployment will have increased by 10 million jobs lost in the European Union .
We now need to act quickly , in a coordinated and effective manner , exactly as Olli Rehn said .
The conclusion from the G20 in London was that , if there is a need to do more , then we agree to do more .
I cannot say anything other than repeat the figure of 27 million unemployed people .
Does one need further arguments to do more ?



I would propose doing four things in preparation for the September G20 : firstly , to prepare a new , coordinated effort to reduce this threat of mass unemployment ; secondly , to follow the de Larosière group 's two proposals - to establish a supervisory board and to give more competence to so-called CSR organisations ; thirdly , to introduce effective financial regulation , covering hedge funds and private equity ; and , fourthly , to prepare Europe to take a role in promoting a new global deal , including for those developing countries which have been hardest hit by this economic crisis .
Please , Commissioner , do not tell me one more time that you have made a financial stimulus of 4 % , including automatic stabilisers .
Next time it will be 5 % , when unemployment increases to 27 million unemployed .
Let us be fair and let us create the jobs .
We can do it together .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) I would also like to welcome the agreement reached in London , but at the same time underline that the global economy needs global governance .
The European Union can take on the role of that leader for two reasons , because both after the war and after the collapse of the Soviet bloc , it was able to restructure its economies within a short space of time .
We have significant experience in managing such complicated processes .
They must be based on structural reforms .
We have to provide space for new initiatives .
If we now concentrate attention on technical details , the improvement of regulation , which clearly is necessary , then we will lose the initiative and room for movement .
Movement and new jobs only appear when structural changes take place .
What structural changes can the European Union offer the world ?
Above all we must modernise governance , modernise the European Union 's financial markets , rest on the strength of our common European market and not shut ourselves away in our little national corners .
If we are able to work together in the European common market , this will be an excellent example to the world , that we do not need to pursue protectionism , that it is precisely openness , cooperation , the movement of capital and macroeconomic balances , based on common agreements , which will help maintain stability and revive the economy .
Europe 's experience in this area is invaluable .
I always find it difficult to understand why we are not doing this .
Perhaps we pay too much attention to those hedge funds and too little to people 's lives .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
Our draft resolution on the G20 summit says that , firstly , various European Union countries have received support from the International Monetary Fund to resolve balance of payments problems and , secondly , that various countries in the euro zone have , thanks directly to the euro , been able to avoid exchange rate pressure in this situation .
Unfortunately , however , the new European Union Member States cannot reduce this currency risk pressure , because they cannot join the euro zone .
At the same time , the economy has become overheated in several new EU states as a direct result of the injection of a very large amount of money by many European banks , fighting to carve out a market in these states .
Now it is borrowers who have been left to bear all the currency risk .
I would therefore appeal for us to consider , particularly in the new EU Member States that have joined the exchange rate mechanism tool and keep to a fixed exchange rate that allows a large part of these loans to be paid back to European banks , whether this should not mean that these countries should also be helped with a swifter introduction of the euro .
This is particularly crucial because solidarity is extremely important in difficult times .
In reality , we are all in the same boat - especially now , when , to be honest , even those countries that have already joined the euro cannot satisfy the Maastricht criteria , with budget deficits of over 10 % .
Since we are in the same boat , let us think in the same way ! Thank you .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , the G20 was a massively missed opportunity for tackling both the environmental crisis and the economic crisis at the same time - in other words for introducing what we are calling a ' Green New Deal ' .
That meeting should have been the moment for a massive investment in renewable energy and energy efficiency , for example , not just because we have to urgently address the challenge of climate change , but because investment in green technologies is one of the best ways of getting people back to work .
Green energy , for example , is far more jobs-rich than investment in business as usual , yet the package agreed by the G20 will actually lock the world into a high-carbon economy at exactly the time that we should be shifting to a very different low-carbon sustainable economy .
Billions of euros were found for the IMF and the World Bank , but for making that vital transition to a green economy there was no serious money on the table , just vague aspirations - just talks about talks .
The communiqué 's words about climate change and the low-carbon economy were relegated to just two paragraphs at the end of the communiqué , with no specific commitments .
It is a tragedy that , at the very moment when the economic system and the global environment are on a collision course , this crucial opportunity to change direction and to make sure that we tackle both of those crises and get people back to work was lost .
Mr President , the assessment of the G20 results that we have just heard - success story , turning point in the crisis , an enormous success for the European Union , and so on - in my view raises two questions .
The first relates to the analysis of the current situation of the world financial system with which Europe , as has been seen , is closely connected .
Let us be clear , the desire of the G20 leaders to send , at whatever cost , a reassuring message to the market , and indeed to the public , led them to very much play down the current situation .
In reality , forecasts of the estimated , but still largely hidden , banking losses are soaring from one month to the next .
The worst is not behind us , it is in front of us .
There was talk of losses of USD 2 000 billion three months ago , and that was already astronomical .
Now , the IMF puts the figure at USD 4 000 billion .
For its part , the Commission has just put a figure of EUR 3 000 billion on the funds put aside under various guises by the Member States to save the banks , in other words a quarter of their GDP .
That is the price of the mad dash to cash for profit and to profit for cash .
This grim reality underlines the importance of my second question .
What is the real substance of the progress made on regulation by the G20 in London ?
When Joseph Stiglitz , who was , as you know , appointed by the United Nations to chair an independent committee of experts on the financial crisis , was asked : ' Do you agree with the economist Simon Johnson when he says that the regulatory aspect of the G20 is close to zero ? ' , Mr Stiglitz replied , ' Yes , I do ' .
The ink on the London statement was not even dry when the main member state of the G20 , the United States , called on the speculative funds that are comfortably installed in the tax havens to buy at a knock-down price the toxic assets that are blocking the balance sheets of the US banks .
We are really raising capitalism 's moral standards .
In truth , the G20 did nothing to stop liberal globalisation .
It ignored the key question of reorganising the international monetary system .
It promoted the IMF without considering its transformation .
It drew a veil over the immense social challenge created by this crisis .
It prescribed homeopathic remedies where major surgery is obviously needed .
Europe , I think , must go far beyond the G20 .
The house is on fire .
Do you hear the cries of anger rising up from our societies ?
They are demanding not soothing words , but strong , practical action , now !
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the decision of the G20 summit to pour billions of dollars into the IMF to combat the crisis is in my opinion counterproductive and harmful .
There are three immediate reasons for this .
Firstly , this commitment obliges creditor countries either to reach into their foreign exchange reserves or to go into debt .
Secondly , the commitment obliges even those states that have suffered lasting damage from incompetent IMF analyses to contribute to the fund .
The Czech Republic , whose citizens I represent here , is an example of this .
Although IMF forecasts for my country are completely divorced from reality , Czech citizens are contributing USD 1.4 billion to the fund .
Thirdly , the IMF will lend money to states under much softer rules than hitherto and it will not press for loans to be made conditional on the drafting of realistic measures to solve the economic problems of the borrower .
Ladies and gentlemen , I firmly believe that this will lead to a deformation of the international credit market at the expense of taxpayers .
( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the summit was a political success and sent out an important message , namely that the world is closing ranks and the political will is there to jointly find and apply global answers to crises and challenges .
Nonetheless , I should like to say very clearly that we should not exaggerate the importance of summit scenarios .
Summits only make declarations of intent ; summits do not take decisions , summits are not legislators , summits have no legal basis .

Several calls are being made on the European Union .
We must have the ambition to take on a vanguard role in the construction of a global financial and economic order .
However , we can only take on a vanguard role if we have European regulations and can offer models .
We are on the right path with our model of a social market economy , with deposit guarantees and with the regulation on credit rating agencies passed today .
However , for me , the results of the summit are lacking in clear agreement on the elimination of the pro-cyclic effects of the existing regulations at European level and globally , the watchword being Basel II .
We still have a great deal to do : hedge funds , managers ' salaries , the banking directive and European supervision , to name but a few .
We are spokesmen , through the Commission , for this continent .
Nonetheless , the national states are also represented .
Community interests stand alongside national interests on the world stage .
This may be an opportunity , but it may also be a weakness .
That is why coordination is especially important .
If our representatives do not all pull in the same direction , we shall be weakened on the global stage .
My final point : the legal implementation of political declarations of intent , their implementation and the coordination of global implementation in time and content will determine our success .
The summit merely points the way .
The result is yet to be achieved .
( PT ) Mr President , the G20 Summit was important , particularly because it created a space for multilateral dialogue and made people realise that , without this multilateralism , the crisis cannot be solved .
However , it was a starting point , not an end point .
The European Union 's role in this must be reinforced and clarified , and the EU must act as a driving force .
As yet we have no indication that this will happen .
We do have an extremely important guide , namely the de Larosière report , but the Commission has been slow to implement it and slow to react . Look at the reaction to hedge funds , for example .
In the meantime , the real economy in Europe is still not showing any signs of recovery , and the ' wait-and-see ' policy that has been followed means waiting for worse figures and for an increasingly serious situation .
Look at the latest estimates from the International Monetary Fund and the OECD ( Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ) of 27 million people unemployed , which is a huge problem .
The Commission also owes explanations to this House on what it intends to do , what its initiative actually involves and what the state of play is with the policy to coordinate Member States ' initiatives .
We should not have to wait any longer .
The political will to act should already exist .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , G20 is indeed the right way forward ; in time G8 will have to be dissolved by G20 .
Then we would have one summit less .
Europeans have failed .
The European Union with 27 Member States is indeed the right arena in which to organise a new financial market order .
To date we have had a lot of talk on this but no clear resolutions .
We have heard a great deal about clearing tax havens , control of hedge funds and the end of fraudulent financial market products .
If the Europeans had gone to London with a policy position , who would have actually been able to stand up against them ?
I find , as my honourable friend Mrs Lucas said , that it is infuriating that the London summit simply adjourned the climate crisis and the security of energy supply crisis .
That has not only inflicted a great deal of damage on the climate and security of energy supply , but has also gambled away the opportunity for thousands of new jobs .
( DE ) Mr President , I can follow on seamlessly here .
It is a tragedy that this continent is unable to reach a majority on what my fellow Member Mrs Lucas referred to .
If it were , we would be in a far better position and could look future generations in the eye .
As things stand , we cannot .
A criticism that I have to make is that much of the debate about the financial disaster and the way in which the emerging or already real climate catastrophe is being pushed aside reminds me of the German Bundestag after the Second World War .
Many members of parliament and many politicians in the Bundestag no longer had any interest in what had happened up to 1945 .
They had to be confronted with it slowly .
That is the starting point : unless you conquer the past , examine your own mistakes and look to the future , there is no way forwards .
The EU and , more importantly , the political actors failed dramatically in the financial crisis .
They must draw conclusions from that and first learn what they did wrong .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the resolution that it will adopt tomorrow , Parliament will welcome the positions taken on credit rating agencies , which aim to increase transparency and to strengthen cooperation between the national supervisory authorities .
In this respect , this very day , Europe has shown the way forward .
This morning , COREPER adopted the compromise reached between the Member States , the Commission and Parliament At noon today , Parliament , in turn , adopted the compromise by an overwhelming majority of 569 votes to 47 .
Therefore , the regulation proposed by the Commission and amended by Parliament will quickly come into effect .
I would like to stress that this regulation lays the foundations for European supervision in the spirit of the proposals in the de Larosière report .
The CESR will be the single entry point for registering agencies and it will initially play a coordinator role .
The Commission has undertaken to propose , in the next few months , a legislative initiative that will enable the finishing touches to be put to a truly European supervisory system .
Before concluding , I would like to stress that the return of confidence , which is the real objective of all the measures taken , obviously hinges on better regulation , especially of the financial system .
However , we must also take into account the fears of our fellow citizens and respond positively to them .
We should give them realistic messages of hope .
Unless we improve the morale of our fellow citizens , we will not restore consumer confidence , without which economic recovery will not be possible The information provided to our fellow citizens has to be balanced and honest and not encourage defeatism by hiding the progress , the successes and practical consequences of the recovery plans , whilst taking into account the timescales necessary for them to produce their effects .

( FR ) Mr President , I wanted to say to Mr Daul , but he has left , that today it is astonishing to see the Conservatives accusing we Socialists of wanting to increase social spending , when their main argument for rejecting the recovery plans is that Europe has the famous automatic stabilisers .
What are these if not unemployment benefits , which we have defended with great clamour ?
On the G20 , I will make one main criticism : they have adopted the Barroso method , which consists in adding together the existing plans and assuming that that makes a recovery plan .
That is not a recovery plan .
Furthermore , looking at the figures from the OECD yesterday , from the IMF today , from the Commission tomorrow , how can anyone imagine that Europe can be satisfied with this ?
We need a real European recovery , and the only method you have for this , Commissioner , is funding with a European loan .
It is time for you to get to work , even though this European Parliament will no longer be there to support you in this task .
Finally , I note that the G20 had a task to carry out , following a message sent to it by Dominique Strauss-Kahn on the eve of its work : ' The system will not recover whilst the question of toxic assets remains unresolved ' .
Clearly , in this respect , the G20 was incompetent .
We still have everything to do .
Two points : the G20 conclusions assess the benefits of the Doha Round at USD 150 billion .
Where does this figure come from ?
How can it be justified ?
We call on you , Commissioner , to explain .
Finally , on supervision , if Europe wants to go down the right road , it must , as a matter of urgency , implement the de Larosière group 's proposals .

( ES ) Mr President , the G20 has sent out a valuable message : prosperity is indivisible , and the only sustainable recovery is a shared and inclusive one .
What we need to do now is make this a reality .
We need to continue in this direction .
The G20 has reaffirmed common priorities , made agreements to provide resources to the International Monetary Fund , development banks and for the promotion of trade .
It has carried out reforms in global financial governance , implemented ambitious plans with regard to regulation and supervision , and has made progress in the fight against tax havens .
Without the G20 , the situation would be desperate , and the sickness in the world economy could become chronic .
However , the most important thing to realise is that the G20 initiative is not an event but rather a process .
The European Union is the most important , integrated , and balanced economic area in the world , and therefore must lead the way , as it has great potential and can enrich the global agenda with the realisation that we are not only in the midst of a cyclical crisis , but actually confronting a crisis with deeper roots , which requires the political initiative of the European Union .
- ( LT ) One of the measures given in the statement issued by the International Monetary Fund on opportunities for the EU 's Central and Eastern European countries to exit the crisis more swiftly is the introduction of the euro .
This is proposed for countries which have currency boards .
In Lithuania the litas has been pegged to the euro at an unchanged rate for four years , which is twice as long as the currency board mechanism requires .
We should also reduce the exchange rate mechanism period to one year for other non-euro zone countries .
The economic slump in the EU and throughout the world calls for novel , speedy and creative decisions and compromises , all the more so because in the ten years of the euro 's existence , not one euro zone country has implemented all of the euro zone criteria and requirements , the Maastricht criteria .
( NL ) I wish to take this opportunity to denounce a bit of hypocrisy with regard to the G20 summit .
This summit was announced as a historic agreement , as something unbelievable , as a step forward , for instance in the fight against tax fraud and tax havens .
A black , a grey and a white list were also drawn up .
But the hypocrisy of the European Union lies in the fact that - to give but one example - barely a week and a half before the G20 summit , we entered into an economic partnership agreement with the Caribbean countries .
Eight of the fourteen countries are tax havens and yet we signed a free trade agreement with those countries , the result of which will be to institute free trade and the liberalisation of financial services , the consequence of which will be that toxic credits and illicit money can freely flow from those tax havens into the European Union .
I would thus like to take this opportunity to complain about the hypocrisy of having a good media show , the G20 summit , which claims it will take on tax havens , and in practice a policy that is diametrically opposed to what has been said .
That is what I wanted to say .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for the discussion .
I would like to state clearly that I agree with Mr Daul , who identified the avoidance of protectionism as a key factor .
Protectionism works like a cancer and it could completely destroy our economy , turning against EU citizens and leading to a deepening economic crisis and a further decline in living standards .
I also agree very much with Mr Daul 's call for a transparent economy with effective and sensible levels of regulation and of course stronger global financial institutions .
Mr Rasmussen and Mrs Starkevičiūttalked of pouring money into the economy .
I must emphasise here that we are not pouring money into the economy in order to assist financial institutions .
Inasmuch as we are doing it , the aim is to boost employment and to help people hold on to their jobs , because we all agree that the most dignified way for EU citizens to secure a living is through their own work .
At the same time , however , in implementing these financial stimulus measures for the economy we must think not only of ourselves but also of our children and grandchildren .
In other words these measures must not lead to any dramatic long-term threat to the stability of public finances .
Our efforts must be focused on protecting employment and therefore the European Commission in cooperation with the Presidency will organise an employment summit where the top priority will be measures in the area of employment .
I would like to voice my disagreement with Mrs Lucas .
I completely disagree that the G20 summit was a lost opportunity but I must challenge all of us to show some political realism .
The current economy is sick .
It needs a cure , it needs first aid , it needs long-term care and it needs a period of convalescence .
We must not expect positive results to appear suddenly over the next three to four months .
The problems affecting the global economy - and therefore the European economy too - are deeply-rooted and long-term in nature .
Therefore the treatment must be long-term as well and it will require patience .
I firmly believe that from this perspective the G20 summit represents a positive step .
Mr Wurtz criticised the superficiality of the financial market agreements .
I agree that in many respects the EU must go deeper and I also firmly believe that this is happening .
We must not look only at the steps taken by heads of state and government leaders , but also at those of finance ministers , which are very often consigned to annexes of various documents .
I would also like to emphasise that the European Commission has already discussed further specific measures this week .
However , I would again make a call for realism .
We cannot expect miracle cures to be found within the next three or four months .
The world economy is in trouble and the cure will be very long-term .
It is essential to emphasise that even within an EU framework we must proceed in a coordinated manner .
None of us exist in isolation .
Only through coordinated action can we successfully overcome the effects of the global economic crisis .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank you for a very serious and constructive debate .
I will of course report this to the Commission , President Barroso and my colleague , Joaquín Almunia .
I have two or three comments , firstly on the European economic recovery plan .
Like Poul Nyrup Rasmussen , I have of course taken careful note of the latest IMF economic outlook , which is indeed a very gloomy read .
At the same time , it is essential to note that we have already taken very substantial and significant policy decisions to stimulate the European economy and the world economy .
This has already , by and large , helped to stop the financial meltdown .
But of course it is only honest to say that there will still be bad news coming from the real economy for some time , especially as regards increasing unemployment .
Therefore we have to be very alert and vigilant .
We have to constantly assess how the economic recovery package , the fiscal stimulus and the financial reforms are working and producing results .
If necessary , we will have to do more - and better - in the course of the coming months .
We are doing our homework on the financial market reform , as a response to several colleagues .
On the Commission agenda next week , for instance , we have a major package of legislation concerning the financial markets , especially the Director 's remuneration , and a recommendation on the remuneration policies in the financial services sector .
This is a very important part of the reforms of the financial markets .
Finally , while the reform of the financial regulation in Europe , and in the world globally , is indeed necessary in order to correct the system errors of financial capitalism , at the same time it is important that we do not throw the baby out with the bathwater as regards the market economy as such .
In other words , we have to preserve the single market - which has been the engine of welfare in Europe - and we have to work for a new world trade deal in the context of the World Trade Organisation .
As Mr Daul said , we need more , not less , trade .
This is especially important for developing countries , which are very badly hurt because of the current recession and the slowing-down of world trade .
As replacement for Louis Michel next month , I am also involved in this because of my portfolio responsibilities .
Indeed , the developing countries are among those which are suffering most from this economic recession .
Therefore we should not lose momentum on rapidly reaching an ambitious conclusion of the Doha Development Round .
In the current economic climate the value of concluding Doha has gone up very substantially .
Doha would boost the world economy and prevent protectionism from picking up .
Therefore all G20 countries should look beyond their domestic political garden and show a real commitment to moving ahead without delay as regards the Doha Development Round .
I think it is also important to note , from the point of view of development , that leaders in the G20 also agreed on a trade finance package worth USD 250 billion over two years to support global trade flows , to which Europe will contribute substantially .
I would point out that , in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received six motions for resolutions tabled by the six main groups of this Parliament at the end of this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Friday , 24 April 2009 .
Support for Special Olympics in the European Union ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
Situation in the Republic of Moldova ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statement on the situation in the Republic of Moldova but , first of all , I believe that Mr Watson wishes to draw the House 's attention to the presence in our Chamber of eminent Moldovan public figures .

Mr President , I should like to draw the attention of colleagues to the presence in the gallery today of the leaders of the three opposition parties represented in Moldova 's Parliament , who are here for this debate : Dorin Chirtoacă , who is the Mayor of Chişinău and the Vice-President of the Liberal Party of Moldova ; Vladimir Filat , who is the President of the Liberal Democratic Party , and Serafim Urechean , the President of the Alliance ' Our Moldova ' .
( Applause )
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , both the Council and the Parliament are following with great unease the events unfolding in Moldova in connection with the 5 April parliamentary elections .
A significant political crisis has developed in our immediate neighbourhood , representing a serious challenge for the EU policy on Moldova and on the entire region in general .
This factor is particularly worrying as the EU is at present preparing to launch the Eastern Partnership .
It is in all of our interests to ensure that the situation in Moldova does not undermine implementation of the Eastern Partnership .
We must make a clear distinction between the statements of President Voronin and the actions of political representatives on the one hand and the interests of Moldovan citizens on the other hand .
Immediately after the outbreak of violent protests in Kishinev on 7 April the EU sent its special representative Kalman Mizsei to Moldova .
Since then Mr Mizsei has been trying hard to initiate political talks between the various Moldovan parties .
The parties winning seats in the new parliament must agree on a realistic solution that respects democratic principles .
Throughout the crisis the special representative has been in close touch with the Presidency and with High Representative Javier Solana .
You perhaps know that Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolánek also visited Kishinev yesterday .
He called emphatically on the Moldovan authorities and on the opposition to enter into political dialogue .
He met with President Voronin , with Prime Minister Greceanu and with opposition representatives .
The main message delivered by the Presidency accorded fully with the long-term actions of Kalman Mizsei .
There is a need to strengthen civil rights in Moldovan society , the government must enable civil society to function properly and it must guarantee freedom of expression and other basic human rights .
Furthermore , it is essential for the Moldovan opposition to gain access to main media in order to put across their opinions and to engage in political contests on equal terms .
On the other hand it is necessary for opposition representatives to cooperate constructively with the ruling party and to respect the election results .
Prime Minister Topolánek , as the President of the European Council , stressed to all representatives the fundamental importance of always bearing the European perspective in mind .
Moldova must not diverge from the path of democracy .
Linking up with the Eastern Partnership project should strengthen Moldova on this path .
I would like to remind you that the official election result declared on 8 April was a victory for the Moldovan Communist Party , which won almost 50 % of the votes .
The remaining votes were shared between the three opposition parties .
Based on this the communists would win 60 of the 101 seats in the new parliament .
The preliminary assessment from the international election observation mission concluded that the election was valid , although reference was made to several problems that occurred during the campaign .
However , the opposition and a number of non-governmental organisations declared that the elections had been marred by fraud .
Last week the Central Electoral Commission recounted the votes and concluded that the ruling Communist Party had indeed won 60 of the 101 seats in the parliament , thus confirming the results of the first count .
According to the opposition , the main problem is not with the vote count but with electoral roles , which allegedly include several hundred thousand ' dead souls ' or people who do not exist .
The opposition is checking the electoral roles in order to produce evidence of this claim .
According to a Commission spokesman , no signs of fraud were discovered during the recount .
The opposition also pointed to the widespread exploitation of administrative resources by the governing party during the election campaign .
The international election observers criticised the Moldovan authorities in this respect .
The EU had warned the Moldovan authorities about this problem several times before the elections .
Particular reference was made to the lack of press freedom and persecution of the opposition by repressive authorities .
Following the protests pressure increased sharply on the independent media .
Journalists were arrested and persecuted .
Some foreign journalists were expelled or prevented from entering the country .
There is a further very serious reason for concern .
During the crisis the Moldovan authorities committed serious violations of human rights .
According to the reports almost 250 people were arrested following the violent protests on 7 April .
Many of them , mostly young people , were beaten by the police , subjected to inhumane treatment and torture , denied access to legal assistance and not allowed to inform their families .
Three young protesters died .
We made it very clear to the Moldovan authorities that such violations of human rights and media freedoms are unacceptable to the EU .
The violence that took place in Kishinev is no justification for the cruel measures imposed by the state authorities .
Moldova has adopted European norms and values through measures such as the EU-Moldova Action Plan .
The EU has urgently called on the Moldovan authorities to uphold the principles of human rights and basic freedoms .
On 15 April Moldovan President Vladimir Voronin took a step in the right direction when he declared an amnesty for all persons arrested during the protests except for people with a previous criminal record .
He also called for a transparent and proper investigation of the events .
The investigation must be conducted in cooperation with the relevant European and international institutions .
The human rights situation is being monitored closely on the ground by the EU and also by the Council of Europe , the OSCE and the UN .
It is important that these operations are coordinated .
The investigation in Moldova must include international participation in order to be considered reliable and fair .
The sharp conflict and mistrust that has prevailed in Moldovan society over recent weeks can only be overcome through a transparent process .
It is essential to find a political solution to this crisis .
Moldova is facing very serious economic problems arising from the global financial crisis .
Continuing political turmoil would make it impossible for the country to tackle these economic problems .
There is an urgent need for a functioning government .
External assistance will also be required , including considerable IMF involvement .
It is very important at this stage to look to a future beyond the immediate consequences of the current crisis and to consider what our policy should be towards Moldova .
The crisis has shown clearly the need for consistent and ambitious measures to reinforce democratic standards and institutions in Moldova .
Greater assistance will be required from the EU , focused on institution building through reform of the police and the judiciary and guaranteeing media freedoms and plurality .
The agreement between Moldovan political parties on overcoming the current crisis should include a commitment to thoroughgoing reform in the areas mentioned .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to end by emphasising that for many years Moldova has been one of the most advanced countries in Eastern Europe , in terms of its determination to uphold democratic standards and its willingness to draw closer to the EU .
It is in our interests to help Moldova overcome the current crisis and to proceed further along this path .
The Eastern Partnership will provide a new and ambitious framework for boosting EU assistance targeted at political and economic reforms in Moldova and other countries in that region .
It is in all of our interests to ensure that democracy is strengthened in Moldova and that Moldova continues to draw closer to the European Union .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , referring to Mr Watson 's announcement , let me first warmly welcome our guests from Moldova .
The situation in the Republic of Moldova is indeed of great concern .
We are following developments closely and seeking ways to promote dialogue and reconciliation between political forces in the country .
As regards the conduct of the recent elections , my colleague Benita Ferrero-Waldner welcomed the preliminary assessment by the OSCE-led international election observation mission .
The mission concluded that the elections had taken place in a pluralistic environment , that a distinct political choice had been on offer for the voters and that a number of international standards for democratic elections had been met .
However , significant shortcomings were identified which are of serious concern and had already been voiced by the Commission well before the elections .
These are undue administrative interference , insufficient respect for the freedom of expression and access of all parties to media , and an overall lack of public confidence in the democratic and electoral process .
These shortcomings need to be addressed as a matter of urgency , all the more so since the events of 7 April .
Much more worrying are the reports of widespread human rights violations in the wake of the demonstrations after the election day .
After the turmoil that followed the demonstrations of 7 April , the Commission strongly condemned the excessive use of force and called on all those concerned to stop the use of inflammatory rhetoric and violence .
We continue to give this matter close attention .
Respect for human rights remains a key condition for the further development of our relationship with Moldova .
It is crucial that allegations of serious human rights violations by the security forces are investigated thoroughly and swiftly .
Where allegations are substantiated , the authorities must act to ensure that those responsible for such abuses are indeed brought to justice .
President Voronin 's agreement to visit the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights , Thomas Hammarberg , as well as cooperation with the EUSR on these issues , is welcome .
Similarly Moldovan interest in the possibility of the dispatch of an EU fact-finding mission is positive .
While these missions cannot substitute for the responsibility of the state to investigate and prosecute human rights violations , they should help to shed light on the latest elections and their aftermath . They should also go some way towards facilitating political dialogue in order to restore public confidence .
Today the situation in Moldova is very fragile .
The country has constantly expressed its desire to deepen its relationship with the European Union .
The current crisis is a test over Moldova 's resolve in this regard .
We welcome the fact that Romania has refrained from taking reciprocal steps following the reintroduction of visa requirements for Romanian citizens and for the declaration of its ambassador as persona non grata .
We should encourage all partners to proceed with the greatest caution and always keep in mind the overriding aim of stabilising the country .
The current situation is of grave concern , but we should not lose our sense of the wider picture .
The key to future stability and prosperity for Moldova is in the deepening of its relationship with the European Union .
On the eve of the launch of the Eastern Partnership we need to demonstrate that we are indeed ready to assist Moldova in overcoming the current difficulties , in particular by defusing tensions , promoting dialogue and strengthening links between us .
The Republic of Moldova is our neighbour .
We have been working closely and in a relationship of trust with the citizens of Moldova over the last 15 years .
We are fully aware of Moldova 's European aspirations .
It is critical that we stay engaged with the Moldovan people today and that together we work not only to overcome the challenges that have arisen in the electoral period but also those which are emerging as a result of the global financial and economic downturn .
In other words , we care for Moldova and its citizens .
The Republic of Moldova has international obligations and commitments , which mean that it has assumed the responsibility to respect democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
However , recent events have shown us a serious deviation from all these commitments .
Random arrests , kidnappings , people disappearing , flagrant violation of the rights of those arrested , inhuman and degrading treatment , terrorising citizens and threats with weapons are regrettable acts which jeopardise this country 's EU future .
The campaign launched against representatives of the mass media and opposition parties , along with the arrest and expulsion of journalists are serious , deplorable actions .
I condemn this campaign of harassment , the serious human rights violations and the illegal actions carried out by the Republic of Moldova 's government .
EU assistance planned for 2007-2010 aimed at supporting the development of democracy and good governance in Moldova amounts to more than EUR 50 million .
I hope that the money has not been used for training the police in how to use violence against the population .
I would like to ask the Commission to present to the European Parliament a report on the use of all EU funds in the Republic of Moldova .
Romania is pursuing and will continue to pursue a proactive policy aimed at supporting the Republic of Moldova 's integration into European structures .
The reason for this is not only down to the historical ties we have with the citizens of this state , but more particularly because of the firm conviction that the Republic of Moldova 's destiny lies in Europe , as a modern , democratic state , based on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
The accusations levelled against the Romanian state by the Moldovan authorities are nonsense .
The introduction of visas for Romanian citizens is also an unjustified and unacceptable action .
The head of state changes , but the citizens remain .
I believe that it is in the European Union 's interest that the Republic of Moldova follows a European path in keeping with the aspirations of its citizens to live in a stable , safe democratic state .
In this regard , the Eastern Partnership is an effective instrument and an outlet for the European aspirations of the Republic of Moldova 's citizens .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , I have always been a strong supporter of Moldova , but the present crisis makes me very concerned .
Although Moldova is a small country that is dependent on foreign aid , we cannot turn a blind eye when the principles of the rule of law are violated .
Relations between the European Union and Moldova remain very important to us , but one should not hope that the European Union consists of blue-eyed naïve people who believe everything that the Moldovan authorities present to us as the truth .
The forthcoming European Parliament ad hoc mission to Moldova is very important .
No topic will be taboo .
We would like to know how the police behaved with demonstrators in the post-election period .
The observation of human rights not only in words but also in deeds is of utmost importance to the European Union and also to representatives directly elected by the people .
Unfortunately , the Republic of Moldova signalled at the meeting of the Foreign Affairs Committee and the Moldova delegation yesterday that Europe must be prepared for monologues in Chişinău .
We cannot accept that , since European integration means open dialogue . Thus partners discuss everything .
I believe in the Eastern Partnership , and also in the possibility of democracy in Moldova .
Let us therefore help Moldova .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , Moldova 's state brings back miserable memories of Europe 's unhappy past : a Communist government declaring victory on its own terms , protesters beaten and killed , accusations that neighbours are orchestrating unrest .
If there is real evidence that the Romanian Security Service has stoked violence , then that should be subject to scrutiny by the international community .
This Parliament 's mission next week must seek evidence regarding reports of 200 000 additional ballots printed , allegations that 400 000 voters registered on election day with inadequate ID , and claims that voters in Transnistria were disenfranchised en masse .
Until those are investigated , until the OSCE reports , many will simply not believe the results , whatever Moldova 's courts conclude .
It may be that Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner 's instinctive optimism proves misplaced .
President Voronin should also denounce the detention , beatings and extrajudicial killing of young people randomly rounded up after the protests .
No more obstacles to lawyers or NGOs , no more withholding the names and numbers of those detained .
I would like the Commission to confirm whether Moldova 's expulsion of Romania 's Ambassador and demand for visas from travellers breaks the agreements our Union has with that country .
If so , what action will the Commission take ?
President Băsescu 's announcement on passports also added to tensions .
We must show sensitivity to bilateral relations but , nonetheless , insist agreements are honoured .
Our Moldovan visitors today describe a country where , in so many ways , freedom and democracy are denied , where the Internet mysteriously malfunctions , where television channels vanish from the airwaves , where state TV broadcasts belly dancing rather than reporting violence on the streets .
Our Union , while mindful of the geopolitics , must understand the politics of Moldova , a people keen to exercise democracy and freedom of choice , a country trading overwhelmingly with the countries to its west , a land linked to Member States of the Union through geography , history and culture .
Next month , as our leaders gather for the Eastern Partnership summit , they should make sure they build partnership on the basis of democracy and human rights .
President Voronin and his comrades must commit to that cause .
Our Union must demand it .
( NL ) The international reporting on the disturbances in Moldova at the beginning of April and their consequences raises a considerable number of questions , questions that the European institutions need to put to the Moldovan and Romanian authorities .
To begin with , Chişinău .
Is the Moldovan government really planning to open fire on demonstrators in cases of emergency from now on ?
I would refer Members to the announcement made by the Prime Minister on state television .
How does the Moldovan government explain the radical about-face in the approach taken by the organs of national security towards demonstrators and other opponents ?
This was an about-face from an incomprehensible passivity towards vandalism , arson and the plunder of government buildings to brutal physical violence against unarmed citizens , resulting in three suspicious deaths .
Above all , how does the Republic of Moldova acquit itself of its responsibility for these breaches of the most basic fundamental rights ?
For a response to this last and crucial question , Madam President , the open letter containing nine recommendations submitted yesterday to the Czech Presidency by fourteen Moldovan defenders of civil society must definitely be taken into consideration .
I hope that the European institutions , Commissioner Rehn and the Czech Presidency will take note of the letter .
Prominent persons in Moldovan society are asking for an explanation .
We must confront the Moldovan authorities .
Moreover , Brussels must at least ask Bucharest for an explanation of the proposal to open up Romanian citizenship on a massive scale to Moldovan citizens with Romanian grandparents .
European consultation regarding the far-reaching consequences of such a sweeping decision is certainly reasonable .
Madam President , the violence in the Republic of Moldova was not a revolution but a mutiny , which took place within a revolutionary atmosphere in a divided society .
That violence could also be seen as having been provoked and used as part of a strategy with the aim of redrawing the borders between the European Union and Eurasia .
Therefore the problem we have to cope with is a European problem .
It is not a mere internal or a single Member State problem .
However , the solution to that problem must not be retaliation but the multiplication of efforts for engaging Moldova on a European way .
Nor is the solution to encourage the Moldovan elites to leave the country as holders of foreign passports .
To this end , we must strengthen the mission of the European Union envoy for Moldova , both in scope and resources , accelerate negotiation with Moldova on visa facilitations , and deepen cooperation in the field of enhancing both public order and respect for human rights .
We have to work together with the authorities , the opposition and civil society , but also with Russia , which has an important presence in the region .
We should avoid these events being taken as an excuse for a unilateral solution on Transnistria .
( SV ) Madam President , there are those who believe that we should have a resolution on Moldova and there are those who believe that we should not .
Those who do not want this resolution often cite the fact that the OSCE actually approved the election itself .
Let me say , though , that the OSCE report was not completely uncritical .
On the contrary , it contained a great deal of criticism .
However , the resolution is not only about the election , but also about what happened after the election and what has been going on in Moldova for quite a while .
Human rights must be respected .
The media must be given freedom .
Maltreatment of peaceful demonstrators can never be accepted .
Approval of this resolution would mean that we would be sending a strong signal to people in Moldova to show them they are not alone , that we can see what is happening there and that we do not accept it .
I therefore urge you all to support this resolution .
( RO ) The events which have occurred in the Republic of Moldova had been on the cards for a long time .
When I say this , I am referring to the fact that in 2008 the EU-Republic of Moldova dialogue mentioned at least three major issues : a ) free access for the opposition to the public mass media , which has been systematically refused and institutionalised by the Voronin regime ; b ) failure to comply with the request of the Venice Commission to refrain from amending the law on parliamentary elections , flatly refused by the regime in Chişinău and its collaborators ; c ) the opposition 's involvement in major decisions on the country 's policy , especially its European integration policy , another measure flatly refused .
The fact that these three major topics have been ignored or systematically rejected by our partners in Chişinău will actually indicate to us that the European Union has been turned down flat by Moldova when it came to matters of fundamental importance to the future of this country .
The events which occurred on the day of the elections were only the predictable end to a story for which perhaps the European Union and European Parliament share some blame .
( RO ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have three types of problem with the Republic of Moldova , all of them serious , based on which we can devise three courses of action .
The first type concerns human rights .
We have hundreds of young people who have been detained , sometimes even tortured .
The next type concerns press freedom .
We have journalists who have been intimidated and abducted from the street in broad daylight .
The final type concerns the method for conducting the elections .
We have a huge volume of specific data on this indicating election rigging .
We will also have to be just as definite in making up our minds about this last aspect .
The opposition parties maintain that rigging has altered the result by 10-15 % .
The citizens of the Republic of Moldova are still looking in great hope to our decisions , to our responses .
It is their only way out of this tragic situation , almost unprecedented in Europe , which they have had to live through .
( RO ) Nowadays in Chişinău , Madam President , you have the right to remain silent , you have the right to do what you are told and you have the right to pay taxes to an elite that is answerable to no one , as well as to emigrate , to conform and , if necessary , to hate on command .
You do not have the right to free expression , association , public debate and not even the right to decide your identity yourself .
Commissioner , these are the conditions then for stabilising the Republic of Moldova , but they do not offer any grounds for optimism .
Having embarked on this road , the only fate that can await Moldova , in the best case scenario , is that of Belarus .
Long before the elections , the Communist Party managed to gain and consolidate its absolute control over all the mass media channels .
These measures have made the democratic process devoid of content and forced a quarter of the country 's population to emigrate .
Against this background the elections could not have taken place without any seed of doubt .
The repression exercised by Chişinău has now become a means for the authorities to communicate with the population .
Therefore , from now on , the EU cannot afford to adopt an indulgent , ambivalent attitude to the regime in Chişinău .
From now on , our silence or these ambivalent statements will indicate our approval and complicity in showing contempt for fundamental freedoms and the democratic legal system , as well as in acts of violence and repression .
Last but not least , the crisis in Chişinău demonstrates that we must improve the methods we use for observing and monitoring elections and rethink the role of our permanent representative there .
Madam President , Moldova remains one of the poorest countries in Europe , with a fragile democracy led by President Voronin , who is an unreconstructed Homo Sovieticus , who still proudly calls himself a Communist and who , sadly , is ambivalent towards the EU even in terms of the Eastern Partnership .
Nevertheless , he remains popular , particularly in the rural areas and among the older generation nostalgic for the security of the USSR in these uncertain economic times .
The OSCE Troika , which included our own EP delegation , basically endorsed his victory , so we just have to accept this fact , even though we must strongly protest the repressive crackdown against the opposition demonstrators who accused the Government of monopolising the media during the campaign , using an outdated and unreliable electoral register - including many people who are supposed to be dead -and the disenfranchisement of the large diaspora abroad who were not able to vote .
Right now we must concentrate on the human rights violations , which must be fully investigated by a mission of the European Union if Moldova wants to continue to receive our support in its EU-Atlantic aspirations .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am most grateful for this debate today , because it shows that a Europe with 27 Member States and 500 million citizens definitely has clout outside the borders of Europe .
Many citizens in Moldova have recognised how important it is to have a division of power , to develop a basic democratic understanding and to fight for it .
It does not happen as a matter of course that people stand up for democracy today and that people can proclaim their convictions in public and are not locked up or subject to repression for doing so .
That is why I believe - and I should like to support the Commissioner fully here - that we in Europe should use everything currently at our disposal in the fight for freedom by individual citizens , for freedom of the press and for a well-established democracy .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in Moldova is still fragile and the EU must continue its intense efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating table .
It must also work with them to find a common solution which is comprehensive , balanced and realistic and which will contribute to strengthening the democratic process and democratic institutions in Moldova .
I entirely agree with Graham Watson that Mr Voronin must sign up to democratic principles and that he must condemn the torture and violence perpetrated against demonstrators .
I think that everyone should also condemn the arrests of journalists and the massive violations of freedom of expression .
In this respect it is also important for us to support fully the work of the EU special representative in Moldova .
There should be no doubt that the EU and the Council are very alarmed at the human rights violations that occurred in Moldova during the crisis .
We are urgently calling on the Moldovan authorities to engage in a transparent process with the full cooperation of the relevant European and international institutions and to investigate and condemn the human rights violations .
The crisis has shown the need to strengthen EU assistance targeted at further political and economic reform in Moldova , in order to strengthen Moldova 's commitment to democratic standards and values and in accordance with EU support over the matter of Moldovan sovereignty and territorial integrity .
The EU is ready to cooperate and to bring Moldova closer to the EU .
However , the basis for this is a democratic Moldova , a Moldova where human rights are respected and a Moldova where there is freedom of expression and where basic democratic institutions are functioning .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to use my speaking time by responding to some of your questions and comments in this , in my view , very responsible exchange of views today .
I shall start with Mr Watson 's remarks concerning visas and human rights , but first I have to comment on his remarks concerning my colleague , Benita Ferrero-Waldner , who is responsible for our relations with Moldova .
You said Benita is an instinctive optimist .
I can defend her and the Commission 's position first by saying that , in fact , the Commission position is very realistic and balanced .
Secondly , you have to be a professional optimist to be a European Commissioner , at least if you are responsible for EU enlargement and relations for south-eastern Europe .
Concerning the visa question , we are indeed dismayed by Moldova 's decision to impose a visa requirement on Romanian citizens .
This is not acceptable .
We are examining the legality of this move .
We will pursue the issue on 30 April , on the eve of Labour Day , 1 May , with the Moldovan authorities within the context of the Commission-Moldova Joint Management Committee , which has been created under the visa facilitation agreement .
Overall , concerning the elections , their aftermath and human rights violations , the Commission strongly condemned the violence that erupted in the streets of Chişinău on 7 April and the massive and excessive use of force by the law enforcement agencies ' forces and , reportedly , by private militia in the aftermath .
Reports of widespread human rights violations with respect to detainees , as well as of abductions , are of serious concern .
We see that , realistically , it is of the utmost importance for Moldova to live up to its European aspirations , that allegations of human rights violations be investigated thoroughly and impartially with the participation of all political forces and , as appropriate , under international scrutiny .
Those suspected of having committed criminal acts , including human rights abuses , must be investigated and , if charged with such acts , offered the right to a fair trial .
Finally , on the likely impact of the election aftermath on EU-Moldova relations , it has brought to the fore the unfinished nature of Moldova 's internal reforms , particularly with regard to the rule of law and respect for fundamental freedoms .
We expect all concerned parties in Moldova , the official authorities as well as the political opposition and civil society , to agree on and progress towards a solution to the current crisis that will bring about more , not less , democracy and freedom for the Moldovan people .
The history of what has become the European Union is concrete proof that dialogue and cooperation and the rule of law can yield a coherent and sustainable mix of respect for fundamental freedoms , political stability and economic prosperity .
The debate is closed .
The vote on any motions for resolutions will take place during the next session .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
At a time when the Communist authorities in Chişinău are continuing to hold on to power through deceit and torture , the prime minister of the country occupying the EU Presidency is content to describe the crisis at the EU 's borders as ' worrying ' .
Not even the evidence of terror and the aggressive stance against a European Union Member State have triggered such a reaction as has the distortion of a legitimate decision from Romania to speed up the process for regaining Romanian citizenship for those who lost it unwillingly in tragic historical circumstances , which the West has some share in the responsibility for .
I cannot help but mention the hypocrisy of those politicians who are now scaremongering about the million Moldovans ready to invade the West , in the same way as they were bandying the notion up until 2007 about an onslaught from the Romanians .
With regard to the trampling of democracy and fundamental freedoms , we will have the opportunity for an exchange of views with Messrs Lukashenko and Voronin after launching the Eastern Partnership .
If this cooperation mechanism is not going to uphold democratic reforms in the former Soviet states which have been invited , this means that it will be dead in the water .
I cannot fail but come to the harsh conclusion that for some Europeans Tibet is closer than Moldova .
This happens probably when the road to Chişinău passes through Moscow .
The elections which took place on 6 April 2009 in the Republic of Moldova were followed by demonstrations .
Unfortunately , the press encountered problems in reporting information about how events unfolded .
I think that freedom of the press , freedom of expression and respect for human rights and the rule of law are principles which we all abide by , promote and defend .
I feel that the situation in the Republic of Moldova is extremely serious .
I particularly believe that the European Union must treat this situation seriously and diplomatically .
I feel that the accusations being levelled at Romania are also being targeted at the European Union .
However , the declaration of the Romanian ambassador in Chişinau as persona non-grata and the sudden , unilateral introduction by the Republic of Moldova of visas for Romanian citizens are unacceptable .
The Republic of Moldova is a European country through its history and geography .
It is one of the EU 's neighbours and relations between the EU and the Republic of Moldova must continue to be based on good neighbourliness .
The region I come from adjoins the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine .
We are involved in many joint development programmes and I think that Romania and the European Union must continue to support economic and social development in the Republic of Moldova through a partnership based on not only good cooperation , but , in particular , on mutual respect as well .
Consolidating stability and prosperity in the Western Balkans - Situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the Western Balkans , and specifically the report by Mrs Ibrisagic , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on consolidating stability and prosperity in the Western Balkans and the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Madam President , it is almost 15 years since the end of the war in Bosnia and almost exactly ten years since NATO 's bombing campaign forced Serbian forces to leave Kosovo .
In December , it will also be 17 years since I , myself , came to Sweden as a refugee from the war that set my former homeland alight and made bitter enemies of the Bosniaks , Croats and Serbs who had previously lived together as neighbours .
The fact that neither Bosnia , Kosovo nor any of the other countries in the Western Balkans has relapsed into war since then is entirely down to the EU and NATO .
However , even though the weapons have fallen silent , the legacy of the war lives on in politics and society in the region .
The only chance for people in these countries to overcome their past is for them to continue along the path towards EU membership .
Only the carrot and the stick that constitute the key dynamics of the accession process can get the governments of these countries to focus on carrying out the work and the reforms which , once and for all , can consolidate stability and prosperity in the Western Balkans .
In the report that I have written on this subject , and which the European Parliament will vote on tomorrow , I examine the various initiatives and projects that the EU and its Member States are involved in in one way or another in order to attempt to develop societies that are prepared to meet the stringent requirements of EU membership .
I do not intend to go into the details of the report here , but there are two things in particular that I would like to highlight .
The first is that there is a fundamental difference between the countries currently involved in the enlargement process and those which acceded in 2004 or 2007 .
The countries of the Western Balkans were ravaged by full-scale war and ethnic cleansing little more than a decade ago .
Fortunately , the same cannot be said of Hungary , Estonia or Romania .
However , this means that the EU cannot simply copy the handbook from previous enlargements and apply it to the Balkans .
An example of this that I mention in my report relates to the prohibition on the extradition of suspected criminals facing indictment in other countries .
Such prohibitions are currently in force in all of the Balkan countries , but the EU is currently making no demands for their abolition .
The justification for this is that no similar demands were made of Slovakia or Poland , for example .
It should be obvious why this analogy is not valid .
I would think that there are extremely few suspected war criminals hiding from justice in Slovakia , but I can tell you that there are considerably more in Serbia and Bosnia .
Justice is the basis on which reconciliation can be built .
Impunity for war criminals is completely unacceptable , and I therefore wish to urge the Commission and the Member States to once again raise the issue of the possibility of getting the countries in the region to take steps towards a coordinated abolition of these prohibitions .
The second matter I would like to highlight is that the accession process is , as I have mentioned , very stringent and demanding - and so it should be .
If we do not make stringent demands and insist on them being met in full we will not actually achieve any real results .
When the requirements are already so stringent and difficult to meet , the last thing we should do is to throw more spanners in the works for those countries who wish to become members , spanners that have nothing to do with the ability of those countries to meet the EU 's membership criteria .
I am also thinking about those who claim that the EU is already full and that it cannot , for the foreseeable future , accept any more members .
Although , as I point out in my report , it would , technically speaking , be perfectly possible to continue to accept new Member States , even if the Treaty of Lisbon were not to enter into force , doing so requires political will , and it is this that it is my job and that of my fellow Members here in Parliament to create .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to the European Parliament for organising this important discussion this afternoon .
I read with great interest the report of Anna Ibrisagic on future stability and prosperity in the Balkans and the draft resolution on Bosnia Herzegovina drawn up by Doris Pack .
The Council agrees with much that is said in the report and we share many of the opinions and concerns expressed in connection with the situation in Bosnia Herzegovina .
I would like to focus my introductory comments directly on Bosnia Herzegovina because stability there is vital for the future of the Western Balkans as a unit , and also because the current situation continues to cause concern .
The Council has been active both in formulating and implementing a strategy supporting the security and integrity of Bosnia Herzegovina , and in backing the reforms needed for ensuring a peaceful and prosperous future .
Therefore I cannot accept the assertion that the Council is not paying enough attention to Bosnia Herzegovina .
We all know that we are still living with the consequences of the tragic events of the 1990s , as Mrs Ibrisagic has also mentioned here .
Bosnia Herzegovina , which for decades was a symbol of peaceful coexistence of nations , cultures and religions became an area of devastating conflict .
Since then the EU 's policy has been to work on stability and reconciliation based on the promise of a European future for the entire Balkan region .
Despite this we are still frequently confronted with fiercely nationalistic rhetoric aimed at reinforcing national differences in Bosnia Herzegovina and at preventing national reconciliation .
The passage of time has not yet resolved these conflicts and neither has it healed wounds between the three nations that make up Bosnia Herzegovina .
It is nevertheless surprising that the nationalist rhetoric and opinions go together with the common interest of all Balkan communities and their political representatives in a European future for Bosnia Herzegovina .
The inhabitants of Bosnia Herzegovina are simply struggling for a safer life and prosperity .
They want to move ahead and they rely on their country becoming integrated into European and other structures as a guarantee of future stability .
Although local political leaders talk a lot about Bosnia Herzegovina 's future in the EU , it is difficult to see any real commitment to this agenda from their actions .
The conflict between interest in a more European orientation and nationalism creates a real risk that while the rest of the Western Balkan region moves forward , Bosnia Herzegovina will be left behind , bound up in its internal conflicts .
Concerns over such future developments in Bosnia Herzegovina have meant that the country remains at the top of our action agenda and the focus of constant attention .
Bosnia Herzegovina has been and continues to be the subject of intense negotiations at all levels of the Council .
The Commission and secretariat of the Council are developing their contacts with partners in the country in an effort to take the political process forwards and to help Bosnia Herzegovina keep in step with the rest of the region .
Member States are supplementing the European agenda through their own efforts at a bilateral level .
We also very much appreciate the attention given to Bosnia Herzegovina by this Parliament .
I would like to express my gratitude to the many MEPs here today who have supported all of the actions promoting stability and political maturity in Bosnia Herzegovina .
The EU continues to promote a European future for the whole region , including Bosnia Herzegovina .
However , fulfilling the criteria for EU accession demands considerable efforts .
It means developing a consensual approach and being prepared to make far-reaching changes .
This is not something that can be achieved overnight .
It amounts to nothing less than a complete political , economic and social transformation .
Bosnia Herzegovina must carry out significant changes to its internal structures and decision-making processes .
We are disappointed about the absence of progress within the framework of the Bosnian Council of Ministers and Parliamentary Assembly .
They are lagging far behind what is needed .
National bodies urgently need to be strengthened and improved on an operational level in a way that will start to bring real results , including substantial progress in EU-related programmes .
This is essential , because the EU can deal with Bosnia Herzegovina only as a whole , and not with its individual parts .
The priorities of the European partnership are also clear .
The Union is always prepared to help but it cannot and it will not take on tasks which belong to the politicians in Bosnia Herzegovina .
Despite the continuing nationalist political agendas , we realise that compromise and agreement are possible in Bosnia Herzegovina .
We saw this earlier in the adoption of the two police laws , for example , which prepared the ground for signing the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , or the solution of the Brcko issue , which marked the accomplishment of one of the essential objectives defined by the Council for Peace Implementation .
However , even in these cases , progress was always achieved and agreements were signed at the last minute and under considerable pressure from the international community .
A much more mature approach is required .
It is of the utmost importance that local political leaders behave responsibly , show some initiative and are aware who Bosnia Herzegovina really belongs to and who is really responsible for its future .
The inhabitants of Bosnia Herzegovina deserve a better result from the votes they cast in the ballot box .
This is an aspect which you , as politicians , can help to bolster more than anyone else .
Such a development would lead to a significant advance as far as the presence of the international community in Bosnia Herzegovina is concerned .
Change is essential .
So many years have passed since the signing of the peace agreement and Bosnia Herzegovina must now stand on its own two feet , abandon its " protectorate ” way of thinking and become a credible and fully-fledged state .
In order to achieve this aim , the Council for Peace Implementation , acting on behalf of the international community , drew up the list of five objectives and two conditions which Bosnia Herzegovina must fulfil before any change can be achieved .
This constitutes a real test of maturity and it is fully supported by the EU .
The 5 + 2 list is not just another catalogue of supplementary terms and conditions .
It is a carefully compiled list of requirements which are fundamental if Bosnia Herzegovina is to be transformed into a modern and fully-fledged state , allowing the presence of the Office of the High Representative to be brought to an end .
Every modern state needs a properly functioning legal system , effective taxation authorities , the resolution of all issues connected with government assets and equal access to a constitutional court for all citizens .
We have already welcomed many times last November 's Prud declaration by the three political leaders in which they made a commitment to work together in supporting the development of Bosnia Herzegovina .
We support the agreements which have been achieved and we urge the political representatives to continue their efforts with a view to the next meeting of the Council for Peace Implementation 's management committee , which will take place at the end of June .
I firmly believe that unresolved issues relating to government assets can be resolved and should not become an obstacle to a solution .
However , initiatives at a political level require broader support .
For this reason I would like to urge society as a whole in Bosnia Herzegovina to become part of the reform effort .
The role of the media in particular should be more constructive .
The mission of the EU is clear .
It is supremely important for the political leadership in Bosnia Herzegovina to cooperate even more closely in order to overcome historical differences and to lead their country towards closer integration with Europe .
The EU will always be willing to help in this effort which is essential not only for Bosnia Herzegovina itself but also for the broader stability and security of the region .
I know that in this process we can count on the support of members of this Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , I remain grateful to you for this support .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am glad that the Western Balkans are back on the European Parliament 's agenda this week .
In recent years a steady stabilisation in the region has taken place , not least thanks to the region 's European perspective , with the ultimate goal being EU membership once the conditions have been met by every country .
Croatia 's negotiations are quite far advanced .
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is a candidate looking forward to opening its negotiations , and we have a network of Stabilisation and Association Agreements in place .
Stability in Kosovo was maintained throughout last year 's important developments .
We must not put these achievements at risk through any kind of complacency or distraction by other - sometimes perhaps more urgent - matters .
Many will have questions about EU enlargement in the middle of an economic crisis , and discussions are likely to intensify as we approach the next elections for this Parliament .
This is understandable and I , for one , feel the pain of our citizens concerning their future , jobs and welfare .
At the same time , let us not make EU enlargement a scapegoat for something it is not responsible for .
We should not make it a scapegoat for our own domestic economic and social problems .
Therefore , a well-informed public debate is essential to keep us all engaged and making progress in this important region .
There have been calls for consolidation of the European Union .
This is exactly what we have been doing for the past years since the renewed consensus on enlargement which was adopted by the European Council and endorsed by the European Parliament in December 2006 .
The key of this renewed consensus is not to take on new commitments but to stick to the existing commitments and respect them .
In other words , if the countries of the Western Balkans fulfil the established conditions , they can move towards EU membership .
In this context , I very much welcome Mrs Ibrisagic 's report .
It rightly emphasises the fundamental importance of offering the Western Balkans a European future .
It is the main driving force of much-needed reform and greater stability in the Western Balkans .
Ten years after the horrific events in Kosovo , we should remind ourselves of the power of the European perspective .
It still helps today to consolidate stability and peace in a region that is , effectively , our own front yard - not back yard , but front yard .
We cannot take a sabbatical from our work for peace and stability in the continent .
While the European Union pursues its own institutional reform , we need to keep on working in parallel on a carefully managed and gradual accession process in the Western Balkans that strengthens both the institutions and civil society there .
The accession negotiations with Croatia have , until recently , been going well .
This is why the Commission proposed , in November 2008 , an indicative road map to reach the final stage of accession negotiations by the end of 2009 , provided Croatia fulfils the conditions .
There is still plenty of work to do , and many reforms need to be stepped up by Croatia .
Unfortunately , the negotiations are currently blocked because of the border dispute between Croatia and Slovenia .
This is a bilateral issue which has de facto become a European problem .
Since January , working closely with the Czech Presidency and the trio of the Czech , French and Swedish Governments , I have taken the initiative to help facilitate a solution .
The aim is to find a solution to the border issue and allow for the continuation of Croatia 's EU accession negotiations .
This is still work in progress and we have needed a great deal of patience and determination to keep up the momentum and progress .
We had a full day of talks yesterday with the foreign ministers of Slovenia and Croatia , as well as of the trio countries .
I want to believe that we are close to finding a way forward and overcoming these obstacles so that we can continue Croatia 's EU accession negotiations shortly .
Concerning the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , I welcome the overall satisfactory conduct of the presidential and municipal elections .
Over the past months we have insisted on the importance of these elections for the country 's European future .
The country has responded positively to our message , thus confirming its willingness to move forward in its accession process .
However , the key priorities for reform should not be forgotten .
It is indeed now time to step up efforts in order to meet the benchmarks which have been set for the opening of accession negotiations .
I would like to thank Doris Pack for her motion and welcome the opportunity to discuss Bosnia and Herzegovina with you today , at a very crucial moment .
Last year , Bosnia and Herzegovina made progress on the path of European integration , especially through the signature of the SAA and the entry into force of the interim agreement .
There have been positive developments in recent months as well , including the Prud Agreement , progress on the Brcko issue and steps towards a census in 2011 .
Also , the implementation of the SAA interim agreement is broadly on track .
While we need to be firm on the fulfilment of the ' 5 + 2 ' conditions for the closure of the Office of the High Representative , there is now a possibility that they could met in the coming months .
Recent steps towards the establishment of a state property inventory are also positive in this regard .
However , here , as for the rest of the region , there is no room for complacency .
Overall reform has remained slow , including on the key EU priorities , and challenges remain .
Nationalist rhetoric is still very present , creating unnecessary political tensions .
This needs to change if Bosnia and Herzegovina wants to continue its progress towards the European Union and avoid falling behind its neighbours .
The Serbian Government remains committed to advancing on its European agenda , and there have been a number of positive developments recently .
It will be essential , however , as the country is increasingly feeling the negative effects of the global financial crisis , that key reform measures are not overlooked .
The process of structural adjustment must continue and the country needs to follow through its commitments , particularly in the area of judiciary and the rule of law .
We are currently examining ways in which to alleviate the impact of the financial crisis , working closely together with my colleague , Joaquín Almunia .
For instance , we are looking at our IPA programme , for which we are considering converting part of the 2009 national envelope into direct budgetary support , also with the support of the international financial institutions .
We appreciate Parliament 's sustained support for the EU 's efforts in Kosovo , which remains a European priority and central to regional stability .
The European Council has repeatedly confirmed that Kosovo shares a European perspective with the rest of the Western Balkans .
The Council has asked the Commission to use Community instruments to promote economic and political development and to propose measures to advance in that direction .
This autumn , the Commission will present a study to this effect .
We shall examine how Kosovo can progress as part of the wider region towards integration with the European Union in the context of the stabilisation and association process .
Finally , looking at 2009 overall and the Western Balkans region as a whole , there has been quite good progress in the area of visa liberalisation , which proves to my mind that , when the incentives are right , the countries respond with effective reforms .
This is most likely the single EU policy area that matters most to the ordinary people - the ordinary citizens - of the Western Balkans .
We hope to table a proposal for visa-free travel by the end of the Czech Presidency for those countries that are most advanced in this field and have fulfilled the established conditions .
This could enable decisions by the Council to achieve visa-free travel for the most advanced countries by the end of 2009 .
Dear friends , I count on your support on this essential visa issue as well as , more broadly , on the European perspective of the Western Balkans .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( NL ) In its opinion in Mrs Ibrisagic 's praiseworthy report , the Committee on International Trade underscores the importance of a tangible prospect of EU membership for the political and economic development of the Western Balkan states .
Given that it is possible to observe a monopolistic market power in essential economic sectors in the region , such a situation erects a twofold obstacle , certainly when this goes hand in hand with party political ties .
Internal development is stagnating and European businesses are staying away .
The prime example of this is the unimpeded rise of Delta Holding in Serbia , with its influential director Miroslav Mišković as the ' octopus ' at its head .
The Commissioner met him back in October .
I ask the Commission , what countermeasures have you taken so far vis-à-vis Belgrade ?
Back in May 2007 , a leaked report from the US embassy there had called for an urgent end to Delta Holding 's monopoly , both in Serbia 's own interests and for the sake of the country 's European integration .
The Commissioner spoke of an engine of development .
I must say that there is a great deal of sand in that Serbian engine .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the autumn of last year , we gave up all hope that , following the so-called Prud Agreement between the representatives of the three main parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina on joint political steps in numerous political fields , something really would change in political life .
Where are we today ?
For the most part they were empty promises which , on closer inspection , evaporated into thin air .
The ethnic division in Bosnia and Herzegovina has deepened .
The lack of trust has increased .
People are being manipulated through irresponsible policies based on purely ethnic criteria , instead of the real problems being tackled .
Everyone in Bosnia and Herzegovina needs the chance of a good education , everyone needs a good judicial system , they need jobs ; in short they need the hope of a better future .
The EU has been helping this country for years with a great deal of money and with manpower , but they obviously also need state administration structures which can take up and use these .
I would like to mention three important points .
The question of state ownership must be resolved .
Constitutional reform must be tackled on the basis of a broad political and social consensus .
Only the entire state of Bosnia and Herzegovina can accede to the European Union .
The road map for visa liberalisation must be completed .
The citizens , like their politicians , want to be able to travel freely .
So the politicians should ensure that the green light is given at the end of this year .
Every citizen needs a functioning judicial system , not one that dispenses one sort of justice in one case and another in another .
Frustration is spreading everywhere .
Civil society urgently needs to have a stronger voice in all areas , in order to remind the politicians of their job .
However , it is difficult to come out of cover , because the party political network extends over the entire country .
The few jobs which may be on offer depend on the goodwill of the parties .
We wish the High Representative the best of luck in untying the Gordian knot of the politicians ' passivity , laissez-faire and laissez-aller , so that peace and stability can finally return and the people 's future becomes rosier than it is at present .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I should like to thank both rapporteurs on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
Good reports have again been produced here and will have broad support .
I should like to pick up on what Commissioner Rehn said , because it seems to me that it was the most important message in today 's debate ; namely , that the process of the integration , the rapprochement of the countries of southeast Europe should not be interrupted , not only in the interests of these countries , but also in our own interest .
The Commissioner said that you need to be realistic in the Commission .
Perhaps in this Parliament we could be a bit more idealistic but , in the final analysis , we too must be realistic .
It is a long and difficult road and the objective will not be achieved overnight .
That is why the comments which I hear from a few people , along the lines of ' let Croatia join and that will put an end to it for some time ' , are the wrong signal .
Nothing that Mrs Pack called for and rightly demanded will come about if people there have the feeling that , come what may , they are not welcome in this European Union and their accession will be dragged out anyway .
The second point is that we must say loud and clear that the bilateral problems which currently concern us , at least the procedure , the process , should be resolved in the same way as bilateral questions ; in future , they should be dealt with before negotiations commence , so that they do not encumber the entire negotiation procedure .
Thirdly , what the minister said is also very important .
We cannot do the work of the politicians and the people in the country for them .
The people in the country need to do their own work .
As Doris Pack said , the political forces must resolve their own problems .
That will then open the path to the European Union and this path must depend on the performance of these countries and not on our willingness .
Our willingness must be there .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , the main thrust of Mrs Ibrisagic 's resolution on the Western Balkans is perfectly clear .
She has emphasised the correlation between reforms in the region and the countries ' likelihood of accession to the EU .
This is the dynamic that we applied so marvellously during the last major enlargement of the EU .
The resolution identifies a number of practical areas where these countries could improve their performance , as well as the many notorious problems besetting the region .
However , for me it is equally important today to point out to these countries , their politicians and peoples that they must keep their side of the bargain .
They , too , must take an active part in the process , because it is not just the European Union that is expected to come up with the goods .
In addition , the integration process must also be promoted from within these countries .
What this means is that they must combat corruption and crime and create a strong civil society and knowledge-based economies and societies .
That is the process we would like to see taking place , so that we may look forward to all countries of the Western Balkans becoming fully-fledged members of the European Union one day , which will be the foundation of ensuring peace , security and cooperation - in that part of Europe , too .
Mr President , there is no question of us approving such a report .
Firstly , its constant references to the Treaty of Lisbon are unacceptable , as this treaty has not been ratified and , no doubt , never will be .
You have to face up to it : the enterprise aimed at introducing pure and perfect supranationality , launched eight years ago by the great Giscard convention , has well and truly been aborted .
Above all , we are unable to accept the ironic tone of a report whose very title , ' Consolidating stability and prosperity in the Western Balkans ' , is stupefyingly hypocritical .
A stupefying report , in fact , which , with the obvious intention of preparing for the accession of new countries , notably Bosnia , so-called Macedonia , Albania , and - why not ? - Kosovo too , speaks as if the current situation in the Balkans were stable , completely ignoring the terrible game being played by two major powers , the United States and Germany , which have painstakingly participated in the political break-up of the whole region .
To achieve this break-up , I would remind you that NATO forces went so far as to bomb Belgrade , the capital city of a European state .
The forthcoming tenth anniversary of this sinister episode will , of course , be passed over in silence , but I am determined to recall it here .
Kosovo is the symbol of this enterprise of political break-up .
It is easy to see the advantage that these powers may gain from such an area of lawlessness , open to all sorts of trafficking and , being at the heart of our continent , such an appropriate place , of course , to install military bases .
However , Kosovo reveals the true face of a policy aimed at the balkanisation of Europe .
This is a Europe in the German style , a Europe of regions or ethnic groups , this Europe with a hundred flags which , by eliminating the States , will gradually eliminate the popular wills in order to disarm the peoples and deliver them up to oligarchies of every hue .
The report passes over all that in silence .
It is in silence , under cover of the usual shroud of good intentions , that Europe is being balkanised and neutralised to the point where it disappears from history .
It is , however , history that will judge all of that .
In the meantime , ladies and gentlemen , I shall leave you to your works .
Mr President , the Ibrisagic report of course emphasises that stability in the Western Balkans is our major priority .
In fact , in my opinion , EU membership is the glue which binds the region together in peace and stability .
We still expect Croatia to be the next country to join the EU , if Slovenia settles its border dispute , unless of course tiny Iceland is fast-tracked in beforehand .
However , in reality things are slightly more tricky , with post-Dayton Bosnia and Herzegovina still far from becoming a true nation and with Greece blocking Macedonia 's progress over the name issue .
Added to this we have the credit crunch and German and French general objections to any further enlargement without the Lisbon Treaty being ratified , though in my view this is merely a pretext to stop all enlargement .
The decision by many EU countries and the US to recognise Kosovo as an independent country has also created new dividing lines in a region that has suffered so grievously from division in the past .
We know already that Kosovo is unable to join the EU , as some Member States will not recognise it , and there is a similar story about joining the UN .
In contrast , neighbouring Serbia , Montenegro and Macedonia are progressing slowly towards eventual EU membership .
Thus Kosovo could end up as an isolated enclave , deprived of EU membership but bankrolled by EU taxpayers for decades to come .
The attempt to solve an issue by international unilateral fiat has caused more problems than it has solved , especially in the region itself .
A more balanced and measured approach could have ultimately enabled the people of Kosovo to enjoy the benefits of EU membership .
Patience in all matters is a virtue , not least in foreign policy .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , even in a time of economic crisis the EU must not forget the commitment it made to the countries of the Western Balkans in terms of future EU expansion .
Therefore I welcome this debate and the clear confirmation of the commitment to future expansion .
European integration is in the vital interests of all the inhabitants of Bosnia and Herzegovina , the country we are paying special attention to in today 's debate .
In this context it is necessary to state that the promise of EU membership was offered to Bosnia and Herzegovina as one country and not to its constituent parts .
For this reason - and we have repeated this many times here - the effective reforms required for entry into the EU must be implemented .
The constitutional reform of Bosnia and Herzegovina should result in the existence of a functioning centralised state with the appropriate legislative , budgetary , executive and judicial powers enabling it to maintain a functioning single market , to pursue political , economic and social cohesion and to defend the country 's interests abroad including , one day , as a member of the EU .
I would like to end by calling on the countries of Western Balkans , the Council and the Commission to increase their efforts to abolish the visa regime .
Visa-free contacts and the free movement of persons would be a great help to the Western Balkan countries on their path to EU membership .
( NL ) I will only go into the subject of Bosnia and the resolution by Mrs Pack that we will be very pleased to support tomorrow .
Talking about Bosnia is always frustrating , and I am pleased that the Commissioner has also been able to mention a few positive points with regard to developments in Bosnia .
Nevertheless , you sometimes wonder whether the glass is half full or half empty .
I even wonder at times where the glass is , when it comes to Bosnia .
Mr Swoboda has just said that a problem with developments there is that one has the feeling that , no matter what changes are made there , the country will still not accede to the Union .
Yet when I speak with people there , I get exactly the opposite impression , namely that they are saying , ' Even if we change nothing , we will still join because they want to have us there so badly ' .
Whichever of the two misconceptions we are talking about , we must get rid of them both .
If reforms are made there and if people get down to working on a respectable legal system and on combating bureaucracy , then a European future is realistic , but if that does not happen , then it is not .
This message must be communicated clearly , and it seems to me that Mrs Pack 's resolution succeeds superbly in doing just that .
( FR ) Mr President , stability and prosperity in the Balkans , that is one objective - that is the objective - because behind all this is the question of peace in our area .
Yes , the accession process is a tool , but it should not slowly turn into Penelope 's shroud , where we unravel at night that which we have woven during the day .
The Balkans ' natural vocation is to join the European Union .
That is a clear political will ; that is a light which , especially for the people , constitutes a signal .
I am not talking about enlargement , but what is needed , above all , is to encourage the integration of the countries and the regions in the Balkans .
Yes , we need to show that we are demanding , that we demand democracy and justice , but to use these demands continuously to reject integration is , in my view , a basic political error .
I cite as proof these issues , among others , of bilateral conflicts .
We have to agree - and this appears in the report - a process for settling bilateral problems , but without for all that blocking the accession process .
That is one way to build and to rebuild our European Union , enlarged to include all the Balkan countries .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to thank Commissioner Rehn for giving us an overview of the Western Balkans again today .
I have just returned from Macedonia and Kosovo and should like to address three points .
The first is the disunity of the European Union .
If it persists in the common foreign and security policy , we shall have no stability and no overcoming of ethnic divides in the Balkans .
Secondly , the strategy of the German conservatives in the CDU has dropped on the Balkans like a bomb as it were , because it divests the European perspective of credibility and , if the European election campaign is fought like that , there will again be conflict in the Balkans .
Thirdly , and this is why we should act now , not only to maintain the perspective , but also to make it realisable : Greece must lift the blockade in NATO to Macedonia 's membership and we must unite in recognising the independence of Kosovo , otherwise our EULEX mission will suffer .
( NL ) Bosnia and Herzegovina is in actual fact a pocket-sized Yugoslavia , a federation in which different peoples must choose between living together peacefully or battling out internal conflicts over the territory .
Since Yugoslavia fell apart in 1992 , attempts have been made to turn Bosnia and Herzegovina into a unitary state , but to no avail .
I expect this will not be possible in the near or distant future .
Agreement among the three peoples and their political leaders on effective governance is possible only when nobody feels threatened any more by the others or by the outside world .
Only when the EU 's High Representative and foreign soldiers have withdrawn from this country will a compromise be possible .
Until then , the stagnation will persist .
Therefore I am not voting in favour of the proposed resolution on this country , which can only lead to the continuation of the protectorate and thus of stagnation .
We must bear in mind that Bosnia and Herzegovina is inhabited principally by three peoples , none of whom constitutes a majority in that country and some of whom feel connected to Serbia , a part with Croatia , while others want to stress a specifically Bosnian identity .
We must take that into account .
( BG ) Mr President , it is a pleasure for me to be participating in the discussion of this document , which highlights that the best basis for the future of all the countries in the region is their full integration as Member States of the European Union .
The Balkans has been and always will be a European region .
Promoting cooperation at regional level should also be one of the European Union 's fundamental policies .
I want to focus attention here on the need to support interparliamentary dialogue at regional level as an important element in the process of European integration .
The EU Member States in the region can play an important role in this process .
Support for the activities of the Regional Centre for Cooperation is particularly important , which is successfully continuing and upholding the policies and principles of the Stability Pact for turning the Western Balkans region into an area of security and stability .
I support the lifting of the visa regime as an important step towards the integration of the Western Balkans .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for a very useful debate .
I am also delighted that the EU Member States have given their general backing to the idea of visa liberalisation with the West Balkan countries .
I would like to express my wholehearted agreement here with the statement of Mr Rouček , who made a very powerful appeal in this regard , as the strengthening of personal contacts between citizens of West Balkan countries and citizens of the EU is surely a positive step which will help to overcome the sense of isolation that some of these states feel and which will help create a Europe without barriers .
I also firmly believe that the economic crisis we find ourselves in today must not become an excuse for slowing down the expansion process , as speakers such as Mr Rouček have also said here .
On the contrary , it is particularly important for the stability of the region that the process does not lose momentum .
I am also delighted that progress has been achieved in negotiations over Montenegro 's application to join the EU , which the Council has just handed over to the Commission for drafting .
The presidency considers this step to be a very important signal to the whole region .
We also consider the unblocking of the accession talks with Croatia to be important .
We consider it unhelpful for the expansion agenda to be burdened with bilateral issues .
Progress over European integration with Serbia continues to be a challenge and it is conditional upon full cooperation with the relevant international tribunal , including the arrest and handover of the remaining accused .
The presidency is working hard for the provisional agreement on trade and commercial matters to be applied from the EU side as well for the ratification process of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement signed last year to begin .
The importance of the stabilisation and association process for reform in Serbia and for supporting the predominantly pro-European government is beyond dispute .
The presidential and local elections in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia have met most of the international standards and generally recognised conditions for the free and democratic conduct of elections .
However , it is clear that without a solution to the bilateral dispute over the country 's name its progress down the path to candidate status will remain minimal .
As far as Bosnia and Herzegovina is concerned , the country must move forward .
Dependency on the international community is not helpful but rather erodes the principle of responsibility and takes responsibility away from local politicians , as Mr Swoboda so rightly pointed out here .
I would like to take this opportunity to call on the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to join forces actively with the aim of leading their country towards a better future .
It is counterproductive to go back to politics based on ethnic principles , as Doris Pack so aptly put it .
The planned transfer from an Office of the High Representative to a strengthened Office of the Special Representative of the EU does not mean that either the international community or the EU is quitting Bosnia and Herzegovina .
On the contrary , the EU is there to help and it is fully aware of the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina is not just another candidate but is actually a very specific case with very sensitive issues and problems .
As part of its strategy the EU is planning to create an office and a policy for peace and it will be ready to take over all coordination activities from the international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
However , we will do that only when Bosnia and Herzegovina itself demonstrates that it is ready for such a significant qualitative change .
The first major step towards Europe was taken with the signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , but that was just the beginning .
We are prepared to continue providing assistance in this unavoidably long process .
2009 is an important year and it could be decisive for Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Firstly , the transfer from an Office of the High Representative to an Office of the Special Representative of the EU is within reach .
It represents a significant step away from dependency for Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Secondly , the period after the next general elections in 2010 should be fully utilised for the promotion of the essential reform agenda , including constitutional reform , as Mrs Pack correctly pointed out .
Thirdly , the entire region is moving forward .
Bosnia and Herzegovina simply cannot be allowed to remain behind .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to end with something we all want .
We want Bosnia and Herzegovina to achieve progress .
We appreciate the support we receive towards reaching this objective from the honourable Members of the European Parliament .
Commission . - ( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank everyone for this responsible debate and their support for the European perspective of the Western Balkans .
I share the concern expressed in this discussion by Members such as Mrs Pack , Mr Swoboda and Mr Maaten regarding the political development of Bosnia and Herzegovina .

At times it seems as if Bosnia and Herzegovina has an unfailing ability to create and actually renew political tensions , even though common sense dictates that we should be expecting improved developments to move in another direction and political reconciliation to find a place in the political future of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
I agree with Mr Maaten that all the countries of the Western Balkans share the view that one day they will be able to join the European Union if they meet the conditions of Union membership , based as they are on the Copenhagen criteria .
This is also true of Bosnia and Herzegovina ; in the case of the conditions that apply to them , there will be no shortcuts or bargain discounts , and if anyone assumes there will , he or she is wrong .
It is very important that this proper way of thinking gains a firm foothold in Bosnia and Herzegovina 's own political debate , so that its citizens can draw their own conclusions about what sort of policy they have the right to expect from democratically elected politicians .
I see Bosnia and Herzegovina 's future as follows , and my view is based on collaboration with Javier Solana , with whom we have produced several communications on the country 's future and the role of the European Union there .
Firstly , our aim is to move away from the Dayton era to the Brussels era , that is , from the era of the international community 's High Representative to the European Union 's reinforced presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
That also probably means the ' two hat ' system in the case of the EU Special Representative and Head of the European Commission Representation , so that we can exploit the political and economic resources the European Union has in the best possible way .
Obviously , a protectorate cannot apply for EU membership , and for that reason this transition is an organic ingredient , a vital element in Bosnia and Herzegovina 's closer relations with the European Union , and it is because of that too that it is in the interests of politicians in the country and its citizens in particular that the terms and conditions of this process of change are met .
This issue also has political importance , because it is too easy to blame the international community for Bosnia and Herzegovina 's problems , when people do not want to look in the mirror .
It is too easy to blame the High Representative when you should be negotiating and trying to reach agreement with your fellow countrymen and women .
I hope that in this respect Bosnia and Herzegovina 's political culture will improve and mature and that the country 's media will also take responsibility for ensuring that negative , nationalistic language does not get any more space than is the case at the present time in the country .
Secondly , the country needs to reform its constitution , in order for it to be able to build a viable system of government .
At the moment , Bosnia and Herzegovina 's system of government is too costly , too ineffective and simply incompatible with membership of the European Union .
Accordingly , the constitution needs to be reformed - through evolution , not revolution - and I am pleased that there are some signs that leading politicians are discussing matters along these lines .
Thirdly and lastly , visa waiver is a crucial part of Bosnia and Herzegovina 's future in Europe , and I am sure that , thus equipped , the country will be able to enter the European mainstream , which will surely be in the interests of the country itself , its citizens , and the European Union too .

rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Nečas for his engagement in this debate here this evening .
I would also like to thank Mr Rehn for raising the bilateral disputes which have become de facto European problems and for stressing how important it is for us not to sacrifice enlargement as a result of the financial crisis .
Bilateral disputes are currently holding back Croatia 's and Macedonia 's chances of continuing along the path to EU membership as they implement the necessary reforms .
With my report , the European Parliament will add its voice to the chorus of those insisting that bilateral disputes must remain precisely that - bilateral - and not be confused with the accession process .
Finally , I would like to say that I believe that enlargement to the Western Balkans is too important for peace , freedom and prosperity on our own continent for us to jeopardise it .
This is the message that I would like my report to send out to the 500 million Europeans who are soon to choose a new Parliament , to the governments of the Member States , to the Commission and to the people and politicians in the Western Balkans .
It is a message that is particularly important to send out at a time when the economic crisis is in danger of leading to ever more people and politicians in Europe wanting to close the door behind themselves and not allow any more people to live , work and trade where they want to on our continent .
I also hope , therefore , that this is a message that my fellow Members of this Parliament will take out with them in the forthcoming election campaign .
If Europe has become colder and more inward-looking , then it is a priority task for us in this House to work to make it welcoming and open once again .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Friday 24 April 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The Western Balkans region is a special case among the countries which the European Union is close to .
It is a region facing numerous challenges , where many more phases still need to be gone through before the integration process can be completed .
However , it is a region whose prospects for joining the EU are clear and unambiguous .
Both my fellow Members and I wanted to ensure that this resolution confirms this fact in principle and in the details of the EU 's interaction with the countries in the area .
We are concerned , as I highlighted in my amendments , about a number of issues : the visa regime , the process for informing citizens about the EU , economic cooperation with the states in the Western Balkans , minorities ' rights , study programmes in the EU for young people from the region , as well as strengthening interparliamentary dialogue even before these states join the EU .
We believe that the process of European unification can continue at citizen level when it has been slowed down at institutional level .
I also believe that , looking at things from this perspective , we can let our concern for the region 's stability to continue to be conveyed in practical ways other than through rhetoric , or from a historical viewpoint .
in writing . - ( HU ) The European Union 's enlargement policy is the best instrument available for preserving stability and the prevailing peace in the Western Balkans region .
We hope that we will be able to welcome Croatia in 2011 , during the Hungarian Presidency , but this depends on Croatia finally agreeing with Slovenia on initiating bilateral talks with international mediation , regarding the division of the Bay of Piran .
The purpose of the talks on the Bay of Piran is to resolve the ongoing border dispute between the two countries , without which Croatia will certainly not be able to become a member of the Community .
A further condition is that Croatia also cooperates fully with the International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague in searching for and extraditing war criminals .
Non-proliferation and the future of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons ( NPT ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Beer , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , which contains :
a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on non-proliferation and the future of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons ( NPT ) .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the existence of thousands of nuclear weapons is the most dangerous legacy of the Cold War .
These are not my words ; they are taken from the speech given by President Obama in Prague recently on the biggest threat facing us .
No other issue is more crucial to security in the 21st century .
We have heard similar words in recent years , for example from US strategists Kissinger and Sam Nunn , who have set out a specific path to a world without nuclear weapons .
High-ranking European politicians have joined in and even the UN Secretary General has set out a 5-point disarmament plan .
It has never been a better time to finally start talking once again about nuclear disarmament .
In recent years , let us not forget , there have only been setbacks .
Negotiations at the NPT Review Conference in 2005 were a disaster .
This must not be repeated next year .
We Europeans must demonstrate now that we are serious about disarmament .
If the EU moves forward , it can set the standard , which is why I completely fail to understand why the majority in this House obviously does not want to support these ambitious aims of reducing weapons of mass destruction .
The plethora of proposed amendments by the conservative group in the Committee on Foreign Affairs turned my report and its aim of talking about disarmament and tabling a recommendation to the Council on its head and turned it into a limp rag of a text .
As Parliament we have a responsibility to take a stand now and we cannot relegate it to a later date or to other parliaments .
We are lobbying for support for the Nuclear Weapons Convention and the Hiroshima-Nagasaki Protocol , because disarmament is possible .
It is not some stupid , far-off illusion .
We can do it , if we force the issue .
The documents that we want do not conflict with the NPT ; they plug a hole in the NPT and hence strengthen it .
We need a clear political statement and that is my call to all the groups for tomorrow 's vote : to reconsider today what is the right way forward .
I know that the NPT also comprises civil elements , but we are not talking today about the renaissance of civil nuclear power ; we are talking about nuclear disarmament .
As chairman of the delegation for relations with Iran and spokeswoman on foreign policy , I would also say that anyone who has not learned from the Iran crisis over recent years , which has often put us in danger of military escalation , that the civil use of nuclear power cannot be divorced from military abuse and proliferation , has failed to understand the entire foreign policy of recent years , the dangers and our nuclear disarmament challenge .
We all know that our objective cannot be achieved overnight , but we need to make a start .
We cannot spend decades demanding nuclear disarmament of the Americans - with full unanimity - and now , when President Obama says he is prepared to do so , where President Medvedev says he is prepared to do so , a conservative majority in this Parliament refuses to follow this path .
That is why I should like to urge you once again in all earnestness , as instructed by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , not to confuse the question of the civil use of nuclear power with a revival of the potential for nuclear disarmament .
Anyone who shuts this window of opportunity for nuclear disarmament will not be in a position to say when another one will open .
I would ask anyone who votes tomorrow against the PSE 's and our proposed amendments to tell his voters in the electoral campaign why he thinks nuclear weapons in Europe are a good thing .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to be able to participate in today 's debate .
I would especially like to thank the European Parliament for the interest it has shown in this question and Angelika Beer for her work as rapporteur in drawing up this interesting report .
The Council will definitely study the recommendations contained in the report carefully .
As the report states clearly , it is important to achieve further progress on non-proliferation .
One of the main priorities is to secure a positive and concrete outcome from next year 's Non-Proliferation Treaty review conference .
The forthcoming May meeting of the Non-Proliferation Treaty preparatory committee is an important preparatory step for this conference .
The EU will continue to make a positive contribution to the review process in accordance with its non-proliferation strategy for weapons of mass destruction and in accordance with the recent declaration on strengthening international security adopted by the Council in December 2008 .
We have an interest in a balanced review aimed at maintaining the overall equilibrium which is the basis of the nuclear non-proliferation regime , and which gives equal importance to all three pillars of the Non-Proliferation Treaty , i.e. non-proliferation , disarmament and exploitation for peaceful purposes .
We believe the review conference can succeed only through a balanced approach .
The EU is aware of the new opportunities for the Non-Proliferation Treaty , especially in connection with the renewal of dialogue between Russia and the US and the renewed commitment to implement the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and to begin international discussions on a credible treaty restricting the production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons .
The EU is also observing with interest the renewed public debate on how to achieve the objectives outlined in the Non-Proliferation Treaty .
One of the reasons for the importance of the review process is the fact that the NPT regime is facing serious problems .
These problems come mainly from North Korea , Iran and Syria .
We must deal with them and resolve them by strengthening the mechanism for monitoring adherence .
As we all know , the EU is active in this area and together with its partners continues to play a leading role , especially in the effort to find a diplomatic solution to the Iran nuclear issue .
As the report states , in addition to the issue of non-proliferation we must also focus on the issue of nuclear disarmament .
We are determined to play a key role in this important area .
The EU is fully intent on promoting nuclear disarmament and thus achieving the objectives of Article 6 of the NPT .
This topic has particular importance for the EU , two of whose Member States possess nuclear weapons .
We call on the international community to join us in promoting the concrete , realistic disarmament initiatives which the EU submitted to the UN General Assembly in 2008 .
At the same time we must deal with the nuclear energy issue .
It is important that the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes should carry on under conditions of maximum security , safety and non-proliferation .
The EU is prepared to strengthen international cooperation in this area both in the context of the next NPT Review Conference and also in other forums .
Multilateral approaches to nuclear fuel supplies in particular can offer a reliable alternative to the development of individual national programmes in the area of sensitive nuclear technology .
We must make the multilateral mechanisms for nuclear fuel supply more attractive , especially for developing countries , as an increasing number of these countries are considering launching nuclear energy programmes .
The report correctly emphasises the importance of ratifying the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty .
The EU places particular importance on progress over ratification and it will pursue progress in order to achieve this objective .
The Presidency has conducted high level visits to the nine countries whose ratification remains essential in order for the treaty to come into force .
We are working for a successful conference to be held under Article 14 of the treaty in New York in September 2009 in order to support the treaty coming into force .
The EU is an important contributor in the development of a treaty monitoring system and is thereby reinforcing the credibility of the treaty 's future verification system .
We also believe that it would be very beneficial to try to commence talks over a credible Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty .
The positive approach recently taken by the US towards the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty and in the area of nuclear disarmament is very encouraging .
We genuinely believe that this approach will lead in the near future to certain very concrete measures .
Generally speaking , this new opportunity may play a significant role in moving the NPT review process in the right direction .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction has arisen as a serious challenge in recent years , and the international community must be ready to face those challenges with conviction and to tackle them resolutely .
In our view , there has been some progress with the new US Administration in the context of the negotiations on the Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) , and positive dynamics on arms control between Russia and the United States should clear the path for a new momentum on nuclear issues .
For the European Union , the NPT is based on three mutually reinforcing pillars : non-proliferation , disarmament and the peaceful use of nuclear energy .
Ms Beer 's report on nuclear non-proliferation gives me a welcome opportunity to describe the Community 's responsibilities and activities under these three pillars .
Under the Euratom Treaty the Commission is responsible for verifying that fissile nuclear materials , like plutonium , uranium and thorium , are not diverted from their intended uses , as declared by the Community users , whether in the nuclear industry or others , like research centres and medical institutes .
The Commission is currently developing an action plan on how best to address chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear terrorism threats .
This policy will be put forward in the middle of this year , with recommendations on further strengthening a culture of safety and security among the 27 Member States .
Moreover , the EU export control system is another key component of our weapons of mass destruction prevention policy .
The Commission action on non-proliferation and disarmament does not stop at the frontiers of the Union .
With the new Instrument for Stability and the Nuclear Safety Instrument - together taking up almost EUR 1 billion of the financial perspective - there is an opportunity for the Commission to enhance its worldwide contribution to non-proliferation by promoting security and safety throughout the world in the coming years .
The purpose of the Community instruments is to develop complete programmes of threat reduction that will offer to third countries a full range of possible cooperation on export control , border monitoring , maritime surveillance , redirection of scientists , bioscience and nuclear safety .
The logic of coherent programmes is very much in line with the G8 Global Partnership goals that were defined in 2002 , where the Commission committed EUR 1 billion for the 10-year period 2002-2013 .
Finally , initiatives to build a new model for civil nuclear cooperation should also be encouraged so that countries can get access to nuclear energy without increasing the risks of proliferation .
The international fuel bank of IAEA , to which the Commission plans to contribute EUR 20 million , is a step in the right direction , provided we can explain the rationale that supports such a programme .
In conclusion , the Commission is working quite hard in supporting all three pillars of the Non-Proliferation Treaty , and , indeed , both the time and the international climate are ripe for change in the way we handle nuclear issues .
The Commission stands ready to work with others and seize the great opportunities before us and to strive to create a safer and more secure world also in this regard .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( CS ) The name of US President Obama will be on everyone 's lips today , particularly in connection with his speech in Prague on 5 April .
However , our aim is not to evaluate the approach of the new US administration but to give recommendations to the Council , which is drafting the EU position on the future of the nuclear non-proliferation regime .
Our Parliament will be taken seriously in this debate only if it promotes a solution which is clear but realistic in all aspects .
The recipe of our political group is therefore to use all available international instruments rather than to create new ones .
This involves strengthening all three closely linked pillars of the Non-Proliferation Treaty , in other words nuclear disarmament , non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and peaceful cooperation in the area of nuclear technology .
It is therefore important to support realistic disarmament initiatives , which include clear procedures for monitoring and verification , in terms of destroying existing weapons as well as their production facilities .
In relation to strengthening the pillar of cooperation in the peaceful use of nuclear technology we also wholeheartedly support internationalising the uranium enrichment cycle , particularly through the creation of an International Fuel Bank .
I am delighted that the result of the vote in committee clearly reflects our position .
I am sure that after President Obama 's speech there will be nothing to change concerning the committee 's results .
The US president confirmed that the path ahead of us will be long , requiring more realism than naivety , and that nothing is more important than concrete , feasible steps .
However , in talks with the new US administration we are facing an important and at the same time difficult task .
We must insist that these issues should not be decided only by the largest nuclear powers , over the heads of the EU .
This is a great challenge for European diplomacy .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Beer on an excellent and timely report .
This is the year of all nuclear debates .
The US is preparing its nuclear posture review , NATO is reviewing its strategic concept and the world is getting ready for the 2010 NPT review conference .
All of this is happening in a special context .
The US is once again being led by a President , Barack Obama , who espouses the vision of a world without nuclear weapons .
This is not the time for timidity or hesitation .
Our voters would not understand if this Parliament prepared a report on the NPT which was less ambitious than that of the current US Administration .
Of course , US leadership on this issue is welcome .
After all , the US and Russia are the undisputed global nuclear hegemons .
However , Europe cannot sit passively by while Moscow and Washington discuss its strategic future .
We need to present our own NPT narrative , based on a strict balance between the non-proliferation and disarmament agendas .
This is what this report is all about and this is the spirit of the Socialist plenary amendments .
Why not support the Model Nuclear Weapons Convention and the Hiroshima-Nagasaki Protocol , both of which are promoted globally by civil organisations and political leaders ?
It is our role as parliamentarians , unencumbered by the weight and limitations of executive power , to show our governments , and therefore the Council , the way in this field .
I hope the House can support the PSE amendments .
Mr President , it is somewhat paradoxical that nuclear weapons contributed significantly to the fact that the Cold War did not end in the Third World War .
This was because both sides were convinced that the use of nuclear weapons would cause the total destruction of both sides .
Today the situation is different .
Of course , nuclear weapons should not be looked upon in this way , but we should be aware that many countries treat nuclear weapons as something extremely important .
For many countries nuclear weapons are a power symbol , for others they are the ultimate deterrent , as is the case with Israel , and for yet others they compensate for the weakness of conventional weapons , as is the case with Russia .
In connection with this , nuclear disarmament , for which of course we should strive , cannot be a rapid process , and President Obama understands this very well .
The most important thing at the moment is non-proliferation of nuclear weapons , and we must be aware of the danger posed by some groups .
Bin Laden showed this very clearly when he said that obtaining a weapon of mass destruction is a religious obligation .
Non-proliferation is absolutely fundamental .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the programme that allowed Iraq , Iran and North Korea to acquire nuclear technology was called Atoms for Peace .
East and West participated in this programme .
We have seen where it led in Iraq , where a terrible war took place following atomic armament based originally on civilian technology .
Where it will end in Iran , I cannot say today .
Korea has left the non-proliferation community .
In the same week in which North Korea aggressively announced its new plans and finally evicted the IAEA from the country , the IAEA has in turn announced that it would start new negotiations with between 30 and 50 developing countries on civilian armament ; it is called equipment , but I call it armament .
This is a deadly cycle .
Unless we stop civilian armament , we shall never get a grip on the proliferation of nuclear technology , including military technology .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , now is the time to finally put an end to nuclear weapons on this planet and to implement the disarmament obligation in the Non-Proliferation Treaty , especially Article 6 .
The new US President , Barack Obama , has stated that he wants nuclear disarmament .
Now the governments of the European Union are being called on to act and engage in specific nuclear disarmament .
What this actually means is disarmament instead of modernisation of British and French atomic weapons .
It also means a stop to Germany 's nuclear participation , which means the withdrawal of US nuclear weapons from Europe , for example from Büchel in the Rhineland-Palatinate .
The majority in the European Parliament and so far achieved in the Committee on Foreign Affairs should not waste time voting on wishy-washy reports and should retain the specific calls for disarmament originally included in the report .
I get the impression that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is still living in the past .
What we need is stronger disarmament components in the NPT and that is what we should vote for tomorrow .
( NL ) The Beer report speaks in very general terms , which is somewhat understandable because the Non-Proliferation Treaty is meaningless if it is not respected and implemented by all states .
On the other hand , though , I do think that the report could have referred more clearly to the two specific cases of North Korea and Iran , since it is very obvious that the major threat is presented by these two states .
The European Union , together with other international institutions such as NATO and , if possible , the United Nations Security Council , must make it clear to totalitarian regimes such as those of North Korea and Iran that further development of nuclear weapons cannot be tolerated .
It is of the utmost importance in this regard that countries such as Russia and China be actively encouraged , if necessary with negative measures , unambiguously to put an end to all cooperation with those countries in the development of nuclear weapons .
If North Korea and Iran cannot themselves be brought to change their positions , then they must in any case be isolated from all possible channels that might help them to develop nuclear weapons .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when the Soviet Union came to an end , many took the view that it would also be the end of the nuclear scare , but what was then a global nuclear scare has re-emerged at regional level ; I need only mention Iran , North Korea , India and Pakistan .
Unfortunately , not even the NPT has been able to prevent that .
The real danger is that terrorists or criminals or irresponsible regimes might obtain nuclear weapons .
The initiative by Kissinger and Shultz and Obama 's speech in Prague has now brought new momentum to this issue .
That is extremely important .
It is becoming clear here that even the nuclear powers are now prepared to reduce their arsenals , and that is what was new about President Obama 's declaration .
It is important now for Europe to speak with one voice , for Europe , its nuclear powers and the others , to speak with one voice .
A first step on this path is the fact that Mr Solana is conducting negotiations with Iran on behalf of all the European countries , as well as of countries beyond Europe .
I believe that we should latch on to that .
We must not expect any quick miracles on this path , as Mrs Beer is doing , but if there is an opportunity today for us to really be able to reduce this threat , step by step , then we should grab it .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for an excellent discussion .
As I said at the beginning of the debate , a turning point has come in the history of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the arms control process .
I would like to thank everyone who spoke here for their comments .
I would like to express my wholehearted agreement with the idea of expressing support for credible , concrete and realistic steps in this area , as stated by Mr Zieleniec , and I would also like to endorse the statement of Mr Onyszkiewicz , who said that disarmament is a slow process and it is all the more important to support precisely these realistic steps .
At the same time I agree that it is vital to draw attention to any abuses of the programme to produce fissile materials for peaceful purposes , as pointed out by Mrs Harms .
I also agree with Mr Claeys that it is essential to take very firm action against those countries that abuse the programme , potentially for their own self-armament .
I would also like to emphasise that the EU will continue to participate in the NPT reviews and to make an active contribution to the success of the process as a whole .
At the New York preparatory meeting in May the EU will set out concrete proposals concerning a future action plan for the review conference in 2010 within the framework of all three pillars of the Treaty .
We will submit our proposals in the form of joint declarations on the individual pillars and in the form of working documents .
Within the framework of preparing the review conference taking place in 2010 the Council intends to draw up a revised and updated common position .
The EU will work towards achieving a successful result and prior to the preparatory committee meeting it will work together with key partners in order to secure a broad support for our objectives .
At the same time we must utilise the new opportunities in the area of nuclear disarmament and the EU is determined not be a passive onlooker .
The EU includes Member States that possess nuclear weapons , Member States that do not possess these weapons , Member States that use nuclear energy and Member States that are opposed to the use of nuclear energy .
The EU as a whole can play a significant role and it is determined to do so .
The Council has resolved to inform the European Parliament regularly about future developments in respect of the results of preparatory committee discussions and more generally within the framework of preparations for next year 's conference .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank all those who have taken part in today 's constructive debate .
This is indeed a subject of great significance .
For our part , the Commission will continue its work in support of the NPT Treaty through our work in verifying the proper use of fissile nuclear materials under the Euratom Treaty .
It works to thwart attempts by terrorists to gain access to chemical , radiological and nuclear materials , through a strengthened Community regime of export controls on dual use , support for the efforts of the IAEA to secure vulnerable nuclear materials and tackle nuclear smuggling - which is very important - and the promotion of a worldwide nuclear security and safety culture using the substantial resources available under the stability and nuclear safety instruments .
I look forward to continued cooperation with Parliament in taking these objectives further and I count on our cooperation in the future .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is not an ideological debate that we are holding here .
After the military inventions led by the Americans against Iraq , Afghanistan and other regions , we found ourselves in an era of ever-increasing crises and the prospect of even talking about nuclear disarmament could barely be dreamed or hoped of .
Now there is a unique opportunity .
I do not know how long this window of opportunity will remain open , but it is our duty to give future generations a peaceful world to live in .
The preconditions to success in the areas which Commissioner Rehn has just referred to include not accepting double standards within the EU .
That means that , as Europeans , we too have a duty to get nuclear disarmament moving again .
May I remind you of our debate in December last year , when Javier Solana was here and we discussed revising the security strategy .
He named as one major danger - and this was shared in this House - the danger of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
That is why I appeal to you once again .
Look again at the three amendments which the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance have proposed in order to set a disarmament and control process in motion , to make available instruments such as a Nuclear Weapons Convention to supplement the NPT .
Re-consider whether you cannot vote for them , because if the PPE amendment is adopted , it will not be possible for my group to vote for this report .
To close , I should like to thank the international organisations such as Mayors for Peace , the IPPNW and the ICAN .
ICAN was there long before Obama as an international campaign for the abolition of nuclear weapons .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Friday 24 April 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Despite containing some positive aspects , this proposal for a European Parliament recommendation falls short of the fundamental demands with regard to nuclear disarmament , particularly as it focuses solely on non-proliferation .
What is needed and demanded is for a whole programme to be established , which prohibits the use and production of nuclear weapons , encouraging their total and complete dismantlement , the creation of areas free of these weapons , the resumption of negotiations on nuclear disarmament and the strict application of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty , including by the current nuclear powers .
We need a programme of nuclear disarmament , which must be accompanied by the demilitarisation of international relations , by respect for the United Nations Charter , by the end of colonialism , by principles of non-interference and by the peaceful resolution of international conflicts .
We need a programme that demands : non-militarisation of space ; reduction of conventional weapons and military expenditure ( and not their increase , as the US administration defended at the recent NATO Summit ) ; an end to foreign military bases ; rejection of the EU 's militarisation and its transformation into a political and military bloc ; subordination of NATO to the UN on security issues ; and dissolution of political and military blocs .
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities - UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities - Optional Protocol to the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate :
on the Council statement on the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities ;
on the report by Mrs Jeleva , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion , by the European Community , of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities - C6-0116 / 2009 - ;
on the report by Mrs Jeleva , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion , by the European Community , of the Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities - C6-0117 / 2009 - .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur Rumiana Jeleva for the two excellent reports she has produced .
I expect my comments on the reports and their conclusions will be relatively brief .
On 11 June 2007 , at the first informal meeting of ministers on questions of disability , the Council adopted a clear position supporting the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities .
At this meeting the Council approved the UN Convention as a basic step concerning support , protection and adequate implementation of human rights and basic freedoms for all persons with disabilities .
At the same time the ministers made a commitment to a further development of relevant policies with the aim of securing a full implementation of the Convention .
They called on the Commission to ensure that the new priorities of the European Action Plan in the area of disability contribute to the effective implementation of the UN Convention .
In its resolution concerning activities linked to the European Year of Equal Opportunities in 2007 , adopted in December 2007 , the Council called on the Commission and the Member States to continue with the process of signing , concluding and ratifying the UN Convention in accordance with their respective powers .
On 10 March 2008 the Council adopted a resolution on the position of disabled persons in the European Union .
In the resolution the Council called on the Member States and the Commission to ensure , in accordance with their respective powers , that persons with disabilities were able to access all of their human rights .
This includes the ratification , the conclusion and the implementation of the UN Convention including common European solutions within the framework of a managed and coordinated approach to the implementation of this convention .
The Council subsequently received from the Commission a draft Council decision on the conclusion of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Physical Disabilities by the European Community .
The review of this proposal began at the end of last year and the Council is still dealing with it .
Ladies and gentlemen , as your report emphasised , a number of important questions arise from the report in connection with authority and these questions require further discussion in the Council .
However , the Presidency has made a commitment to try and complete the negotiations as soon as possible , in order for the Convention to be concluded soon by the Community .
I would like to thank Parliament for the interest it has shown in this topic .
The Presidency will keep you informed about progress in the talks that are underway in the Council .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Disability Convention is the first human rights convention that the European Community has signed alongside its Member States .
This was a necessary step to allow the full implementation of the Convention in the European Union , including in policy areas within the responsibility of the European Community .
As both the Convention and its optional protocol came into force one year ago , on 3 May 2008 , a swift conclusion by both the Member States and the Community is now a priority .
Indeed , seven Member States have already done so .
I want to express my gratitude to Parliament and in particular to the rapporteur , Ms Jeleva , for their support for the European Community 's conclusion of this UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its optional protocol .
I am delighted to see that Parliament can endorse both proposals .
Since the Convention falls within the shared competence of the Community and the Member States and is also binding on the EU institutions , I am glad to see that they are ready to work together to ensure this Convention is implemented properly .
The goals of the Convention are very important overall to facilitate a positive impact on the lives of our fellow citizens with disabilities , to improve the consistency of the legal interpretation of certain provisions within the Community 's competence , and to ensure uniform minimum protection of the rights of persons with disabilities across the European Union with regard to the obligations stemming from the Convention .
We need to work together to protect the human rights of persons with disabilities , and an effective implementation of the UN Convention will do just that and meet that objective .
I count on us working together towards this common goal .
rapporteur . - ( BG ) Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today when we are discussing the European Parliament 's reports on the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities , its Optional Protocol and the statement on these two documents from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I would like to remind you that disabled people account for more than 10 % of the population of the European Union and the world .
According to data from the World Health Organization , this percentage is still growing due to the increase in the overall size of the Earth 's population , the advances made in medicine and the global ageing trend .
This UN Convention which we are looking at today is the first in the area of human rights which is open to accession and formal approval by the European Community .
This also marks a unique first step in the activities of the European Parliament .
The Convention 's objective is to promote , protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities , while at the same time respecting their human dignity .
I am extremely pleased that during the discussion in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we worked together in a spirit of goodwill and cooperation .
I think that it is very important that my colleagues and I in our parliamentary committee decided to say a little bit more than a brief ' yes ' in support of the Convention and Protocol reports and prepared a proposal for a resolution .
Fellow Members , the European Parliament has always consistently supported every effort made by the Community in drafting , implementing and enforcing legislation relating to equal opportunities and non-discrimination against people with disabilities .
When the issue of disabled people is raised , our political differences disappear when it comes to the ultimate aim , namely , for us to ensure a higher quality of life and work .
There are , of course , different views about the way in which we can achieve our objective , but with its almost unanimous decision - only one vote was not a ' yes ' - the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs proved that differences must be overcome about the way to achieve sensible , long-term and sustainable solutions .
Fellow Members , I believe that our decisions , the decisions of the European Parliament , are of huge significance to people with disabilities in the European Union .
At this point , I would like draw your attention to the fact that the competencies which stem from the implementation of the UN Convention and the Optional Protocol are divided between the Community and its Member States .
The implementation of the Optional Protocol is important from the point of view of offering the opportunity to individuals or a group of people to inform the UN Committee for people with disabilities about any infringement of their rights arising from the Convention .
It is important to emphasise that this option will be available after national legal protection instruments have been exhausted .
As expressed in the Optional Protocol report , we will require the European Commission and Member States to inform us every three years about its application in accordance with their relevant areas of competence .
I think that , as the only European institution with members elected directly by the EU 's citizens , the European Parliament has the right and main responsibility for respecting the rights of all its citizens .
I want to emphasise that when we started working on the documents at the end of 2008 , only four Member States - Austria , Spain , Slovenia and Hungary - had ratified the Convention and Optional Protocol , while another three have done the same - Sweden , Germany and Italy - between then and now .
I believe that with today 's debate and I hope with our vote in favour tomorrow , we will kill two birds with one stone : we will approve the Commission 's proposals for Council decisions and we will give Member States a positive , encouraging signal to continue the process of ratification and / or accession .
I would like to end by once again thanking all my colleagues who were involved in the task of drafting the reports and the proposal for a resolution .
I would also like to thank my colleagues from the European Commission for their helpful cooperation , as well as the representatives of organisations for people with disabilities for the suggestions which they made .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , women and girls with disabilities experience multiple discrimination and disability has very clear gender-specific dimensions .
We must make disabled women and girls more visible and , above all , we must ensure that they are given greater consideration at EU level .
The European Parliament made very important points clear to me in the resolution on the situation of women with disabilities adopted in 2007 .
The specific situation of women and girls must also be given full consideration when implementing the UN Convention .
Regrettably , so far only 4 EU Member States have ratified the Convention and the Protocol .
We need gender mainstreaming in EU policies on people with disabilities , especially for access to work and integration in the workplace .
Education , anti-discrimination and the right to work must be secured .
The main problem is violence and we must very clearly show it a red card .
Women and girls with disabilities are at very great risk of violence , including sexual violence , both within and outside the home .
Often their right to sexuality and maternity is restricted or there are forced abortions and sterilisations .
The Member States should therefore pass legislation to protect them from violence and give better support to victims .
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , first of all , I would like to thank my fellow Member , Mrs Jeleva , for her effective cooperation on this report , as well as other fellow Members and the associations of people with disabilities .
I would like to emphasise that we need to provide clear protection for disadvantaged groups , all the more so as our debate is taking place at a time when the impact of the economic crisis is being felt .
I would like to stress that the European Union promotes the active inclusion of people with disabilities and their full participation in society .
This is the approach at the heart of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities .
This is why we are calling for these international documents to be ratified urgently by European Union Member States , as well as for the active involvement of disabled people and organisations representing them in the process of monitoring and implementing these documents .
We also urge Member States and the Community 's executive to ensure free access and the distribution ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur for all her cooperation in the passage of this report through the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I was rapporteur , as you know , on the UN Convention on behalf of the European Parliament in 2003 as the UN Convention was being drafted .
We have since achieved a legally binding convention which , I believe , is historic .
That is a milestone in itself , but what I said in 2003 I will say again .
If the EU is to have any credibility in this debate , it must lead by example .
International human rights treaties are of no use whatsoever if countries do not sign , ratify and implement .
Yes , all Member States have signed , but they have not all signed the protocol .
Most of them have not ratified , and they certainly have not implemented - something we have called for in numerous parliamentary reports .
The UK Government - my own government - for example , has again missed its own deadline of last year for ratifying the Convention , which is an absolute disgrace .
To my mind this is shameful .
I would like to see the Commission and Parliament keeping up the pressure on Member States to ratify and implement .
This Convention has the potential to empower millions of disabled people in the EU .
We must now do all we can to make it a reality .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , with the Convention , the right to protection and recognition of their human dignity and to full participation in society has been secured internationally for disabled persons .
It is now all the more important for the Council to submit the ratification act to the UN no later than this year 's International Day of Persons with Disabilities .
At the same time , we call on all the Member States to ratify the Optional Protocol , so that the UN Convention acquires an international complaints committee .
I can only tell you how important this is with reference to my country .
Until now , disabled persons have been refused equal access to education .
Only 15 % of disabled children are integrated into the school system .
Claims to access for disabled persons are circumvented in my country with translation tricks .
That is why we must protest against the fact that this sort of thing is still happening and safeguard full social participation for disabled persons in all the EU Member States in future .
Mr President , I am very proud to have been at the launch at Sadler 's Wells in 2001 of the campaign for the Convention .
I am very proud that Members across this Parliament have played a leading role in supporting the creation of the Convention .
I am very proud to have been with the Human Rights Subcommittee in Geneva at the Human Rights Commission and Council to lobby for its agreement .
I am very proud that the European Commission and the European Communities have signed up to a human rights instrument for the first time .
I am very proud that it is the swiftest-agreed convention in the history of the United Nations , but most of all I am very proud that disabled people and disabled people 's organisations have played a full part in its consideration and its agreement .
Our support for ratification this week should make clear three points .
Firstly , in becoming the eighth ratifier , the European Union is saying to the EU Member States that they too should ratify and implement , including the optional protocol .
Secondly , Commissioner , we and the European Commission , across all its competencies , should screen existing policies and procedures to make sure that we comply with the Convention and act accordingly .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( PT ) I too welcome the fact that we are here to debate and adopt the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and , at the same time , to call for its Optional Protocol to also be taken into account by the Member States .
This represents a significant step forwards in defending and promoting the rights of persons with disabilities , with a view to respecting their dignity .
However , it is not enough for countries to have signed this Convention or even for them to be prepared to take its Optional Protocol into account .
These countries also now need to ratify this Convention and be prepared to apply the Convention and the Protocol as quickly as possible .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we agree that although over the past years and decades the EU has made enormous progress in combating discrimination against persons with disabilities , the situation is still far from satisfactory .
Today and every day , this month , this week , this very day thousands , tens of thousands , hundreds of thousands of EU citizens with disabilities are suffering discrimination .
They are discriminated against on the labour market , in the service sector , in transport .
They are discriminated against through poorer access to public services and they are very often discriminated against in respect of access even to some basic public services such as education at every level .
I am quite sure we agree that the main problem we are confronting in this area is the social exclusion of our fellow citizens with disabilities .
To tackle this we need a whole series of legislative acts which will prevent discrimination , but at the same time we also need a functioning system of social services as a key instrument not only for limiting social exclusion but also for bringing about social inclusion .
The greatest problem facing citizens with disabilities is of course their much higher levels of unemployment .
In the economic problems currently affecting the EU we all know that it is our fellow citizens with disabilities who are paying the highest price for the worsening situation on the labour market .
The availability of employment opportunities is worse for them than in times of prosperity .
They very often pay the price of having poorer qualification and education structures than the rest of the population , and this naturally has very negative consequences for their chances of integrating into the labour market .
They very often face much worse access to education , to normal schools and educational institutions , as Mrs Schroedter correctly pointed out .
I would also like to say that we are fully aware of multiple discrimination , which confronts many citizens with disabilities , as Mrs Breyer pointed out .
And here I would like to say that the convention we are debating includes a specific article applying to women , so multiple discrimination has not been forgotten here .
At this moment we must of course applaud the 7 states that have ratified the convention .
They have set an example for other states which have yet to complete the procedure .
The clear call from Mrs Lynne for the ratification process to be speeded up is important , but on the other hand we must respect the fact that ratification has rules , that these rules must be respected , that these rules are often very different in the various Member States and they have to be respected .
I would also like to applaud the statements we have heard today , for example from Mrs Plumb , who pointed out the major role of the voluntary sector partners in developing and implementing policies relating to our fellow citizens with disabilities which attempt to limit discrimination against them , to limit their social exclusion and to integrate them socially .
I would only like to say that the Council has devoted great attention to this matter and that the Presidency is placing great emphasis on the participation of the voluntary sector partners .
In the spirit of our motto , ' Europe without barriers ' , we have also invited all representatives of disabled persons to events connected with this issue .
Under the sponsorship of the Presidency a series of events arranged by disability organisations have taken place .
I would like to mention the meeting of the Council of the European Disability Forum which took place in Prague between 28 February and 1 March 2009 .
Also this week , an international conference entitled ' Europe without Barriers ' took place .
It was set up by the Czech National Council for Persons with Disabilities .
The conference was held directly under the auspices of the Presidency and constituted one of the Presidential events .
As a participant I can confirm that the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities was one of the main items on the conference agenda .
The Presidency is determined to develop significant activities in this area , including regular contacts with voluntary sector representatives at a pan-European level .
I would like to end by pointing out the convergence of the European action plan on disability and the UN Convention , as well as the results achieved in implementing the action plan , which places special emphasis on dignity , fundamental rights , protection from discrimination , justice and social cohesion .
It is now generally acknowledged that taking notice of the issue of disability is the key to resolving it .
To this end the action plan on disability has urged and supported access to social services and it has increased access to goods and services .
I firmly believe that the EU will continue with the positive steps it wants to take towards full social inclusion and full integration of fellow citizens with disabilities .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like once again to thank all who participated in the interesting debate , especially the rapporteur , Mrs Jeleva - especially for the important resolution that will be adopted in plenary tomorrow .
I would also like to thank the Council for its reassurance that the Czech Presidency will strive towards a quick conclusion to the ratification and the whole process .
I would also like to thank Parliament for your recent support of the Commission 's proposal for a horizontal anti-discrimination directive .
The directive , if adopted by the Council - where unanimity is needed - will further consolidate the rights of people with disabilities at European level , which I trust is our common goal , both in the Council and in Parliament - certainly it is in the Commission .
rapporteur . - ( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank everyone for their participation and the views they have expressed .
I would like to think that we can place today 's debate in a wider context , specifically by making a connection with the fact that the UN Economic and Social Council adopted a decision last year , whereby the priority theme for the 2009-2010 review and policy cycles will be social integration .
A special place in this policy cycle for social integration is given to the World Program for Action Concerning Disabled Persons .
I also believe that today 's debate will spur the Member States on which have not yet ratified the Convention and / or Optional Protocol to do so in the foreseeable future .
I am sure , and on this point I would like to agree with the Council , that the vote on the reports will help us take a positive step in the right direction .
The European Parliament must bear its responsibility for improving the conditions of people with disabilities .
As was emphasised during this debate , we must really work tirelessly and exercise every possible control so that the legislation we produce will be enforced properly and that we are not responsible for a good legislative base and weak enforcement .
I would like to thank once again all fellow Members from the various political groups for their support , as well as my colleagues from the European Commission and the NGOs whom we worked with throughout the entire process .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Friday 24 April 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The rights of disabled people are broken regularly .
Recently in my home town of Poznań an incident occurred which is symptomatic of this .
A Member of the Polish national Parliament parked his car in a place reserved for the disabled .
Paradoxically , this MP has a friend who is disabled .
Why do I mention this ?
It is because no laws , conventions or documents will improve the situation of disabled people if public officials openly and with impunity break rules created specially to help the disabled to live and function .
Conventions are of course very important , but equally important is genuine , dependable and full implementation .
Disabled people are not happy with rights which they only have on paper .
People with disabilities are counting on real changes which will give them equal opportunities . Thank you very much .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0227 / 09 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Anti-Lisbon rhetoric
The global financial crisis has shown us just how imperative it is to have a strong European Union .
We have learnt quickly in Ireland that myths and disinformation about the Lisbon Treaty will be small comfort in a shrinking economy and with rising unemployment .
With the EU Presidency held by the Czech Republic , and the country 's own President espousing anti-Lisbon rhetoric , how does the Council intend to reconcile these messages with the patent need for greater , rather than less , EU cooperation ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has always made plain its determination to strengthen cooperation within the EU , particularly in times of crisis .
The Czech Presidency , following on from the activities of its predecessor , is working hard to resolve the problems caused by the current financial and economic crisis and in this context has adopted measures at various levels .
It has established a joint framework for Member States , as can be seen for example from the bank rescue plan , the European economic recovery plan , the regulation and supervision of financial markets .
The European Parliament has also contributed to these measures by supporting investment in infrastructure , and not least through its efforts on the international scene .
The Council at its meeting of 19 and 20 March focused on overcoming the financial crisis and the problems of the real economy and made it very clear that Europe can confront these problems and stop the current crisis only through unified and coordinated action within the framework of the single market and economic and monetary union .
The Council decided at its meeting on 19 March that a closely coordinated EU response within the framework of the European economic recovery plan should mobilise all available instruments , including Community resources , and that it should fully integrate the strategies of growth , employment , social integration and social security .
As far as the Treaty of Lisbon is concerned , the Council reached an agreement in December last year concerning further progress .
At the request of Ireland , the Member States agreed to provide specific legal guarantees relating to the issues that were a source of concern during last year 's referendum in Ireland .
The Council also agreed that if the Treaty of Lisbon comes into force , then in accordance with essential legal procedures a decision would be adopted on the continuing national representation of each Member State in the Commission .
With the exception of the completion of detailed related activities focused on this topic by mid 2009 and assuming a satisfactory implementation , the Irish government at the same time committed to work for the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon by the end of the current functional period of the Commission .
The European Council in its meeting of 19 and 20 March was informed of the current situation regarding this matter and decided to return to it at the June 2009 meeting .
Madam President , may I thank the Minister for his reply .
I think we are far too defensive in this House - and in institutions generally - when it comes to Lisbon and the European Union in general .
It is time that we put some of the people who are attacking Europe on the defensive .
Where would we be without the European Central Bank ?
Where would we be - those of us who are in the euro zone - without the euro zone ?
The one thing we do not have is an identifiable head of the European Council who can speak on matters of economic recovery , and I think it is clear that the provision in the Lisbon Treaty to provide for such a person is really essential .
If we had that person in place now we would not have the zigzagging that goes on between the six-monthly presidencies .
Perhaps the Minister might say in his reply what he sees as the prospects for the ratification of the Treaty in the Czech Republic .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) I will respond to all of the questions later , in one go .
It is our normal procedure for you to reply firstly to the questioner and his supplementary question and then , normally , I will - and that is my decision - take the other supplementary questions together and put them to you .
I should be obliged if you would answer first .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Thank you , Madam President .
Ladies and gentlemen , I will answer the question .
I would like to emphasise that in the Czech Republic , as far as ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon is concerned , the two-chamber Parliament made up of the House of Representatives and the Senate is working very hard on this Treaty and on 18 February this year it was passed by the House of Representatives .
Here I must stress that under Czech constitutional rules it is essential to have a constitutional majority to pass this Treaty .
The Senate of the Czech Parliament will probably vote on the Treaty on 6 May , but the Senate has made its approval conditional on the drafting of an appropriate law under which the transfer of powers from the level of qualified majority voting requires the consent of both chambers of Parliament .
This amounts to a so-called conditional mandate .
The relevant law has already been drafted and approved , and we expect that on 6 May the Senate will vote on this law and that , once it is passed , the Treaty of Lisbon will receive parliamentary ratification .
Does the Czech Presidency not agree that the problem in the case of the Lisbon Treaty is not so much a lack of information about it , since the information is there and is available , but the considerable amount of misinformation wilfully put about by the opponents of the Treaty ?
Given that the Treaty is not being signed by the European institutions but was negotiated by the Member States , does it not also agree that the national governments must do much more to counter the myths and misinformation that Mr Mitchell referred to and get their act together in this vital debate for the future of Europe ?
Minister , I am sure that in your country , as in Ireland , voters sense and worry about the Orwellian feel to the EU at the moment .
They are not stupid , and they know that the Commission gerrymandered its legislative agenda so that no bad news entered the Irish media 's bloodstream .

It is a shame that Mr Mitchell , Mr Corbett and others are so blinded by the glittering prizes of being successful Eurocrats that they miss the point : that the people of Ireland have delivered their decision .
Perhaps , sir , you could get the Council to instruct the Commission to stop the massive growth of its communication and information - otherwise known as propaganda - departments , and allow the results delivered by the wonderful Irish people to stand and prove that democracy lives in the European Union .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) I must emphasise that we should all have the courage to admit to ourselves that EU citizens have very little awareness of how the EU operates .
The EU affects EU citizens very often in an abstract way and its institutions are very difficult to understand .
The lower the level of awareness the easier it is for conditions to arise that are conducive to , for example , misinformation , which takes a hold on people 's minds more readily precisely because they are not sufficiently informed about how the EU operates .
In my opinion , addressing the democratic deficit and addressing the fact that citizens do not always identify with the EU and its institutions would ensure that disinformation and lies do not have a chance to take hold .
I firmly believe that every EU Member State government has a fundamental duty to speak out against disinformation and falsehood .
At the same time EU Member States ' governments should inform their citizens regularly about all matters relating to European integration .
I firmly believe that only then will we achieve real democratic progress .
Subject : Double taxation
In view of the recent case-law of the Court of Justice concerning double taxation , what measures does the Council intend to propose in order to harmonise European tax law so that European citizens do not have to pay twice for the same taxable transaction ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as far as the current state of affairs in the Community is concerned , no measures have yet been adopted at a Community level to eliminate double taxation in the area of direct taxation except for Council Directive 90 / 435 / EEC of 23 July 1990 on the common system of taxation applicable in the case of parent companies and subsidiaries of different Member States , the convention of 23 July 1990 on the elimination of double taxation in connection with the adjustment of profits of associated enterprises and Council Directive 2003 / 48 / EC of 3 June 2003 on taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments .
This arises from the fact that the area in question falls within the responsibility of Member States , provided that they respect Community law .
Agreements on eliminating double taxation which are concluded bilaterally between Member States in accordance with the aforementioned autonomous powers and consistent with the OECD sample agreement do not appear to be sufficient for eliminating all legal double taxation in the EU .
The Commission , which has the exclusive right to initiate laws in the Community in relation to direct taxation , at present clearly prefers a pragmatic approach to this matter in view of the principle of subsidiarity that applies to Community legislation in the area of direct taxation and in view of the requirement for unanimity .
This pragmatic approach should encourage Member States to cooperate in ensuring that their domestic taxation systems , including bilateral agreements on taxation , are functioning smoothly .
This is mentioned , among other things , in the Commission communication on coordinating Member States ' direct tax systems in the internal market , especially in the final version of document COM 2006 / 823 .
The Council confirmed this coordination-based approach of the Commission in its conclusions of 27 March 2007 .
It emphasised that the functioning of the internal market can be improved through cooperation in the area of taxation at a Member State level and , where appropriate , at a European level , while respecting Member State powers at the same time .
The Council declared that acceptable solutions could take various forms , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
( ES ) Mr President , the information that you are giving us is correct , but we as Members of this House , and most definitely the citizens of Europe , get the impression that there is a very dangerous gap in Community law .
At present , whilst tax demands continue to be intensified in every one of the Member States , mobility is almost impossible .
When we ask the Commission to explain this pragmatic approach , it seems that the Commission does not have any support in the Council .
We seem to find ourselves in a vicious circle , in which the Commission refers us to the Council , and the Council refers us back to the Commission , but , meanwhile , the reality is that the citizens of this Europe that we are trying to build do not have the option to reside in different countries or to establish relationships , due to the heavy tax burden caused by the lack of harmonisation in the fiscal system .
Could the Council do something to put an end to this vicious circle ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) First of all I would like to emphasise that the long-term objective is a solution in the form of a directive or a multilateral treaty .
Only thus can we develop this system effectively from the standpoint of legal principles .
The Commission is proposing a solution for the most pressing problems arising in connection with the internal market , through improved coordination of Member State tax regulations and improved decision-making processes .
The Commission in its communication 823 on coordination put forward a proposal to create a mechanism for an effective resolution of disputes connected with international double taxation problems in the EU but due to insufficient support from the Member States , as the MEP mentioned here , the Commission abandoned this request in favour of other initiatives .
The Commission is fully aware of the impact of double taxation agreements on the internal market and it will start preparing public consultations in 2009 .
Based on these consultations the Commission will draft a communication on its findings together with a proposal for an acceptable solution to existing problems .
The Council has repeatedly grappled with this problem within the framework of various initiatives .
The first one was the expansion of the framework of Directive 90 / 435 / EC on the common system of taxation for parent and subsidiary companies through Council Directive 2003 / 123 / ES , which eliminates the economic and legal double taxation of cross-border flows of dividends within the framework of the Community .
In 1990 an arbitration treaty was adopted with the aim of eliminating double taxation arising from the setting of transfer prices between related enterprises .
Nevertheless this directive did not prove very effective , partly because it has the character of an international treaty concluded between Member States and not the character of a Community legal instrument .
In 2003 Directive 2003 / 49 / EC was adopted , eliminating double taxation for interest and royalty payments between associated enterprises from different Member States , which authorises only the country of the beneficial owner of the payment to tax that payment .
The question of expanding the framework of this directive should form the topic of further negotiations in the Council .
In connection with the two communications from the Commission on coordinating Member State systems of direct taxation on the internal market and retirement tax , ECOFIN adopted the December 2008 Council resolution on retirement tax .
This resolution endeavours to eliminate double taxation and coordinates state procedures in the area of retirement tax so that , with the transfer of economic activities from one state to another , when assets of physical or legal persons are transferred from the state which applies the tax on exit , then the recipient state should apply the market value of the asset which was exchanged at the time of the asset transfer from the exit state as an expenditure when the asset is sold .
We all understand that these issues on taxation can be very technical , but in general will the Minister agree that anyone who understands these issues will surely see that tax harmonisation is not essential to avoid double taxation ?
All that is required - I know it is quite technical - is a will for better cooperation between Member States .
Given the amount of money that governments are currently taking away from hard-pressed taxpayers , surely it is time to encourage more tax competition to reduce the burden on working families across the European Union .
( DE ) President-in-Office , I think that the Czech Presidency is taking a very positive and proactive approach to this issue .
I should like to congratulate you on that , because naturally it is important to protect citizens and small and medium-sized enterprises so that , when they provide services , they can also recover their income accordingly .
Double taxation is something for which there is no social justification whatsoever .
Hence my question : do you believe that the European Court of Justice could set standards here ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Court of Justice has decided that the direct application of community law , of freedom of movement and the principles of non-discrimination do not oblige Member States to eliminate legal double taxation arising through the mutual interaction of different taxation systems in cross-border situations within the Community .
This position arises from the decision of the European Court of Justice in case C-513 / 04 Kerckhaert Morres .
The court has already ruled on this matter and I firmly believe that very little scope remains here .
According to the case law of the Court of Justice , treaties eliminating double taxation must fulfil the requirements of the internal market , and in particular they must not introduce discrimination or discrepancies in relation to basic freedoms enshrined in the Treaty on the European Communities .
On the other hand I firmly believe that the risk of double taxation enormously complicates the tax systems and above all it complicates things for small and medium-sized enterprises , who sometimes find it very difficult to penetrate the complicated systems of individual national laws .
It is precisely SMEs that are most exposed to this risk , because SMEs have higher costs because they cannot afford to hire expensive consultancy or law firms in the way that large corporations - and particularly multinationals - can .
Therefore SMEs are more burdened by these complicated tax systems .
I am personally convinced that the fairest solution is for all Member States to have the simplest , most transparent direct taxation system , and as far as I am concerned , the lowest possible taxes .
Subject : Poultry meat
In light of Commission proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets as regards the marketing standards for poultry meats , would the Czech Presidency agree that in the interest of food and consumer safety , traceability and product quality that all poultry meat sold as ' fresh ' must provide consumers with a guarantee of freshness .
Would the Presidency agree that there is a serious problem with regard to poultry meat that is slaughtered and frozen in a third country , transported and defrosted - and in some cases processed - in an EU country , and subsequently marketed and sold as ' fresh ' EU produce . Would it agree that this is not acceptable and is misleading to the consumer and unfair to EU producers who adhere to strict EU guidelines ?
What steps is the Czech Presidency currently taking to ensure the smooth adoption of this regulation ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Presidency would like to assure the honourable Member that it places great importance on a high level of food safety and consumer protection within the framework of the Community regardless of whether the food is produced locally or imported from third countries .
In this context the Presidency would like to refer to the conclusions of the Council meeting of 18 and 19 December 2008 on the safety of imported agricultural products and food products .
In accordance with Community rules the Council in its conclusions invited the Commission to submit a report to the Council and to the European Parliament by the end of 2010 concerning the effectiveness and the application of hygienic and phytosanitary checks on imported foods .
As a result of its obligation to ensure high levels of human health protection when implementing Community policies , the Council in December 2008 rejected a proposal from the Commission for a Council regulation implementing Council Regulation ( EC ) No 853 / 2004 , regarding the use of antimicrobial substances to remove surface contamination from poultry carcases .
The Council took the view that the use of these substances could potentially mask poor hygiene practices .
The European Parliament expressed its opposition to the proposal in a resolution of 19 June 2008 and asked the Council to reject the proposal .
Regarding the Commission 's proposal concerning trading standards for poultry meat , the Presidency would like to confirm that the proposal is at present under negotiation in the Council with the aim of ensuring a high level of protection for consumers and of preventing poultry being sold as fresh when it has previously been frozen .
The Presidency can assure the honourable Member that it is taking all measures to enable the rapid adoption of this regulation as soon as the European Parliament has issued its opinion .
I thank the Presidency for that reply because it was indeed my understanding that the Czech Presidency was to take action in this matter .
I am pleased to hear that it is being discussed within the Council that you will take action to prevent poultry meat being frozen and subsequently sold as fresh , because of course it means that many EU producers - indeed all EU producers - are not operating on a level playing field .
So I suppose my question to the Presidency is : how soon can we expect some response from the Council on this , and can you give us any indication as to what particular actions you might take in this matter ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this problem has now been resolved by the working bodies of the Council within the framework of the negotiations over a proposed Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 , establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets with regard to trading standards for poultry meat .
The Czech Presidency has proposed a compromise text for which the Council 's Agriculture Committee has expressed majority support .
The text will be submitted for WTO assessment within the framework of consultations with trading partners .
If there is a positive result and the European Parliament approves its report at the plenary session at the same time , which should happen , then the Czech Presidency will submit the compromise text to the Council .
The Council has a formal obligation to await submission of the European Parliament 's opinion , although it does not have to refer to it in its decision .
The compromise text states that for products made from fresh poultry meat in accordance with this regulation , Member States may stipulate slight variations in the temperature requirements which are applied for an absolute minimum time and only to the extent required for allowing handling and cutting up operations in processing plants during the production of fresh poultry meat products .
We expect that the Council will address itself to this proposal in May and based on negotiations to date we expect positive results .
Following the BSE crisis in the beef sector some years back , we brought in full identification and traceability for beef products in Europe .
Would the Council not agree that we need to move swiftly , not just on poultry but sheep and pigmeat as well , to give consumers the same information and indeed to provide the same traceability if something should go wrong ?
The Sommer report on information to consumers is wending its way through Parliament at the moment , and perhaps through added labelling - which would add to the traceability - the Council might agree with me that this would be a way of achieving this .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , indicating the origin of poultry meat does not form part of Annex 14 of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 , and therefore it is not part of the proposal we are now debating .
The indication of origin is handled under Commission Regulation ( EC ) No 543 / 2008 , and it therefore comes under the responsibility of the Commission and is debated in committee .
I would also like to say that I understand this question very well because if you look at the threat which arose from so-called mad cow disease in the case of infected beef , taking into consideration the real impact on the health of the population in EU Member States , then some of the diseases that come from poultry meat , for example salmonella , cause a dramatically higher number of health problems and even deaths than mad cow disease caused in its time .
On the other hand I would like to emphasise again that indication of origin comes under the responsibility of the Commission and we should not forget that monitoring the place of origin is of course much more difficult in the case of poultry than it is with cattle .
We should also avoid getting into a situation where the attempt to protect the consumer to such an extent that all doubt and all potential risk is absolutely eliminated leads to a system that is so administratively complex that it leads to significantly higher food prices .
I would like to repeat again here that the key responsibility in the area of mandatory indications of origin for poultry meat lies with the Commission and not with the Council .
Subject : Crisis management and small- and medium-sized undertakings
The European crisis management programme includes assistance for small undertakings under the Small Business Act .
In this connection , what actions have been taken to date and what further actions are being planned ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in December last year the European Council agreed on a European economic recovery plan .
This plan includes concrete measures for supporting small and medium-sized enterprises , the most important of which are the measures aimed at improving access to finance and reducing the administrative burden on business .
At the same time the European Council expressed its support for increased intervention by the European Investment Bank in the years 2008 to 2011 , particularly with loans to small and medium-sized enterprises , which represents an increase of EUR 10 billion compared to current lending in this sector .
Additionally , the European Council has supported temporary overruns of threshold values for at least two years in relation state support involving sums up to EUR 500 000 and adjustments in the state support framework which are essential for boosting support to companies , particularly small and medium-sized ones .
The European Council also called for the use of accelerated procedures allowed under European Community law for awarding public contracts and for a reduction in the administrative burden on companies .
The European Council also supports full implementation of the Commission action plan on the Small Business Act initiative that was adopted by the Council on 1 December 2008 .
The action plan for the Small Business Act initiative should help small and medium-sized enterprises in the period of economic turmoil by improving access to loans , reducing the administrative burden , helping small and medium-sized enterprises to exploit the benefits of the internal market and increasing competitiveness on foreign markets .
On 5 March the Council concluded that the action plan should be fully implemented as quickly as possible at Community and Member State levels while complying with the principles of subsidiarity .
Additionally , the Council again mentioned the importance of further improvements in access to finance - I am thinking of loans , guarantees , mezzanine finance , etc - and also to venture capital for newly established innovative enterprises and for small and medium-sized enterprises where it is necessary to take account of the effects of the current financial crisis .
We must strengthen market access for small and medium-sized enterprises above all through more monitoring of the market and of individual sectors in order to identify and tackle barriers to the internal market .
Requirements for accounting and procedures for setting up new companies should be essentially simplified and speeded up .
At its meeting on 19 and 20 March the European Council agreed on the following measures : eliminating existing barriers and preventing the emergence of new ones , achieving a fully functioning internal market , further reducing the administrative burden , improving the framework conditions for industry in order to retain a strong industrial base for enterprise with particular emphasis on small and medium-sized firms and innovation , supporting partnerships between the different areas of business , research , education and training and increasing the quality of investments in research , knowledge , and education .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to say that on 10 March 2009 the Council achieved a political agreement that all Member States would have the option , based on a change to Directive 2006 / 112 / EC , to implement permanently reduced VAT rates on a range of labour intensive services , and these are usually services provided by small enterprises , of course .
Among the other legislative proposals arising from the Small Business Act initiatives the Council should adopt a regulation on the Statute of the European Private Company which would make it easier for small and medium-sized enterprises to conduct cross-border business activities .
The Council will also look at revising the late payments directive , with the aim of ensuring that small and medium-sized enterprises are paid on time for all commercial transactions .
As far as the agenda for better regulation is concerned , the Commission last year presented 11 new accelerated measures for reducing the administrative burden on business with the aim of achieving a 25 % reduction in the existing administrative burden caused by EU regulations by 2012 .
According to estimates , this could lead to savings of about EUR 30 billion , and the greatest benefit would go to small and medium-sized enterprises .
On 10 March this year the Council called on the Commission to propose specific new measures for reducing the burden in respect of each of the 13 key priority areas in the action plan .
The actual steps in relation to this include the adoption of proposals for simplifying the third and sixth directives applying to mergers and breakups of commercial undertakings at the first reading in the European Parliament , and also approving a revision of the fourth and seventh directives .
However , this important work should continue with the aim of achieving the 25 % reduction in the administrative burden and the Commission should complete its review of all existing legal regulations as quickly as possible .
( EL ) Madam President , I thank the minister for his reply , which listed all the measures planned .
Of course , now the application of these measures needs to bring real results to all those in the European Union at present who have small and medium-sized enterprises which are suffering the consequences of the crisis and to all those who want to set up new small and medium-sized enterprises .
It is on this point precisely that I would like the minister to tell me if we have statistics on new business start-ups , alongside the statistics on the businesses which are disappearing .
I would be interested in having these comparative figures , if not today , then in a future reply .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Firstly I would like to emphasise that the numbers of failing and newly-established companies as well as the specific conditions for establishing a new company vary considerably between the individual Member States of the EU .
While in some states it takes a few days to set up a small or medium-sized company , in other states it can unfortunately take several months .
It is of course possible to draw up a detailed summary containing the information you are requesting , Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , and we would present it in writing .
Subject : Outcome of the Spring Council on financing a global climate deal
In light of last week 's Spring Summit , is the Presidency satisfied with the outcome of the negotiations which took place on providing financial assistance to developing countries to further a global climate change deal at the COP-15 in Copenhagen this December ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the conclusions from the meeting of 19 to 20 March 2009 , the Council stated that mitigation and adaptation measures would require considerable domestic and financial resources , both public and private , particularly in the most threatened developing countries , and that the EU would provide a fair share of the funding for these measures in developing countries .
Commission estimates based on recent studies indicate that by 2020 the additional public and private investments will have to increase to almost EUR 175 billion if emissions are to be reduced to a level compatible with EU objectives .
Current studies also show that more than half of these investments will have to be made in developing countries .
The secretariat of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change further estimates that in 2030 the cost of adaptation in the developing countries would be in the range of EUR 23 to 54 billion a year .
As concerns funding for mitigation measures in developing countries , the Council has adopted a clear position .
With the help of developed countries developing countries should draw up strategies and plans for building a low-carbon economy .
These strategies and plans should make a distinction between measures that can be adopted independently as they involve either zero or very low expenditure or even a net benefit in the medium-term , and measures which will lead to positive additional costs that individual countries themselves cannot easily afford .
In order to implement the Copenhagen agreement it is essential to have sufficient , predictable and timely financial support .
The international financial structure providing this support must be based on principles of efficiency , suitability , equality , transparency , responsibility , cohesion , predictability and proper financial management .
In relation to funding sources , the Council confirmed options which may be further examined in international negotiations and which involve an approach relying on contributions based on an agreed scope , a market approach based on contract auctions or combinations of these and other options .
Moreover , during the transition to a global carbon trading market , flexible mechanisms , the clean development mechanism and joint implementation will continue to play a significant role in financing emission cuts in developing and transforming economies .
In relation to this it will be important to strengthen integrity from the perspective of the environment , the contribution to sustainable development and fair geographical distribution .
It is also necessary to expand the carbon trading market in order to send clear signals about the cost of carbon .
This involves one of the most cost-effective ways of cutting emissions while at the same time providing an obvious stimulus for the transfer to a low-carbon economy .
In connection with the EU agreement on the climate-energy package the Council has also emphasised the contribution of this package to EU efforts to secure funding for measures aimed at mitigating climate change and adapting to it .
It is clear that we must do much more in the area of funding .
The Council has decided to return to this topic in its June meeting , in order to further define its position in relation to ongoing international negotiations .
I should like to thank the Czech Presidency for a fulsome response .
I actually got it in writing earlier today because they did not think we would reach Question 10 .
Can I assume that really is the view of the Czech Government , as you have just put on the record , because it would certainly encourage me greatly if I thought so ?
I thank you , because it means the Czech Government has come a long way on climate change matters since the start of its Presidency .
Apart from the Council meeting in June , could you indicate the rest of the timetable for coming to an agreement on the so-called ' fair share ' from the EU in financing third-country mitigation and adaptation ?
I fully agree with what you say , by the way , on the carbon market and its contribution .
Thank you , Mrs Doyle .
I am intrigued to know that you had the answer in advance .
That is a practice I have wished to encourage from both Council and Commission for a very long time , so congratulations to you both on achieving that .
( Interjection from Avril Doyle : ' That is because they thought we would not reach Question 10 ! )
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the less time is left for the Presidency of this Czech government , the faster it seems to pass and that is perhaps why we are trying to hurry on and to deal with all of the administration on time .
I would like to say in response to the question from the honourable Member that the Council will discuss this topic again in June this year .
In the opinion of the Council it important to focus more on the financial mechanisms of the fight against climate change .
In advance of the Copenhagen meeting the Council will publish the EU approach to different ways of financing mitigation and adaptation measures , to supporting new technologies and to creating the right environment for implementing these plans .
The Council will also show how the EU will make a concrete contribution to these plans and it will explain how the costs will be shared out between the Member States , as well as the efforts towards implementing these aims .
All of this will be based on actual proposals from the Commission .
Concerning certain other problems related to financing the global agreement on combating climate change , the EU has made it clear that it wants to assume a proportionate share of responsibility in this matter .
Moreover , the EU has established basic principles relating to funding and has made it clear that it intends to discuss these options with its global partners .
However , it is obviously too soon to reveal our cards by publishing some of the numbers .
It would not be sensible , it would not be prudent , it would not be tactical .
We have an idea of how much funding will be needed to implement the global plan .
However , we must know at least approximately what sort of mitigation measures third countries are planning to implement .
In this context I would like to say that in 2007 the EU set out a voluntary commitment to cut emissions by 20 % - and in the event of a successful global agreement by 30 % - and this was long before any other country in the world had published anything at all on mitigation proposals .
While I have the opportunity , I will press the point , because it does seem to me that if answers to questions that we think we are not going to reach can be provided in advance then there is no reason why the questions that we are going to reach should not have the answers in advance , so that we can have - as we just had now - a better and more helpful exchange .
Thank you both for demonstrating that , which has made the point that many of us have long sought to make .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 20.10 and resumed at 21.00 . )

Ecodesign requirements for energy-related products ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Csibi , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy related products ( recast ) - C6-0277 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their cooperation in reaching the compromise agreement with the Council on the recast of the Eco-design Directive .
It has been a challenging process , mainly due to the very restrictive nature of the recast .
A legislative proposal where Parliament can hardly change anything is not the appropriate framework for codecision .
We are no longer an institution limited to giving assent and this is not the way Parliament wants to work with the recast in the future .
However , I am pleased that despite these challenges we managed to reach a compromise that confirms the basic principles of the Commission 's proposal , such as the extension of the scope to energy-related products , but also brings more clarifications and more emphasis on all relevant environmental parameters .
Thus , the compromise improves the definition of ' energy-related products ' by clarifying which products could be covered by implementing measures , such as window-insulation materials or some water-using products like showerheads or taps .
And I insist on the fact that giving these examples does not mean that these products will be covered automatically .
First , they will be subject to specific impact assessment , and implementing measures will be developed only for those products that have significant environmental impact , have significant potential for improvement and are not covered by other legislation that can achieve the same objectives more quickly and with less expense .
Then , the compromise provides for the assessment of the methodology used for preparing the implementing measures to better cover resource efficiency and the life-cycle approach .
In times of narrowing natural resources , we must not only aim at energy efficiency but at optimising the use of resources as a whole .
Furthermore , we must try to reduce the environmental impact of our products not only during their use phase , but also through their entire life cycle , from raw-material selection to manufacturing , packaging , use and end of life .
Even if for now the Directive is extended only to energy-related products , we should be prepared for a further extension to all products in the future .
Both the Committee on the Environment and the Committee on Industry have demanded a clear commitment to extend the scope of the Directive beyond energy-related products after its review in 2012 .
In response , the Commission committed itself to adopting the current methodology , if needed , with a view to a further extension of the scope to all products .
But we could not have any firm commitment for an extension of the scope to all products after the review of the Directive in 2012 .
I would have liked the Commission to have had a firmer and more visionary approach , especially since we have all the instruments on the table today and this was the best option identified by the impact assessment .
In this sense , I believe we missed the opportunity to do more for the environment with less bureaucracy .
There is also the review in 2012 .
We will certainly not contest the fact that we need to change our consumption and production patterns by switching to cleaner products .
Change is needed , but change is also possible without overburdening companies and households .
By building a low-carbon and resource-efficient economy we can give a new impetus to competitiveness .
The Eco-design Directive represents a big opportunity for industry to build more competitive businesses based on green technologies .
It creates a level playing field across Europe , reducing red tape and production costs .
It also provides flexibility for the industry , as self-regulation measures can be recognised as alternatives to regulatory implementing measures .
Last but not least , relevant stakeholders are consulted and associated in defining and reviewing the implementing measures and assessing self-regulatory measures .
From my consultations with stakeholders , I realise that forward-thinking businesses do not wait for regulations in order to become compliant , but take proactive measures .
Some do it out of altruism but most do it because eco-consciousness is simply good for business .
However , we need to give the industry the right signals .
Even though my vision of extending eco-design requirements to all products is not shared by all my colleagues , I strongly believe that only by shifting to cleaner goods can we stop environmental degradation .
More than 80 % of all environmental impacts of a product are determined during product design .
An improved product design would avoid waste and provide consumers with more efficient , more reliable and longer-lasting products .
Extending the eco-design requirements to energy-related products such as windows or water taps is the first step towards a more ambitious approach and a sustainable product policy at EU level .
Sometimes even small steps can lead to big achievements .
I hope you will endorse this compromise agreement as a way forward and you will continue keeping up the pressure to optimise the full potential for environmental improvement and stimulate the design of eco-friendlier products .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Csibi , for his outstanding work on this proposal and by saying how very pleased I am that his work has made agreement possible at first reading .
The content of the proposal - from a purely legalistic point of view - is limited .
It essentially consists of extending the scope of the existing Eco-design Directive beyond the energy-using products that it currently covers to include all energy-relevant products .
From a political point of view , though , this change is of the utmost significance .
It represents an important step on the road towards the third industrial revolution in Europe , to the transformation of our European national economies into national economies with low-CO2 production .
I have a vision of how the European product of the future will look .
The European product of the future , bearing a ' Made in Europe ' label , will be the most innovative , safest and also the most energy and resource-efficient product around .
I am convinced that a leading role for Europe in energy efficiency and in the thrifty use of resources will not only benefit the environment , but also our employment figures .
Environmentally-friendly products and environmentally-friendly processes are currently booming economically , even in this crisis , and this is set to continue .
To my mind , this directive is a good example of integrated product politics .
It has already proved its worth and we are seeing good results when it comes to energy-using products .
The directive provides a framework for the laying down of eco-design requirements that take account of the actual environmental impact of a product throughout its entire life cycle .
As Mr Csibi has already said , the directive paves the way for a voluntary initiative by industry .
It limits officially specified requirements to those products in which a significant saving potential could be realised in an economically viable way .
The directive currently in force is already making an important contribution to achieving the European reduction targets , through the abolition of light bulbs , boilers and numerous other energy-inefficient consumer products .
Expanding the scope of the directive to cover all energy-related products brings with it an enormous potential for further reducing energy consumption and thereby CO2 emissions .
To recap , every product that is relevant to the consumption of energy now falls within the scope of the directive .
This therefore also includes those products that do not consume energy directly when used , but which influence energy consumption indirectly .
So , for example , requirements can now be laid down for products that use water and for windows .
To give just one example : simply increasing the proportion of windows with double-glazing could give rise to an additional 30 % of energy savings by 2020 .
That is the equivalent of a saving of 55 000 gigawatt hours , which represents a saving of 27 megatonnes of CO2 , or the output of two to three nuclear power stations .
That shows the enormous impact that the apparent innocuousness of such changes can conceal .
The Commission intends to continue its on-going work on the approximately 25 implementation measures for the eco-design directive that were set out in its working plan for the 2009-2011 period .
In addition , after consulting the Eco-design Consultation Forum pursuant to Article 16 of the directive , it will lay down what products are to be included in the second working plan by 21 October 2011 .
By 2012 the Commission will also review , pursuant to Article 21 , whether it would be appropriate to extend the scope of the directive to products that are not relevant to energy consumption but that do have a bearing on resource conservation .
As agreed in the negotiations that led to agreement at first reading , the Commission is issuing a statement .
Parliament is aware of the statement .
I will pass it on to the Bureau after this sitting .
Due to the quick adoption of the proposal at first reading , the Commission can now implement its sustainable industrial policy and get straight to work on coming up with other specific steps to save energy and reduce CO2 emissions .
Let me conclude by observing that the close cooperation between Parliament , the Council and the Commission sped up the negotiations .
I am very pleased to be able to tell you that the Commission feels able to support all of the amendments put forward by the rapporteur , Mr Csibi .
Thank you .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Csibi .

The result of our joint efforts reviewing the Eco-design Directive is , in my opinion , to a large extent , a missed opportunity .
To widen the scope from energy-consuming to energy-related products is , of course , good .
But why stop there ?
The problems we face in terms of resource use go beyond energy .
The Commissioner should know that .
The problem is the overall pressure on ecosystems and the natural resource base .
Many scientific reports bear witness to this , not least our own thematic strategy on natural resources .
An estimated two thirds of major ecosystems in the world are over-utilised , and we are depleting natural capital .
This problem is getting worse because of growing economies and populations .
The fact is that the current growth model and concept is not sustainable .
Who but the European Union could help transform the concept to a more sustainable one ?
The Eco-design Directive , in my opinion , does offer a way forward .
As with energy efficiency , we could establish standards and norms for how to source materials , how to design products to facilitate recycling and reuse and enhance resource efficiency .
Sooner rather than later we will have to address resource efficiency .
Having seen earlier drafts of the Commission proposals which included resource efficiency , it is a mystery to me why such proposals were not followed through .
Tell me , where else in EU legislation do we have measures that encourage resource efficiency ?
We need policy frameworks that encourage resource efficiency across the board , that encourage companies to try new business models - like functional thinking - offering services rather than products , and where revenues obtained through quality of service , and not only via increased volumes from sales , are taking place .
As I said , all this could have been covered by the Directive .
I predict that , a few years from now , we will all regret that we were not more proactive today .
As I said , a missed opportunity .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur .
I admire and value his dedication and commitment , and I also very much appreciate his rapidity .
As far as I am concerned , it could all have gone a bit faster , and it is unfortunate that he was so seriously held back .
Europe is now wrestling with an economic crisis , but we have all , in fact , been wrestling for many years with a lack of innovation .
Other continents are often more innovative than the European Union .
The United States is so because it invests much more money - from the public but also from the private sector - in research and development .
Japan is highly innovative , partly through its ' top runner ' approach .
Our directive on ecodesign aims at innovation .
This is good for the environment as well as for the economy .
Made in Europe should indeed stand for the most environmentally friendly products .
Innovation must take place in several directions : lower energy consumption , less pollution from production and consumption , much better handling of natural resources and attention to reusing or recycling products at the end of their useful lives .
It is not simply about energy-using products , but also about energy-related products , and I am fully in agreement with the rapporteur that it should in fact be about all products .
Resources , in other words , are important .
If , within twenty years , there will be nearly nine billion inhabitants on this earth , and if they all want a reasonable level of prosperity , then it is essential to handle natural resources well and sparingly .
There are inspiring concepts , such as the cradle-to-cradle concept put forward by Michael Braungart , radical ideas to make possible a complete reuse of materials .
Today , the important question is : does the directive on ecodesign actually work ?
The best-known example from the directive on ecodesign is the ban on incandescent light bulbs , an unpopular but very positive decision .
Unfortunately , there is still some confusion about the energy-efficiency of LED bulbs , as they turn out to be somewhat less advantageous than manufacturers made it seem .
Another regrettable example of the directive on ecodesign is energy labelling .
You now have AA , A + , A20 , A40 , and soon all products will have some type of A rating .
Meanwhile , it is completely unclear what that means , which is hardly a good example of ecodesign .
Fellow Members , this revision cannot , unfortunately , solve everything .
We are stuck with our own procedures and agreements and this is a missed opportunity indeed .
Hopefully , the evaluation will provide an opportunity for improvement .
It is important that the directive on ecodesign be thoroughly evaluated soon .
Does it really bring about the innovation we are seeking ?
Does it place the European Union and European manufacturers at the top of the market ?
Does it save energy ?
Does it reduce waste and the use of natural resources ?
And most importantly : can the effect be extended to non-energy-related products and to all products ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Verheugen , ladies and gentlemen , I have a few words of warning to say about this compromise , which was achieved very quickly - astonishingly quickly , in fact .
We have leapt forward so quickly that we could have adopted this directive tonight practically without debate .
That must be one of the reasons why so few Members are planning to speak .
I would like to warn that we are extending the scope of this directive at a point in time where we have hardly any experience of how transposal of the current directive has gone .
I would also like to remind everyone that we have debated the scope in Parliament , and this House wanted to extend it to cover all products .
I think that would be the wrong way to go .
It is neither acceptable nor sensible to subject every product produced in the EU to an environmental compliance assessment , and it is regrettable - at least as far as I can see - that this is being included in the text as an option for 2012 .
I would like to warn that we need to beware that the European Commission does not become a product planning authority .
Politicians and administrators do not know better , including after the experiences of the financial and economic crisis , how products should be produced and what engineers can perhaps do better .
In closing , I would also like to remind everyone that the growing complexity of this product legislation overwhelms small and medium-sized enterprises .
Many of these requirements can hardly be met by these enterprises as it is , and what we are doing today will saddle them with further burdens , the practical consequences of which I have the feeling we have not sufficiently thought out .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my sincere thanks go to the rapporteur , Mr Csibi , for his excellent work .
The Ecodesign Directive is not one of those matters the media or the general public would get worked up about , but actually it is about something that is very important , although I also share Mr Wijkman 's view that the perspective should be widened to cover resource efficiency in general .
All the surveys that have analysed the cost of climate protection show that it is by saving energy that we will cut emissions fastest and more cheaply .
If we impose energy efficiency requirements on equipment and products we will save significantly on energy significantly , without the public needing to go to a lot of extra trouble .
Buildings are estimated to cause 36 % of greenhouse gas emissions in the EU .
According to reports we have all seen , improving the energy efficiency of buildings is one of the most economical ways of protecting the climate .
Now we are to broaden the scope of the Ecodesign Directive , imposing energy requirements , for example , for windows and wall and insulation elements in buildings .
That is only right , and I think it is excellent that we have not allowed the chemical industry lobbyists to block this very necessary decision .
This directive will do much to help us reach the 20 % energy saving target .
Another important means at our disposal is the energy labelling of equipment .
It is pathologically stupid that the Commission should try to do away with the A to G scale , which has worked so well , which consumers have become familiar with , and which has provided a model elsewhere in the world .
I am pleased that the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy this week adopted a firm position in favour of keeping the A to G scale and updating its criteria as technology develops .
I hope that the Commission will at last pay heed to the very strong and clear view of this Parliament .
rapporteur . - Mr President , compromise is never easy , and today 's debate showed us that we have different opinions , but it is also never easy to find a good middle way between the progressiveness of the European Parliament and the realism of the DGs and the Council .
But I would like to sincerely thank our colleagues from the DGs for their flexibility .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Verheugen for his support and kind words , and the shadow rapporteurs who helped me in this legislative process .
From my point of view I think that we have succeeded in finding a good middle way in this proposal and in finding a way of dealing with this package which will not overburden European industry but also will help us attain a more energy-efficient and resource-efficient European industry .
But I would also like to echo to some extent what my colleague Mr Krahmer said , and to express my hope that the implementation of this proposal will be as quick as our legislative work .
So I would like to see quick implementation , I would like to see quick results and I would like to see results which first of all serve the interests of European citizens , and then also those of European industry .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The current financial crisis is only helping to reinforce the EU 's responsibility to honour its commitments in the areas of energy and the environment .
Numerous measures must be taken ( for example , ecodesign ) so that the way we consume and manufacture items in Europe becomes more sustainable , without additional costs being imposed on businesses and citizens .
Ecodesign relates to the first stage in a product 's life cycle .
The aim of the new concept is to eliminate the impact made on the environment by products and the production process .
Around 80 % of a product 's impact on the environment and the costs throughout its life cycle can be calculated during the design phase .
The accumulation and dissemination of the body of knowledge generated by the ecodesign efforts of manufacturers is one of the crucial benefits in the reform of the ecodesign directive .
Informing consumers about energy efficiency and resources should become a key element in manufacturers ' decisions .
Improving energy efficiency is the quickest and cheapest way of reducing greenhouse gas emissions .
In order to provide greater transparency for consumers , industry and the relevant authorities and facilitate the rapid collection of data for consumers and SMEs , there must be an accessible database .
I support the request submitted to the Commission for creating a public ecodesign database available online .
Harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Neris , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products - C6-0203 / 2008 - .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this evening we are coming to the end of the first phase of the work of examining the Commission proposal on the conditions for the marketing of construction products .
I wish , in this respect , to thank the Commission for its technical support , and I also wish to thank all of the shadow rapporteurs for their receptiveness and their willingness to engage in dialogue , which has enabled us gradually to arrive at the same positions and to reach agreement on major points of this issue .
Whilst it is true that we fully support the objectives of the reform , which are to improve the market 's operation , to give credibility to the CE label and to simplify the system , and that we share the unquestionable interest in having a common technical language , a broad majority of the members of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection were anxious to air their doubts .
These doubts can be explained in the first place by our unanimous desire to avoid simplifying and relaxing procedures and thus curbing product control and declarations .
They also arise from the position of the Commission which , in our view , tends to be happy with a situation in which product assessment criteria are in part left up to the Member States , so that the real meaning of the CE label depends on the country in which the products are marketed , thus causing problems of credibility .
Our reservations are based finally on the fact that , at a time when we wish to take Europe down the road of a green economy , the text proposed to us deals neither with the energy performance of products nor with their partial harmfulness to users .
To answer these concerns , the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection has introduced a series of changes .
I personally will mention five of them .
We propose , in the first place , to maintain the obligation for construction products placed on the market to have the CE label , in order to guarantee that everything sold in Europe has undergone the appropriate control procedures .
This choice must not contribute to creating extra burdens on the weakest companies , thus handicapping their activity .
That is why we have defended maintaining simplified procedures for micro-enterprises and why we have introduced a measure exempting small-scale craftspeople from a compulsory CE label .
The second point concerns the simplified procedures to make access to the CE label easier .
We have , however , decided to reserve access to these procedures to manufacturers of construction products , not to importers .
This approach , which is aimed at improving the supervision of the market , will enable us to prevent low quality products from being imported by dubious import companies .
The third major change is the introduction of a minimum level of harmonisation as regards the criteria for assessing construction products in Europe .
This is to ensure that the CE label has the same meaning in whichever country the product is marketed in .
Where possible , we would in fact like the requirements applied to product assessment in Europe to be the same in all the Member States .
To this end , we have also introduced the option of creating new assessment criteria that are not merely technical , but can also be used to measure performance on subjects of general interest , such as the environment , safety and health risks .
To the same end - and this will be my fourth point - we have helped to significantly enhance the user information provided by manufacturers in the declaration of performance .
Manufacturers will , in particular , have to declare any harmful substances appearing henceforth on an annexed list , which also includes the substances mentioned in the REACH Directive .
Finally , and this is my last point , the members of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection have tried to introduce more transparency in relation to the certification conditions for construction products , more transparency in relation to the companies ' role in the certification process , and more transparency , too , in relation to the clarification of the conditions of access to the CE label , clearly distinguishing the access routes for products covered by a harmonised standard from the route reserved for products that are not and that are often referred to as innovative products .
This work is in fact coming to an end , but it has not reached the stage that we wanted .
The difficulties faced in the Council as regards formulating a position meant that one could not be agreed , despite good cooperation from the French Presidency and the Czech Presidency .
Today , I regret this , although I am aware that the extra time allocated to us might allow us , at second reading , to achieve a much broader consensus and , above all , to have more meaningful discussions , where these positions for this sector will be voiced .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Neris , for her efforts in working on such a comprehensive and technically complicated proposal .
This is a law-making process that has created great challenges for us all , but we must be clear that what we are talking about here is the future of an extraordinarily important sector .
Construction products alone already make up 3 % of internal European products , and if we include construction activity , the construction sector amounts to 10 % of the total economic output of the European Union .
It is absolutely clear , therefore , that efforts to improve the competitiveness of this sector - especially in the current crisis - are particularly important .
With this proposal , we are aiming to create a solid basis for the consolidation of the internal market for construction products .
Only in that way can we secure the necessary growth and jobs beyond the recovery phase .
In order to achieve this goal , the current Construction Products Directive must be brought into line with the principles of better law-making .
I will now set out what we were trying to achieve .
We wanted to clarify the basic concepts and the use of the CE mark , simplify the procedures in order to reduce costs for businesses , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises , and to raise the credibility of the entire system .
For me , it was about avoiding any unnecessary additional burdens for businesses , especially for the smallest companies .
I therefore think it is important that no new administrative or assessment procedures are introduced , something that is of vital importance , above all , for the smallest local companies .
In accordance with the principles of the Small Business Act , which was , I would point out , given an extraordinarily warm welcome by this House not long ago , the Commission proposal puts forward simplified procedures for micro-businesses when it comes to products that do not give rise to any serious safety concerns .
I do not want to see this approach changed - it is one of the key points of the proposal .
This is because , in practice , it is the case for a number of families of construction products - such as windows , internal doors and floorings - that the existence of very small manufacturers is extremely important for the functioning of the market and is in the interests of consumers .
The potential of these small manufacturers must be exploited efficiently for the benefit of the European construction industry .
I do not share the opinion that it is necessary to prescribe the declaration of hazardous substances going beyond the rules that we have already put in place under the REACH regulation .
I assure you in all earnest that the rules laid down under the REACH regulations cover everything - there is nothing more that we would need to do for the construction sector - all the concerns that I have heard are comprehensively covered by the REACH regulation .
I really do wonder what point there would be in having comprehensive , integrated legislation on chemicals if we were then to go and introduce new and deviating regulations for individual products .
There is no way that the Commission would support such an idea .
Finally , I will deal with CE-marking and the abolition of national labelling .
Let me be quite clear on this : where prescribed , national labelling adds additional testing requirements for construction products over and above the provisions of harmonised European standards , but it does not give any added value at all in terms of content .
All it adds is more red tape and more work for the businesses in question .
That is directly opposed to the main goal of the proposal .
The construction sector 's situation is different from that of the traditional areas of what has been called our ' new approach law-making ' , which was recently the subject of the internal market package .
We cannot simply copy the solutions implemented in the other sectors of ' new approach law-making ' in the construction industry as it has a completely different structure and works with completely different materials .
For understandable reasons I have not gone into every amendment .
We will inform Parliament 's staff in writing of the Commission 's position in relation to the rest of Parliament 's amendments .
The proposal for a regulation on construction products is a very important proposal , in my view .
I consider today 's debate important and I share the view of the rapporteur that , with a little more time , we still have a good chance of achieving a result together and reaching a sound compromise .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - Mr President , could I say that the Commissioner showed a good understanding of the construction industry .
All I would say is that I think it represents a larger percentage of overall GDP , something like 12 % or 13 % , and of materials , say , 4 or 5 % , so it is a very important sector .
I am a civil engineer by background and it was a privilege to do the opinion on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
I was delighted that at the end there was total , unanimous support for the opinion that we put down .
We looked at the technical matters more than the marketing because , overall , it is really an internal market approach that we are discussing tonight .
The construction industry does need a regulation after 20 years of having the Directive in place .
I would emphasise the need for more CE marking , which is absolutely essential .
We do not want to see any more national standards and I wish this whole process every success for the future .
It is a very important measure in a very important industry .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SK ) At present there are many differences in intra-state requirements for construction products and for installing them in buildings .
As construction is one of the sectors where the mutual recognition principle is most often breached , I welcome the proposed regulation on the marketing of construction products .
It is a comprehensive piece of legislation which aims to update a 20 year old directive on construction products and several regulations .
This regulation makes changes to the declaration of conformity requirement , harmonising the legal terminology and defining the exceptions for small and medium-sized enterprises .
According to my information , producers of construction materials are very interested in the CE mark .
Besides this , it should greatly simplify administration for exporters and importers and it has value from a marketing perspective .
Producers of lime , cement and bricks , for example , are already enjoying the benefits of the CE mark .
In the construction sector the CE mark does not indicate safety and the national marks do not have additional value for users .
Instead they represent a barrier to the internal market .
National marks do not indicate that additional properties of a product have been tested , nor do they say anything about the quality of a construction product .
Despite this , producers often have to pay for tests and for the right to label their products with national marks .
I have no objection to voluntary marking which has the purpose of testing the qualitative properties of products , such as ECO Design for example .
I firmly believe that our aim must be to strengthen the CE mark and the obligation to use it .
Commissioner Verheugen , I appreciate your opinion on the use of national marks for construction products , but as shadow rapporteur I support the original proposal of the Commission .
The harmonised standards are a more effective and appropriate instrument for producers on the construction products market and I am therefore proud of having drafted , here in the European Parliament , the framework for financing the European standards .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs Mrs Neris , Mrs Fourtou and Mrs Rühle and their team for their excellent cooperation , as well as my colleagues Den Dover , Malcolm Harbour , Andreas Schwab and Tereza Pinto de Rezende for a great piece of work .
I would also like to express my thanks to colleagues from the Commission and the Czech Presidency for their accommodating and constructive approach .
I wish this legislation much success .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Setting product standards is not simply a technical matter .
Twenty years ago I was involved in the first standard-setting in a completely different area of responsibility , namely construction .
I must say that I am pleased with the result that Mrs Neris has achieved .
That is , the performance of a construction product should be assessed not only in terms of its technical capabilities and essential characteristics but also in terms of the health and safety considerations of its use over its entire life cycle .
Our group has therefore worked hard to include provisions that benefit both the safety and the security of employees and users as well as the environment .
I thank the rapporteur for her support in this regard .
Our group is of the opinion that all information known to the manufacturer should be included in a declaration of performance , including information about hazardous substances .
The Member States should ensure correct application of the legislation and provide for penalties for infringements , including criminal sanctions for serious infringements .
Mr President , when it comes to the harmonisation of products , the argument is all too often used that it is a technical matter that cannot be contaminated with social measures .
I am pleased that , in this case , we have been able to resist this argument , and I hope that we can conclude this tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I wish to congratulate Mrs Neris on the work she has achieved on a technical issue that is particularly difficult for non-experts like us .
The aim of the regulation proposed by the Commission is to achieve a harmonised legislative framework , whilst retaining flexibility and reducing administrative overheads and costs .
I do not know if we have always met this specification , but at least we have tried , with the rapporteur and the others shadow rapporteurs , to facilitate the work for second reading , since the Council has been unable to arrive at a common position .
I will not go into the details , but I will take advantage of the time that remains to describe the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe 's position on the CE label , one of the crucial points of this report .
On this issue , the ALDE Group is in full agreement with the Commission and has always opposed the proliferation of national labels .
We will therefore vote in favour of making the CE label exclusive , of simplifying the procedures for acquiring this label , and of facilitation for micro-enterprises .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would certainly like to add my thanks to the rapporteur , the shadow rapporteur and , above all , to Mrs Pleštinská and I would like to continue where Mrs Fourtou left off .
We did , after all , agree the Goods Package a year ago , and we had to resolve the difficult issue of CE-marking at that time .
Commissioner Verheugen , the decision by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament to drag the compromise agreed then into this directive also has to do with the fact that the study that you commissioned was possibly not effectively represented in all parts of this House .
You have a clear opportunity here , Commissioner , to press the Socialist Group more strongly not to ignore the results of the study .
Perhaps there may also be some more recognition of this by tomorrow 's vote , particularly since the CE marking in this directive - in contrast to in the Goods Package - does not relate to consumer-relevant information but exclusively to product characteristics that really serve a different purpose in any case .
As a second point , the Construction Products Regulation has been very successful in helping push towards the completion of the internal market as , for one thing , we were able to successfully bring about the simplification of the regulations for small and medium-sized enterprises in many areas and , for another , we implemented the relaxations for microenterprises that were announced in the Small Business Act and which we had been asked for , explicitly and often , in various places .
I absolutely agree with the points that have been made in respect of the national standards institutes .
We need a much stronger European internal market in this respect .
It needs to be possible for a Spanish manufacturer to get a product authorised for Germany or Sweden by a standards institute in Spain rather than having to rely exclusively on the threading of the eye of a needle that is national approval by each national institute .
Furthermore , Commissioner , I warmly welcome what you had to say in respect of the regulation of chemicals .
It took great efforts for us to bring about the REACH regulation , and we should not be adding new regulations on top of that for each new legislative proposal that relates to materials with one chemical connection or other .
There are a couple of points that we must deal with again when it comes to second reading .
The first is the question of the regulations governing product claims .
There must be more on this area , I would think , so that users genuinely obtain an effective insight .
We must also prevent duplicate regulation .
Annex 6 , in my view , goes too far .
The Low Voltage Directive and the Machinery Directive already cover many issues in this regard .
There needs to be a careful reconsideration of whether there should be lex specialis regulations in this case .
For the rest , Mrs Neris has produced a fundamentally sound basis for the vote at first reading .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , my thanks for giving me the floor again , but I do not need it .
All that is left for me to say is thank you all for this constructive and useful debate .
Mr President , thank you , Commissioner , thank you , ladies and gentlemen , for having contributed so fully to this work .
I will make just one comment : I have indeed taken into account all that has been said because I think that this work should continue .
For us , it is important for this sector to be a little more structured within the Community , but , above all , for the standard , which we would like to be a little more exhaustive as regards the CE label , to be much more consistent .
In this respect , our wish is above all for further European integration for a better Europe , and , indeed , further integration for these sensitive sectors , because we know that they are at the heart of our economies and are also levers for economic recovery .
There is also a need to address all the points that we have mentioned .
The last thing I wanted to say relates in fact to what Mr Schwab was saying about all the studies .
We will take into account the studies that have been completed , of course , not just to confirm what we have done , but to make any reassessment that proves necessary .
I believe that for us it is essential that we put our heads together in this sector , and we will do so .
Thank you , Commissioner , for holding these fruitful exchanges , and I hope in any case that , at second reading , this text will be both consistent with and adapted to the needs of our companies in particular .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments - Common system of VAT as regards tax evasion linked to import and other cross-border transactions ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mr Hamon , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 2003 / 48 / EC on taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments - C6-0464 / 2008 - , and
by Mr Visser , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 2006 / 112 / EC on the common system of value added tax as regards tax evasion linked to import and other cross-border activities - C6-0039 / 2009 - .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the shadow rapporteurs who have contributed to the adoption of this report in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , not least Mrs Pietikäinen and Mrs Raeva , and to congratulate the coordinators from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , Mr Gauzès and Mr Klinz , who played an important role in terms of ensuring that this report , which will be put to the vote tomorrow in our plenary session , was adopted in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .


You know that at the conclusion of the G20 meeting , some of the EU Heads of State - and prominent ones at that - claimed victory by announcing , in a stream of communications , that the age of banking secrecy was over .
These thunderous statements aside , the European Parliament - and I welcome this - has now set out to do the practical work and has taken an interest not in communication but in the efforts it can make to effectively combat tax evasion , which is estimated to amount to EUR 200 billion each year .

These EUR 200 billion should be compared with the amounts for the recovery plans to help the countries of Europe cope with the crisis ; they should be compared with the European Union budget ; and they should also be compared with the deficit levels of the countries of Europe .
Today , Europe 's taxpayers are thus perfectly justified in asking the European banking sector , and therefore the European banks , to make the efforts needed to allow the Member States ' tax authorities to recover part of the tax income they are losing through evasion or fraud .
We have done a constructive job , and I believe that we avoided resorting to dictates or mutual recrimination .
We have advanced on three fronts , and I wish to commend what was the draft text from the European Commission and the work done around Commissioner Kovács , who was unquestionably going in the right direction .
We have tried , as best we could , taking as our yardstick what the European taxpayers are telling us , to improve the Commission 's text in three directions .
We decided that , as regards the scope of the directive , the text was a little too timid , both on the legal structures involved and in the definition of savings products .
We know that financial engineering has a considerable imagination when it comes to inventing new financial products to allow some people to escape taxation .
This is why Parliament and the Commission propose to introduce a committee procedure that adapts the definition of savings products to the current reality of that financial engineering .
However , on this issue , many products are currently excluded from the scope , and , in our opinion , they should be included as quickly as possible ; this is particularly the case for some types of pension schemes that work via capitalisation , and , more generally , we think that the proposal to include products which guarantee 95 % of the investment does not offer sufficient guarantees .
That is why we think the threshold of 90 % is more reasonable .
Amendments will be tabled to this end tomorrow in plenary .
We will see if they are adopted .
I regret that we have not found a compromise in committee on this point and hope that plenary gives a strong signal by defining savings products as products which guarantee 90 % of the capital and not just 95 % products , as the Commission is proposing .
Broad consensus was , however , reached on how the scope of the directive should be widened , especially in the wording of Annexes I and III .
Annex I is , moreover , considerably strengthened by the report , since we are drawing up a very broad list of tax havens that spares no jurisdiction and that , unlike the G20 list , specifically includes Delaware and Nevada .
We have defined more broadly than the Commission the legal constructions that these jurisdictions will have to show either do not exist on their territory or are fiscally transparent , and I believe that this reversal of the burden of proof is a more effective way of fighting tax evasion .
However , the main weakness of this text - and I will conclude on this - relates to the transition period granted to three Member States : Belgium , Austria and Luxembourg .
Although Belgium has announced it is abandoning the system of withholding tax , I wish to see the system for the automatic exchange of information become widespread and , for this to happen , I would like a date to be set for the end of the transition period .
This is why , even though we have adopted the principle of a study to assess the respective merits of the systems of withholding tax and exchange of information for 2011 , when the directive is revised , we wish to see 2014 set as the end date for this transition period .
I wish to say that we have tried to work in a spirit of transparency and towards improved transparency at a time when European taxpayers are required to contribute , especially in order to come to the aid of the European banking sector .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) I should like to start by thanking the shadow rapporteurs for their sound cooperation .
Let me put things into perspective .
The fight against fraud , although in large part the responsibility of the Member States , cannot be conducted solely at the national level .
It must be a priority for the European Union , and we must make sure that there is close cooperation between the Member States and the European Commission .
Given that the reform of VAT has been put on the back burner for the moment , the Commission has concentrated on the so-called classic measure , which is to say changes in the VAT legislation that introduce technical improvements but do not fundamentally alter the existing system .
I support the initiative brought forward by Commissioner Kovács because it moves in the right direction .
Tax fraud leads primarily to violations of the principle of fair and transparent taxation , and can lead to distortions of competition if one company does charge VAT while another does not , over and above all the costs to the government .
This affects the operation of the internal market , since honest businesses have competitive disadvantages because of tax fraud .
I heartily welcome the efforts of the Commission to try to tackle the deliberate abuse of the VAT system by criminal gangs who seek to take advantage of the shortcomings in the system .
VAT is not only an important source of income for the Member States , but also for the EU .
The European Union receives around EUR 20 billion from VAT revenue .
It is estimated that VAT fraud in Europe comes to EUR 100 billion per year .
This refers to the sum not handed over by importers at the border .
It is a reason for taking on those importers and exporters who commit fraud .
The European Commission is introducing a major change , however , in seeking to hold suppliers acting in good faith jointly liable with importers who commit fraud .
I have therefore tried to increase legal protection for exporters acting in good faith .
In other words , businesses should not bear the responsibility for the shortcomings of administrative cooperation between Member States .
If Member States are simply given an additional power to prosecute exporters on a cross-border basis , the Member States will have little incentive to bring an improvement to administrative cooperation .
With our amendments , we are trying to prevent honest exporters from being penalised unnecessarily .
Therefore , the honest exporter must receive a warning two months before the actual penalty , so that he has the opportunity to prove that he had been acting in good faith .
Contact in this regard must be made via the exporter 's own tax office and not that of the importing Member State .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament argues in favour of a maximum recovery period of five years .
I do not agree with this .
The liability period for VAT at the national level has not been harmonised .
In Belgium , for instance , it is three years except in the case of demonstrable fraud .
A longer period of joint and several liability for VAT on cross-border transactions is undesirable because businesses will have to bear a much greater administrative burden , leading to high costs for doing business that are certainly not desirable in the current crisis .
Moreover , companies will , as of 2010 , have to submit monthly summary declarations for cross-border transactions within the EU , as a result of which the tax authorities will automatically receive the necessary information to cross-check intra-community transactions .
This information must be used by the tax authorities in an appropriate and targeted manner .
Why would it be necessary to give them five more years before carrying out the cross-checks , once they already receive monthly data ?
I am afraid that the result of a lengthy claim period of five years will be that tax authorities will act late and the fraudsters will have disappeared .
As a result , the claims for recovery will be made against businesses that may have been acting in good faith .
Mr President , I will conclude .
Importers who commit fraud must be dealt with quickly .
The honest exporter must be addressed by his own tax administration , with prior notice of two months and within a maximum period of two years , as this period limits , as far as possible , the administrative burdens on honest businesses .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , in a globalised world , where tax evaders and fraudsters take advantage of the limited scope of authority of national tax administrations , efficient cooperation and mutual assistance between tax administrations is essential to better combat tax fraud and evasion .
Improved rules and greater transparency are crucial .
This has recently been underlined by the G20 summit in London , and it is even more relevant in the internal market in the midst of the financial crisis and the need to tighten fiscal policies in the European Union .
Against this background I am glad to discuss with you tonight two proposals that both contribute to the objective of fighting tax fraud and tax evasion in two different tax areas .
The proposed revision of the Savings Tax Directive seeks to close loopholes and better prevent tax evasion .
I very much welcome the constructive and supporting attitude to this proposal shown in the report by Mr Hamon and the opinion by Mrs Siitonen .
I am aware that the most controversial point of the discussions in the committees has been Amendment 20 , fixing an end to the transitional period during which three Member States are allowed to levy a withholding tax in place of automatically exchanging information .
I also notice the opposed initiative from Mrs Lulling and Mr Karas supporting , through Amendment 28 , the option for these three Member States to pursue the levying of the withholding tax and to abstain from automatic information exchange on a permanent basis .
Let me recall that the ultimate objective of the Savings Tax Directive is automatic exchange of information on as wide a basis as possible , as this is the only reasonable tool to enable the country of residence of the taxpayer to apply its own tax rules to cross-border income from savings .
This is perfectly in line with recent developments at international level - such as the G20 conclusions - favouring transparency and the strengthening of the cooperation between tax administrations on the basis of exchange of information .
Therefore I can assure you that the Commission , while rejecting Amendment 28 because it contradicts the aim of the Directive , has no negative view on Amendment 20 .
However , we consider that fixing a date for the end of the transitional period is premature at this stage and could create an obstacle to the necessary quick adoption of the amending proposal by the Council .
There is actually a need to evaluate when and how the political commitments for enhanced cooperation , which have been taken by a number of jurisdictions , can actually be implemented .
Nevertheless , the Commission will not be opposed to any reinforcement of the corresponding provisions of the Directive which could be unanimously agreed by the Council .
In Amendment 22 the Commission is asked to produce by the end of 2010 a comparative study analysing advantages and weaknesses of both the systems of exchange of information and of the withholding tax .
However , the target date for the production of this study does not seem realistic : all Member States would also have to make available to the Commission , from this year onwards , the elements of statistics the transmission of which is set to be optional for them under the Council conclusions of May 2008 and Annex V of the amending proposal .
Concerning the other amendments of a more technical nature which aim either at extending the scope of a particular provision - like Amendment 17 on insurance - or at limiting the administrative burden on the economic operators , the Commission considers that its proposal is already the result of a delicate balance between improving the effectiveness of the Directive and limiting an additional administrative burden .
The proposed amendments , however , could negatively affect this delicate balance .
They could either increase the administrative burden in a disproportionate manner - this is notably the case for the amendments aimed at extending the scope - or have an unfavourable impact on the effectiveness of the provisions .
While appreciating the constructive approach of Parliament , the Commission cannot therefore accept some of the amendments in their present form .
However , the Commission will defend the spirit of a number of these amendments in the Council deliberations without formally amending its proposal .
Turning now to the sensitive subject of VAT fraud , I would like to recall that at the ECOFIN meeting of 4 December 2007 the Council invited the Commission to accelerate its work on the conventional measures to combat VAT fraud .
The ECOFIN also invited the Commission to present legislative proposals to rectify the shortcomings encountered in the current legislation .
Hereupon the Commission presented a communication on a coordinated strategy to improve the fight against VAT fraud in the European Union in December 2008 .
The communication sets out a series of measures for which the Commission intends to present legislative proposals in the short term .
The present proposal is part of the first set of proposals announced in this communication .
The proposal will allow the Member States to better fight VAT fraud in two ways .
Firstly , by providing further clarification on the conditions for exempting certain imports of goods , and , secondly , by creating the legal basis for allowing cross-border joint and several liability for traders failing to fulfil their reporting obligations .
I would like to thank Parliament , and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Visser , for dealing with this proposal in such a short time and for the constructive report .
Allow me , however , some comments .
Amendments 2 and 4 of the report would require the Commission to carry out an evaluation on the functioning of the new cross-border joint and several liability provision .
Unfortunately , the Commission does not possess this information , as the assessing of taxes , as well as their recovery , are purely national competences .
Furthermore , if the Commission receives complaints from the economic operators that the provision is being misused by national tax administrations or leads to unwarranted results , it will assume its responsibility as guardian of Community legislation and take appropriate measures .
This includes in particular presenting a proposal to amend this provision when necessary .
Amendments 3 and 5 go against the division of competences between Member States in the overall functioning of the Community VAT system .
This system is based on a taxable event taking place in a specific Member State , leading to a VAT debt and VAT liability in that Member State .
It is the Member State where that VAT is due that will determine the procedure to be followed in order to collect this VAT , including from non-established traders .
Therefore , a trader who has not fulfilled his reporting obligations in the Member State of departure will have to justify his shortcomings to the tax administration of the Member State where the VAT is due and not to the tax administration of his own Member State .
The latter will only intervene upon request of the first Member State in order to obtain additional information or in the tax recovery process .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I support the compromise reached by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Mr Hamon 's report on the Savings Tax Directive is excellent and balanced .
It addresses the prevention of tax evasion and greater transparency .
Parliament needs to be strict in this area .
For example , we should harmonise the taxation systems for savings income in the form of interest payments .
We need to include the last remaining Member States in the information exchange system .
Banking secrecy , which is far too rigid , needs to be opened up , so that we can fight against the tax havens .
The G20 Conference also made the dismantling of tax havens one of the key objectives .
Parliament must set an example , for us to recover from the financial crisis and regain the public 's confidence .
Transparency in the banking sector must be ensured , and that will only be possible with the exchange of information .
Madam President , the debates and discussions around the fiscal system for savings have taken such a passionate turn that it has become disturbing .
I do not hesitate to defend what appears to be a minority position here , but we will see what happens tomorrow , even though our rapporteur and the commissioner are still mixing up the sheep and the goats .
Let us go back to the root of the problem .
The Directive on savings taxation came into force in 2005 with the aim of taxing the capital revenues of non-residents .
Two systems are involved here : exchange of information between tax authorities and withholding tax .
What are we finding after several years of operation ?
Official and unofficial studies all show that exchange of information is seriously failing , because it is complicated , burdensome and costly .
Withholding tax , on the other hand , shows many virtues .
What do you think is deduced from all this - above all by our rapporteur and the commissioner ?
Well , that the system that does not work and does not guarantee the payment of tax due will be made compulsory .
Understand that one if you can !
The issue is not lacking in piquancy , as it will also be noted that the system of withholding tax is constantly gaining ground in the various Member States - 19 out of 27 are applying it to their general satisfaction .
However , what is good enough at home becomes unacceptable once you cross the border .
This logic will just lead to an unravelling of what we have been building here for decades , in other words the single market in financial services .
The Community acquis of the free movement of capital is also called into question , as the so-called major countries are pushing for repatriation of their residents ' capital .
However , any blow can now be struck in the fight against this new Hydra of banking secrecy .
I say to my fellow Members who are fighting against this so-called monster that is guilty of all sins : you have chosen the wrong target by confusing the issues in the framework of this directive and , above all , you are deluding yourselves .
To finish , Madam President , I hope that many of my fellow Members will heed the voice of reason and vote for Amendment 28 by my group , which will lead to no less than allowing the Member States a free choice between withholding tax and exchange of information .

Madam President , Commissioner , I am sorry that Mr Visser did not stay to listen right to the end of the debate on this topic , but I must begin by saying that we support the Commission 's proposals in this direction .
A complete reform of VAT would , of course , do a much better job , but as this is not possible at the moment , your proposal should resolve some of the problems encountered by Member States in their desire to contain VAT fraud .
Particularly in the context of a crisis , we think that it is of paramount importance for VAT revenue to be guaranteed as , at the moment , Member States are trying to invest billions to support the economy .
In this respect , every opportunity to limit the chance of fraud should be supported by Parliament .
I would also like to say that we support on the whole the proposals made by Mr Visser in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
They will perhaps instil slightly greater confidence among the business sector , compared to the initial proposals from the Commission .
However , we also think that the suggestion made in Article 1 , point c ) that the period between the delivery of the goods and the receipt of notification referred to in the second subparagraph should be two years is fairly short and , in our view , creates additional opportunities for restricting the scope and results of the European Commission 's proposal .
This is why the PSE Group is suggesting that this period should be five years , which we believe is sufficiently short for the business sector , but also a long enough period for the tax administration to complete its work .
Furthermore , the introduction of this point c ) is not linked either to suggestions concerning from what date and how it will come into force , which we think will create additional problems for Member States .
We hope that the proposal will be supported and yield its expected results .
Commissioner , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , against the backdrop of an economic and financial crisis , we must support the European Union in its efforts to achieve a more efficiently run and effective tax system .
The Commission 's proposal to amend the directive on taxation of savings in other Member States offers an opportunity to improve the existing scheme .
Those of us in the European Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs support extending its application to new financial instruments and geographical areas .
Europe 's Liberal Democrats proposed the inclusion of territories with particularly lightly regulated tax regimes , such as the states of Delaware and Nevada in the US , as well as an assurance of equal treatment between Member States and a reduction in the administrative burden involved with implementing the directive .
However , Commissioner , the basic debate remains whether to abolish the system of tax calculation at source in favour of the automated exchange of information .
From a Liberal viewpoint , the issue here is how we will manage to increase tax revenue collection and how enforcement only of the exchange of information will not result - a fact which is confirmed according to the research already carried out - in preventing tax abuses or in increasing revenue collection , but it will only deprive some Member States of their competitive advantage .
Taxation at source is not only more efficient , but also offers greater transparency during collection .
I firmly believe that Member States must retain their autonomy when it comes to selecting a taxation system .
The ALDE Group made the suggestion for a comparative analysis to be carried out of the two systems .
We hope that we will have the results from the Commission at least by December 2010 .
We also hope that these results will provide the basis for future Commission proposals on amending the savings taxation system within the European Union .
Tomorrow we are voting on another important text concerning VAT fraud relating to imports .
The objective of this directive is to ensure the rapid exchange of adequate , good-quality information .
In this case , five years is a fairly long period for the business sector .
It also aims to introduce a shared liability mechanism .
While protecting every Member State 's tax revenue , it is important however for us to ensure that joint liability only comes into play when the information supplied contains serious irregularities or there is an unjustified delay in providing it .
Otherwise , we risk imposing a further harmful burden on business .
I hope that we will vote in favour of these reports tomorrow .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , tax evasion is not our main problem when the world economy is being shaken to its foundations .
It is true that we live with tax fraud throughout Europe , in the US and throughout the whole world , in fact .
It is true that we have tax havens around the world where wealthy people and companies can put and leave money .
However , that is not our main problem today .
Focussing on this is a way of escaping our responsibility .
What we need to do now , if we are to have any tax bases left at all in the future , is to get to grips with the financial crisis .
Why do we find ourselves in the situation we are in now ?
It is due , above all , to the fact that we now have ownerless capitalism .
In practice , the financial undertakings , the large banks and the majority of the large companies are run by officials and these officials can introduce bonuses , severance payments and pensions that are all dependent on the profits of the company that these people manage .
There is nothing in this world simpler than to increase profitability in the short term and thus the profits that these companies make .
It is just a matter of increasing the risk .
There are numerous studies of ' Taleb distributions ' , as we often call them , where , if you increase the risk substantially , you can count on profits rising dramatically and everyone can be given these bonuses and other benefits , in other words these ' perks ' .
Then , of course , the risks start to become reality , but then those leading the company have already left or will have to leave .
They get to buy chateaux in France or play golf in Spain .
We should not feel sorry for them , but the system is quite simply unsustainable .
Moreover , none of the players have any incentive to prevent this development .
The credit rating agencies are dependent on getting customers , but they will have no customers if they say that their customers are not credit-worthy .
Depositors know that there are deposit guarantees , and so do not need to worry about which bank they put their money into .
Other players know that they can come to an agreement with the other party and count on the fact that they are too big to fail , while the taxpayer always picks up the bill .
This means that the states must say at the outset that they will not take all the risks .
It is an extremely difficult thing to do , but it must be done .
Unfortunately , I do not believe that the European Parliament will cooperate on this , but I would recommend to everyone in this Parliament that they do so .
( NL ) Contrary to my usual custom , I will begin with a political statement , as I find tax evasion and avoidance , in these times of increasing unemployment and increasing pay inequality , a real scandal .
During the elections , it will become clear which parties are really willing to take this on .
Mr Hamon 's report on taxation of savings income is an example of the question at hand .
I realise that it is difficult for the Commissioner to reach true agreement on this under the unanimity rule .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has more ambition than may be found in the Commission 's proposal , and this has been worked into a number of amendments which we have submitted .
A final comment on Mrs Lulling , who contrasts the two systems of information exchange and taxation at source .
I think that that is not really the point .
We are talking about the loopholes that are present in the law in both systems and which are the points that we should focus on .
Steps have been taken , but more needs to be done than the current report proposes .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank you for your comments and the views you expressed during the debate .
I am glad to see that the European Parliament and the Commission share views on actions to be undertaken to better fight against tax fraud and tax evasion in the European Union and I am pleased with the general support for the two proposals .
I would like to thank you again for the priority given to the savings taxation file and for your support for the Commission efforts to promote good governance in the tax area .
Achieving rapid progress in the discussions on the amending proposal is also one of the priorities of the Czech Presidency .
Due to the international climate - the financial and economic crisis - it is also a priority for most Member States .
I am convinced that , once Member States agree on ways of closing existing loopholes in the Savings Taxation Directive , it is likely that the Council will ask the Commission to update in a similar way the agreements with the five non-EU countries and the 10 other jurisdictions participating in the savings taxation mechanism .
It is premature to speculate today on how they will react to our approach .
The EU first needs to reach a unanimous agreement internally .
However , bearing in mind progress achieved in the G20 talks on meeting the OECD exchange of information standards , I am optimistic in this area as well .
As regards Mr Visser 's report , I have indicated before that the Commission cannot accept Parliament 's amendments but we have taken note of the recommendations contained in the report .
In particular , the need for better coordination between the different Member States , the necessary improvement of the quality of the information that is exchanged , the need to allow other Member States automated access to certain data contained in Member States ' databases and the requirement to harmonise registration and deregistration procedures are ideas that are strongly supported by the Commission .
This is also the reason why the Commission will come forward , by the end of May , with a more substantive proposal for a recast of the regulation on administrative cooperation , where these proposals will be incorporated .
In conclusion , and as I have already mentioned on past occasions , it is clear that there exists no one single and global solution for eliminating tax fraud and tax evasion .
The proposals we have discussed today are two major steps forward within the framework of the global anti-tax fraud strategy at EU level .
Madam President , I will be very brief , as I have already spoken at length just now .
I would like firstly to thank Mrs Raeva and Mrs Siitonen , and also the Members , for their speeches and contributions to this text , and to say to Mr Kovács that , in my opinion , I have understood what he said .
However , I think that a strong signal tomorrow from the European Parliament on the question of the scope , on the question of banking secrecy , and on the question of the list of tax havens will be a valuable help to the Council , especially if , in future , we need to negotiate new agreements with third countries .
Now I would like to finish with the criticism - the gentle criticism , I might add - levelled at Mr Kovács and I by Mrs Lulling .
She criticised us for ' mixing the sheep and the goats ' , even though she did so very gently .
I would like to say to her that I think , tomorrow , this Parliament , whilst it sometimes mixes the sheep and the goats , will be able to distinguish between the general interest and private interests , and I hope that we will thus have contributed to stepping up the fight against tax evasion .
( FR ) Madam President , I asked to speak in order to make a personal statement .
Mr Hamon has just criticised me for something but I must say to him that I see that he and the commissioner unfortunately continue to mix the sheep and the goats .
I must also say to him that the only system that ensures that every taxpayer pays their taxes - which is what we all want - that the best system is levying withholding tax because the system of exchange of information is a failure .
It has not worked , and we do not know who has paid what because the authorities do not know how to manage the system .
I wanted to make this clarification .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Friday , 24 April 2009 , at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
In the debate on tax evasion in the area of taxation of savings income and VAT , I would like to draw attention to the following matters .
1 .
Total tax evasion in all tax jurisdictions of the European Union amounts to around EUR 200 billion annually .
That is over 2 % of the Member States ' GNP , and it means that public spending in Member States is reduced by a huge amount .
2 .
It is good , therefore , that the new directive fills loopholes which have been found in tax legislation , and also , having regard to the imagination of people who evade tax , tries to prevent the development of new strategies of evading tax legislation .
3 .
The matter of tax havens in the territory of the European Union has been raised , and also of those in dependent territories of EU Member States .
The current financial crisis has shown that tolerating unclear tax legislation , anonymous transactions and lack of cooperation in the area of taxation may in the short term ensure extra income to particular countries and dependent territories , but in the long term this destabilises the financial system and may be the cause of severe financial crises .
in writing . - ( ET ) The loss of revenue due to tax fraud in all taxation categories amounts to more than EUR 200 million per annum in the EU , which is equivalent to nearly 2 % of GDP .
Billions of euros of lost revenue each year due to tax fraud leads to the reduction of additional investments in EU Member States and public expenditures of general interest , which in the context of the present financial crisis significantly reduces Member States ' abilities to solve problems that arise in the area of social affairs , healthcare and education .
The struggle against tax fraud is an extremely important topic for the EU , and we must retain our leading role in this area !
Only by doing so will it be possible to achieve a situation in which significant financial centres outside the European Union will implement similar measures to those implemented in Member States .
I support the European Commission 's idea that , duly taking into consideration the principle of the free movement of capital specified in the Treaty establishing the European Community , we should consider adding clauses to counter EU resident physical persons ' attempts to avoid the implementation of the savings directive , by channelling interest earned in the EU through tax-free cover enterprises or entities that lie beyond the territory of the EU or beyond territories where similar or identical measures to those agreed at the EU level are implemented .
A zero tolerance policy must be applied to tax havens .
Any delay in finding solutions that ensure the fairer and more consistent application of measures in this area is unjustifiable in the present economic situation !
in writing . - ( FI ) The revision of the Savings Tax Directive is an important part of the reworking of the financial architecture and the rules of the financial markets .
The current directive is hopelessly out of date .
It is relatively easy to circumvent , for example by using as intermediaries investment companies that the directive does not define as paying agents and which are , therefore , under no obligation to participate in the information exchange system .
Likewise , it has been possible to arrange investment portfolios in such a way that income that is the equivalent of income on interest remains outside the definition , as a result of ' repackaging ' .
The reform is an attempt to address these problems .
To solve the problem of intermediaries , the Commission is extending the definition of paying agent to include foundations and funds .
There are also plans to include new , innovative products and , for example , certain types of life insurance policies in the directive .
It is far more difficult to include other new products .
Unfortunately , it is extremely awkward to lay down definitions that would make it possible to include all income that might be compared to income from interest as an interest payment , especially when it is relatively easy to create new products .
With regard to this , we should examine broadly how these products can best be regulated , before they are included in the directive .
The Commission also means to put forward a proposal for an amendment to the Mutual Assistance Directive , which will also include reforms connected with the automatic exchange of information .
To avoid tax evasion , it is also vitally important that the three countries that are exempt from the current information exchange system - Belgium , Luxembourg and Austria - are included in the system the other countries employ .
The rapporteur 's proposed deadline for this , which is 2014 , should receive our full support .
Problem of profiling , notably on the basis of ethnicity and race , in counter-terrorism , law enforcement , immigration , customs and border control ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Ludford , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the problem of profiling , notably on the basis of ethnicity and race , in counter-terrorism , law enforcement , immigration , customs and border control .
rapporteur . - Madam President , over the past decade , laws and practices have been introduced enabling the retention and exchange of huge volumes of personal data .
Currently the EU itself is proposing a number of measures that facilitate profiling , a technique of pulling together data from various sources in order to make a sort of template against which are identified those people whose characteristics , behaviour or associates seem suspicious and who merit further screening as likely perpetrators of crime or terrorism .
There has also been a move in policing towards a predictive and preventive approach which , while not without value in some circumstances , can lead to repressive measures against innocent people based on stereotyping , often on the basis of race or even religion .
The reason I am concerned about profiling and data-mining is because they depart from the general rule that law-enforcement decisions should be based on an individual 's personal conduct .
The danger exists that an innocent person may be subject to arbitrary stops , interrogations or travel disruption .
Then , if that flagging of them as a person of interest is not promptly removed , longer-term restrictions could follow , such as refusal of visas and entry , bans on employment or even arrest and detention .
In a world of increasing international exchange of data , the identification of someone as a person of security or policing interest , if not corrected , could have not only inconvenient or expensive but indeed appalling consequences .
One need only remember that Canadian torture flight victim , Maher Arrar - on whose horrendous experience the film ' Rendition ' was based - was picked up due to profiling based on people his brother happened to know ; having done nothing himself to merit suspicion , he nonetheless spent seven months in a Syrian torture dungeon .
The report I am presenting to you has benefited greatly from the considerable input of the shadow rapporteurs , whom I warmly thank .
It outlines human rights , data protection and non-discrimination standards in an attempt to uphold two basic principles for any profiling exercise to meet : that repressive consequences should be based on individual behaviour , and that the principle of equality under the law should be upheld .
Not all profiling raises legal objections .
We are all familiar with thrillers where the psychologist is called in to draw up a criminal profile of the murder suspect ; and if a witness gives a clear description , a profile - of a bank robber , let us say : white , male and 30 - it would be nonsense to arrest someone who was Asian , female and about 50 .
The most obvious risk of profiling is on the basis of ethnicity or race .
If used by police officers as the only basis of deciding whom to stop , search or arrest , it is lazy , misguiding stereotyping , which amounts to illegal discrimination against minorities .
There is much concern about the victimisation of Roma people in this way .
In my own city , London , the impact on young black men has led to tougher guidelines and safeguards - none of which , it must be stressed , should impede the intelligence-led investigation of crime .
Besides concerns regarding legitimacy , I strongly question the effectiveness of profiling .
To keep looking for suspicious people on the basis of looks or behaviour can distract from the search for those who are really dangerous .
There is also the risk of the real criminals adapting to the profile by using innocent-looking people as drug mules or suicide bombers or by changing travel routes away from those monitored .
Counterterrorism efforts focus the spotlight on Asians , especially those of Pakistani origin .
Thirty-two per cent of British Muslims report being subject to discrimination at airports .
There is a great risk of alienating these people , who may then end up not cooperating with the police , ultimately hindering security .
This report therefore asks for European or national legislation on profiling to be brought in compliance with existing European law and international treaties .
If possible , all safeguards for profiling should be drawn together in a single legal instrument .
Besides the legal assessment , further studies should be conducted into the proportionality and effectiveness of profiling .
The Fundamental Rights Agency and the European Data Protection Supervisor , in their respective capacities , should play a key role in those studies .
Finally , if profiling is to be used legally and fairly as a means of contributing to the maintenance of security , a coherent and just legal framework must be established .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , on behalf of the Commission I would like to welcome this initiative by Parliament to bring the issue of profiling , notably on the basis of ethnicity and race , in counterterrorism , law enforcement , immigration , customs and border control , to the centre of attention at European level .
The Ludford report represents a very good platform that contributes further to this issue by launching a broad discussion and suggesting how to tackle this problem .
I want to underline that already existing data protection legislation ensures a high level of protection of personal data - including sensitive data such as information on ethnicity or race - and applies regardless of the technology used .
Therefore , it is obvious that general data protection principles apply to profiling as one of the ways of data processing as well .
The Commission strongly believes that unjustified or unnecessary ethnic profiling is an unfair and prohibited practice , even when this is done for law-enforcement purposes or in connection with immigration , customs and border control , and is contrary to the fundamental values of the European Union .
Under important instruments proposed by the Commission - like the Schengen Border Code , Eurodac , SIS , VIS - the use of unjustified ethnic profiling techniques is not authorised .
For example , as regards border controls , the provisions of Article 6 of the Schengen Borders Code require that border guards execute checks with no discrimination against travellers on grounds of racial or ethnic origin , religion or belief .
I would also like to mention the activities of the Fundamental Rights Agency in this field .
The Agency is about to present a good practices handbook for combating and preventing ethnic profiling .
The Commission supports the inclusion in the 2010 work programme of the agency of joint training with FRONTEX , where the said handbook could be used .
The Commission also supports the inclusion in the 2010 work programme of the agency of a project on implementing Article 6 of the Schengen Border Code that aims at collecting data .
Finally , the Commission welcomes the minorities and discrimination survey that was presented yesterday .
The sections on law enforcement and border control provide us with further and recent data on experiences of ethnic profiling .
The Commission will , of course , carefully study the results of the Minorities and Discrimination Survey , which will be published chapter by chapter through the year .
But already now we can conclude that racism and xenophobia are still persistent phenomena in the European Union and that they affect the lives of members of ethnic minorities .
The Commission agrees with the draft report that processing of data for statistical purposes , including ethnicity , race or origin , could be used to identify indirect discrimination or unjustified law enforcement practices .
However , this angle has to be properly assessed .
Therefore , the Commission is looking into the opportunity to ask the Article 29 Data Protection Working Party to prepare an opinion on the processing of personal data for statistical purposes , including ethnicity , race or origin .
The Commission is also following closely the activities of the Council of Europe on the draft Recommendation on Profiling .
The Commission is about to launch a request to the Council for a mandate to be authorised to negotiate this draft recommendation .
As regards the need for a legal framework to define profiling , the Commission believes that the relevant EU legislation on border management and data protection is adequate to protect fundamental rights .
Indeed , it requires that any processing activity has to be grounded on a specific , recognised legal basis and respect particularly the principles of necessity , proportionality , purpose limitation and accuracy .
It is subject to supervision by independent public authorities .
Currently the framework also contains strict rules relating to the processing of sensitive personal data or automated decisions .
All these principles also apply to profiling as one of the ways of performing processing of personal data .
The Commission is committed - and I am personally committed - to fighting racism and xenophobia to the full extent of the powers conferred by the Treaties , and this includes cases where racism comes from public authorities .
The Commission is determined to reinforce our policy to fight racism and xenophobia in the Stockholm context , which should include tackling the issue of ethnic profiling .
Again , on behalf of the Commission , I very much welcome the draft report , and I look forward to its adoption in plenary tomorrow .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , as Socialists we fully support this report and contributed to it because we believe it is the first time in this Parliament that the political , legal and moral debate surrounding ethnic profiling and its effects on ordinary people has been raised properly .
We believe that predictive profiling and data mining are issues which have long been unexamined and I very much welcome the Commission 's positive approach to both recognising this issue and understanding the possible indirect discrimination that can be caused by ethnic profiling .
The Socialists hope that if this report is adopted tomorrow and following the upcoming Council of Europe recommendation on profiling , there will be sufficient political impetus to address this issue at the highest levels .
Why ?
For my constituency of London and for myself personally , I can say that I know what ethnic profiling means .
It means being stopped and searched regularly because of how you look , rather than being stopped and searched because of proper intelligence , proper policing , with proper procedures put into place .
This kind of profiling is a waste of resources .
It does not catch terrorists ; it does not catch criminals .
What it does is target indirectly or directly those who are vulnerable , who have an ethnic background which is just the wrong background
This can lead - and I think people should understand this - to strip searches and other abuses which we have seen .
This report is an important step forward in protecting people against something which so far has been unexamined , but I am glad that Sarah Ludford had now raised it in Parliament and we will fully support this report tomorrow .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank Sarah Ludford for her report .
Kathalijne Buitenweg cannot be here , but I will represent her views .
I must begin by asking : what is a terrorist ?
What kind of feeling do terrorists create ?
They create insecurity .
Terrorists also make everyone vulnerable , and prevent them from pursuing their life as they want to .
Then you look at the anti-terror legislation with profiling and you see it creates insecurity and it creates problems for people living their daily lives .
You cannot combat terrorism with anti-terror laws that create the same feelings of insecurity .
I think the European Court has been very clear on this , saying that this should be banned .
We can see that it is neither efficient nor legal .
The Carter Center in the US has showed it was not efficient .
The German surveillance scheme on 18-40-year-old Muslim men in Germany was not efficient .
It does not work , and I very much hope that we can take away the last exemptions allowing airports and harbours and so on to use these inefficient methods that make people feel bad .
And how can you say that you will have a high level of protection when people leave CDs with 20 million people 's data on them lying in cafés , and when we know how easy it is to hack into computers ?
I did it myself as a kid actually .
So I think this report is important .
The Council needs to adapt its logic and spend the resources efficiently , targeting specific individuals and focusing the time on them instead of going for ethnic registration , which is in complete violation of any human rights standards .
( NL ) First of all , I would like to thank Baroness Ludford for this fine report .
The report should have been even stronger , but it represents progress in the debate on this subject .
Sometimes ' profiling ' can be necessary , but such cases must be clearly delineated and protected against abuse .
The possibilities for storing , exchanging and interpreting information have , in recent years , increased faster than the necessary limits which democracies set for themselves in this regard .
The US security services have not gained better or more reliable information as a result of data mining and investigation based on profiling , but instead primarily a heavier workload .
A security agent compared it aptly with filling a water glass with a fire hose , in other words , particularly inefficient .
Naturally , profiles based on ethnic origin have been used for years , even if we generally call it by another name .
Even I , all of 1.60 m tall , and thus hardly the most threatening physique , have been regularly taken aside at customs .
A minor personal irritation , but many people who scrupulously abide by the law experience this inconvenience not regularly , but systematically .
Such people get the message from our society that they are always suspect , less worthy and unwelcome .
We are not going to catch true criminals , who come from every population group , by this method .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the interventions of the different MEPs show the importance of the issue of profiling and the respect of fundamental rights and the attention paid to it by Parliament .
The report gives an excellent picture of the questions raised by the use of profiling techniques , in particular when they are based on ethnicity , race , nationality or religion for law enforcement , immigration or border control purposes .
The Commission follows closely - and will continue to follow - the problems posed by the use of profiling in general and , in particular , in the sectors expressly referred to in the report .
The Commission is currently launching a consultation on the challenges posed by new technologies to data protection .
Its results should provide the Commission with elements that will feed its reflection and guide it when dealing with the problems that profiling can pose in the areas of justice , freedom and security .
The recent results published by the Fundamental Rights Agency on minorities and discrimination in the EU , which the Commission welcomed yesterday , show that racism and xenophobia are persistent phenomena in the European Union and that they affect the lives of our minorities .
The Commission has to carefully study the results of this survey in order to decide the way forward .
Again , I very much welcome the draft report , and I am looking forward to its adoption in plenary tomorrow .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I very much welcome the Commissioner 's positive response .
I think some of the things he has talked about will be extremely useful - the Fundamental Rights Agency , guidance on ethnic profiling , the Commission working with the Council of Europe on its recommendation , and the suggestion that the Article 29 Working Party can be asked for guidance .
I would like to push the Commission a little bit further , though , on focusing on the specific problems of profiling .
After all , we do have a recommendation on the table for profiling in the context of PNR data , so there are special problems .
I would like to thank very warmly the small but select band of colleagues who have contributed to the debate .
I think two things came out strongly : first of all , the fact that so-called ' security ' measures can create insecurity and , secondly , that they can be a waste , instead of a targeting , of resources .
So we are talking here about effectiveness as well as civil liberties .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Friday , 24 April 2009 , at 12 noon .
Statistics on plant protection products ( debate )
Τhe next item is the report ( Α6-0256 / 2009 ) by Mr Bart Staes , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , concerning statistics on plant protection products [ 11120 / 2 / 2008 - C6-0004 / 2009 - .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) We have before us the final agreement which we have negotiated with the Council and the Commission , a final agreement after a first reading in which we in Parliament took a very strong position and introduced a number of elements that , with a large majority , in fact gave us a very strong starting position vis-à-vis the Council .
I must say that the Council 's common position a few months after our first reading was rather disappointing .
There was not , in fact , much willingness to follow our approach , and therefore the negotiations with the Council were far from easy .
We did move a step forward , though , and there was a very constructive atmosphere .
The parliamentary delegation , too , was a strong group .
There was unity in diversity .
I think that we can bring the result to a vote tomorrow with a degree of pride .
In any case , we are making a contribution and ensuring that there is a basis , in addition to the two laws that have already been adopted on pesticides , that is , the directive on sustainable use and the regulation on the placing of plant protection products on the market , a set of instruments to be used in sound regulation regarding the provision of data via statistics .
This is therefore , to my mind , the basis for the parliamentary legislative work we have carried out .
One of the most important achievements is the fact that we have succeeded in imposing on the Council , even against its will , the fact that we have taken as our basic definition of pesticides the one that Parliament , in the political agreement with the Council , previously included in the directive on sustainable use .
This makes for a certain consistency , and that is important for later use as well .
We have also been able to include a very clear reference to the general legislative framework on statistics , to the way in which statistics should be used , the way in which they are handled and , above all , the way in which the data will have to be handled in future , from the perspective of confidentiality , among others .
We have attained our goal in that Member States must provide considerable information on pesticides and in a form that is mutually comparable .
Personally , I would have liked to go even further , but what has been achieved is a first step .
Another achievement is undoubtedly the fact that , because we took as our basic definition the word ' pesticides ' and the definition of pesticides used in the directive on sustainable use , we have also , in a second instance , included the concept of ' biocidal products ' .
That was an important request by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
This is an achievement .
It appears in the regulation , and in the current political agreement , although the latter does state that we undertake to expand the regulation on statistics and pesticides as it now stands with the concept of ' biocidal products ' at the time when the legislation exists and also - and that was an urgent demand on the part of the Council - after an impact study on the matter .
We have obtained greater transparency .
We have succeeded in requiring that the data must be published on the Internet .
We have , as noted - it is always a question of negotiation , for that is democracy - also failed to achieve a certain number of things .
I have already mentioned them , including the fact that there is a weaker formulation regarding the non-agricultural use of pesticides : on that point , the draft regulation does not entirely live up to what was achieved at first reading .
It is a question of give and take , however .
I must say that I am very grateful to the shadow rapporteurs .
It was a pleasant way of collaborating .
This was , for now , my last legislative report in this legislative period , and I hope that I will be able to add a fair bit to it in the next legislative period .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides approved by the European Parliament and the Council in January 2009 intends to complement the existing legislative framework by targeting the use phase of pesticides , with the objective of reducing the impact of pesticides on human health and the environment .
This proposal is the third legal pillar of the strategy , together with the framework directive and the Regulation for the placing on the market of plant protection products , and aims at providing reliable data to measure the progress of the Strategy .
The main objective of this proposal is thus to ensure that comparable and reliable data are collected in all Member States and transmitted to the Commission , making it possible to calculate harmonised risk indicators and to measure the progress of the Thematic Strategy .
An agreement at first reading on this proposal could not be reached between Council and Parliament for reasons mainly linked to the scope of the Regulation and to the publication of results .
Thanks to the intense and fruitful trialogue in second reading and in particular to the sense of compromise of the rapporteur and his shadows , solutions could be found for all the issues .
The Commission believes that the compromise found is very reasonable and meets the concerns of the Parliament without creating disproportionate burdens for the national administrations and businesses and it can therefore support it .
The Commission would like to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur , Bart Staes , for doing a great job on such a complex proposal , for his patience and for the very constructive exchanges he has had with the Commission .
On the basis of the current compromise , the Commission is confident that an agreement in second reading can be reached between the European Parliament and the Council on this important proposal to ensure the success of the Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the plenary session of January 2009 , we adopted two legislative texts on the sustainable use of pesticides and on the procedures for marketing plant protection products .
The negotiation of these texts has been passionate and has allowed real advances in the protection of human health and the environment .
Those two texts would be nothing without this one , however .
This regulation is , in fact , the enforcer for the other two .
You will recall , Commissioner , that these statistics are needed to reveal how many new products are coming on to the market , and also how their use is growing , and above all to calculate the risk indicators defined in the report on the sustainable use of pesticides .
I would also stress that , in my view , we have not only struck a balance between the necessary transmission of data and the confidentiality of the latter , but also established proportionate administrative requirements , since this is a concern for the users .
As regards biocides , it is important to stress that this text should , in time , cover them in accordance with the results of an impact study .
We have studied the non-agricultural commercial uses of pesticides .
For the moment , any assessment of their volume can only be intuitive .
For this reason , the pilot studies due to be carried out by the European Commission will be very enlightening .
I wish finally to thank our rapporteur , who supported us throughout the negotiations and made a major contribution to our reaching an agreement .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) I think that everything has been said .
This is a good agreement , and I hope that it will be adopted tomorrow morning .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Friday , 24 April 2009 , at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
As indicated by the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme , the European Union has recognised the need for a more consistent reduction in the impact which pesticides have on both the environment and people 's health .
This regulation concerning statistics on plant protection products will plug existing gaps relating to the use of pesticides in Member States .
It has emerged from the data supplied by the Commission on the use and sales of pesticides that we need to have at Community level a harmonised method for collecting statistics both from the stage of placing the products on the market and from manufacturers .
We are all aware that a more consistent legislative framework needs to be established at European Union level governing the use of pesticides .
This is why I want to emphasise that I welcome the creation of a common framework for systematically generating Community statistics relating to the placing of pesticides on the market and their use , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The President declared the sitting closed at 11.05 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
25th annual report from the Commission on monitoring the application of Community law ( 2007 ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Frassoni , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the 25th annual report from the Commission on monitoring the application of Community law ( 2007 ) .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is my third report on the application of Community law and I must say that - with all due respect for the considerable amount of work that we have done , together with the Commission - I do not think that we can declare ourselves to be particularly satisfied .
I believe that there are basically three problems , which I would like to mention , and which have been drawn to your attention and , above all , to the attention of the Commission in our report .
As compared with the outset , I can see a tendency on the Commission 's part to pay less attention to what Parliament does and asks , given that in contrast to previous practice we have received almost no reply to the questions that we have asked during the past two reports .
I must say that this causes me a certain degree of frustration , since we had all agreed that the issue of the application of Community law was a priority in the ' better regulation ' agenda .
We have encountered the following problems : the three fundamental issues that we discussed with the Commission were transparency , resources and the length of procedures .
We can see that with regard to the new point that we developed together , in other words the issue of transparency , progress has been rather slow and in fact , with the new regulations on access to documents , the opportunity for those who carry out infringement proceedings , or who request that infringement proceedings be opened , to find out why they have been closed or why they have been opened , is decreasing by any standards .
Secondly , I would like to talk about the issue of defining priorities : the definition of priorities , respect for and conduct of infringement proceedings must naturally involve decisions which are not merely technical but are also political and here , unfortunately , after the three or four years that we have been working on this point , we still have a problem with monitoring and the transparency mechanism , not only internally in other words , with regard to the Commission but also externally .
I would like to give you a couple of examples , particularly concerning Community law on the environment .
We know that this is the main problem in the application of European law , and yet both from the point of view of resources and from the point of view of the priority given to this sector , we are still lagging significantly behind .
One of the most interesting issues , and one which was discussed in the most positive terms with the Commission , was that of the reduction in the time taken by proceedings , through a set of mechanisms that had been put forward and in part agreed with the Commission .
On this issue too , however , we have remained at a stalemate due to a certain inertia , which I hope in the future can be resolved .
Also , another issue that we had debated at length with the Commission was the ' pilot project ' : this is a project whereby , when a citizen complains to the Commission , the complaint is forwarded to the Member State so that it can give some sort of response .
The assessment that some Member States have given , particularly our Commissioner , Mr Tajani , regarding the operation of this pilot project , is relatively unsatisfactory ; the fact that the Commission no longer writes directly to those who have been accused of a possible infraction greatly reduces the capacity of an administration that is guilty , let us say , of this alleged breach , to be motivated to respond .
Things are always that way : if an Italian ministry department writes to a region , that will certainly be less effective than a letter arriving directly from the Commission .
This is the kind of criticism that has been made of the pilot project , but unfortunately the Commission has not given much of a response .
Madam President , I reserve the right to come back in the second part of the debate , to respond to the comments that I am sure Vice-President Tajani will make .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I am here today on behalf of President Barroso , who asked me to pass on his regrets that he is unable to attend this debate on our 2007 annual report on monitoring the application of Community law .
The Commission welcomes the support given by Parliament to the approach it adopted in its 2007 communication entitled ' A Europe of results - applying Community law ' .
The Barroso Commission attaches great importance to the correct application of Community law , making it a top priority .
That is why the Commission has made a special effort to improve its working methods for the benefit of citizens and businesses , as explained in the 2007 communication .

Previous Parliament resolutions have inspired a significant number of the initiatives introduced in the communication .
Firstly , last January we introduced more frequent decision-making in infringement proceedings with the aim of speeding up cases ; secondly , we launched the ' EU Pilot ' project in 15 Member States last April to test a new method aimed at improving problem solving and the availability of information ; thirdly , the main purpose of this initiative , which is close to Parliament 's interests , is to better serve the interests of citizens and businesses with regard to questions and problems identified in the application of Community law , including infringements of this law ; fourthly , the Commission will nonetheless continue to decide to prosecute infringements in the event of non-conformance within the framework of the ' EU Pilot ' project , particularly through infringement proceedings ; and fifthly , President Barroso has written to the chairman of Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs , Mr Gargani , with details of the pilot project 's performance in December 2008 .

This letter also confirmed the Commission 's intention to send Parliament a detailed report on the project 's first year of operation , and preparatory work on this has begun .
Following on from its communication , the Commission also adopted an annual report , which is more political ; while it , too , points to the work done over the course of the last year , it also seeks to identify priorities for the application of Community law and a programme to put these priorities into practice .
The report constitutes an important and strategic statement by the Commission on a key aspect of the ' Better Lawmaking ' programme .
One of the aims of this initiative is to provide Parliament with more useful information to form a better framework for the interinsitutional discussions that follow .
Parliament has welcomed the identification of the priorities listed in the 2008 annual report , especially those concerning fundamental rights and quality of life .
For the first time , the Commission has used its annual report to set more precise priorities for the various sectors .
Our goal remains to focus our work more on actions that will yield more effective results in the interests of all citizens and businesses .
The action taken on the priorities identified last year and the progress made will be shown in this year 's annual report , as well as the new priorities for 2009-2010 .
Thank you . I am very interested to hear the contributions to this debate from the various Members , and I will give some answers to Mrs Frassoni at the end of the debate .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Petitions . - Madam President , I should like to congratulate Ms Frassoni on her report .
I think she and I now , over a period of two or three years , have enjoyed working together on this report on behalf of Parliament .
That cooperation I have enjoyed ; I do not enjoy the fact that we seem to end up every year repeating much the same things and having a certain sense that we are going round and round in circles .
It ought to be pretty simple , because this is about our citizens being able to see what European law is ; when there is a problem , to be able to see what the enforcement process is ; and , finally , to see the result of that enforcement .
But , as it is , we seem to have to keep trying to invent new mechanisms all the time to actually deal with a process that is already there but is not obvious and is not transparent .
We have made some progress in that the beginning of the process , in the sense of making EU law understandable , has now been taken on board by the Commission , and I am pleased that we now see , with some regularity , so-called citizens ' summaries prefacing pieces of legislation , so that we can all see - and those we represent can see - where we ought to be heading and what the law ought to achieve .
But when it comes to the enforcement process , we still seem to be in a position where the decision to enforce or not is less than obvious - why that decision may or may not be taken - and citizens are often left wondering .
We have recently received a letter from somebody who had tried to get a piece of legislation enforced and is now so disgusted with the whole European set-up , having been pro-European , that they now support an anti-European party .
That is the point : if we do not get this right , we bring the whole of European law and the whole of our institutions into disrepute .
It is as serious as that .
All of us as Members , in these last days of this mandate , are spending our time tearing around , going from trialogue to trialogue and first-reading agreement to first-reading agreement , arguing about sets of words , the contents of sentences in legislation .
That is great .
But if , at the end of the day , it is not enforced in the way that our citizens expect , we might ask ourselves : what is the point ?
All of our institutions have a responsibility concerning the monitoring of EU law .
You , the Commission , have the primary responsibility , and I wish in a way that we did not have to have this debate in this style every year .
Madam President , one of the key principles governing the operation of the European Union is that the Member States accept the obligation to transpose and implement Community law .
This principle is foundational to the process of integration .
There is without doubt a need for continuous , active cooperation of the Commission and Member States in order to ensure rapid and effective answers to doubts raised by citizens and to criticise and rectify breaches in application of Community law .
I welcome the declaration of the Commission on closer cooperation with the European Parliament in the area of reporting and application of Community law .
National courts play a fundamental role in applying Community law , and so I fully support the Commission 's efforts at specifying additional training for judges , the legal profession and civil servants in the Member States .
However , the effective application of Community law is still associated with serious challenges , including widespread delays in the transposition of directives .
One of the most important mechanisms which allow us to ascertain how , in reality , European law is applied , is the system of references for a preliminary ruling , the objective of which is to give national courts the opportunity to ensure uniform interpretation and application of European law in all Member States .
A fundamental problem with the procedure for references for a preliminary ruling is the time needed to receive an answer from the Court of Justice , which unfortunately is still around 20 months .
The reason for this is always the same - translation of the trial dossiers into all the languages of the EU .
This takes around nine months .
Of course , these translations are extremely important , because they ensure wide access to the latest and most important European rulings and they increase legal confidence in the European Union .
However , success or failure in the effective introduction of EU law will ultimately be determined by whichever institutional model is considered appropriate .
Having the knowledge and the means is not everything .
The will to take action is also needed .
Madam President , just as in previous years , the Commission has not responded to the issues raised in last year 's resolution on monitoring the application of Community law , of which I was the author .
In this respect there are three fundamental issues in which the lack of improvement remains a cause for concern : transparency , resources and the length of procedures .
Of the new cases of infringement in 2007 , 1 196 concerned a failure to notify national measures relating to the transposition of Community directives .
It is unacceptable that the Commission should grant itself 12 months to deal with these simple cases , which , apart from the necessity of a quick reaction , do not require any analysis or assessment .
The ' EU Pilot ' project , which was launched a year ago in 15 Member States to test the new method for reaction to complaints , could be extended to the other Member States , but the lack of information on assessment of its operation does not , unfortunately , allow Parliament to comment on this issue .
I regret to say that during this parliamentary term no significant progress has been made with regard to the role that Parliament should play in monitoring the application of Community law .
In connection with this a call should be made for prompt implementation of the related reforms proposed by the Working Party on Reform , which enhance Parliament 's capacity to monitor the application of Community law in Member States .

( ES ) Madam President , for once I am glad that I am not the incumbent , glad that Mr Tajani has come , because Mr Tajani has the advantage of having been an MEP .
I know that as a former Member of this House you have experienced the frustration that we have as MEPs regarding the application of Community law .
Well , in Parliament , we do have a tendency to take the Commission to task , but I think that we are setting the Commission an impossible brief , because all Community law and all application of Community law is based on indirect application .
In other words , the Commission has only a few officials in the central headquarters where it receives some complaints and has some options for action but , at the moment , the trend is to restrict budgetary powers , and so the Commission is not going to be able to act .
All Community law , and all application of Community law , is based on action by the national authorities : national parliaments , national courts and national civil servants .
Here , on this aspect , I do not believe that we can demand too much from the Commission .
What we should do is to help the Commission , and I think that the report by Mrs Frassoni contains several points that may be useful in trying to make the application of Community law a reality .
I am referring to the points on the correlation of national measures with directives , the cooperation of national parliaments and action by national courts .
Madam President , I wonder if Commissioner Tajani would agree that , in a sense , the biggest obstacle to the correct observation of Community law are in fact our national governments .
I will just give one example .
About 20 years ago we agreed to have the four freedoms throughout the European Union .
In my constituency there are many people of Italian origin , one of whom is a teacher and , obviously , a fluent Italian speaker .
He returned to his family home in Italy and was forbidden to teach in his family 's native country because his training was undertaken in England .
That surely must be wrong , but there is nothing that we can do about it because the Italian authorities say - for whatever reason - that this is reserved for Italian nationals .
The British Government 's behaviour at airports seems to me to be in flagrant breach of most European agreements .
Is there something the Commission can do - maybe by making a plea , at the next summit , to our national governments to show a bit of European solidarity ?
( ES ) Madam President , over the last five years , as an MEP who is a member of the Committee on Petitions , I have examined hundreds and hundreds of petitions , complaints and questions regarding the environment , and I have seen the very limited extent of cooperation by the national authorities .
One might even say that there is a real rebellion in progress by certain Member States against the application of the directive on natural habitats and other environmental directives .
We can see how inadequate the Commission 's departments are ; they have neither sufficient resources nor the political will to apply Community law in the most obvious of cases .
All this goes on for so many years that , in the majority of cases , when infringement proceedings reach the European Court of Justice we are acting ' at the point of death ' , and so the law , in irreversible situations concerning the environment , achieves nothing .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the draft resolutions under discussion today attach particular importance to the interests of citizens , and more specifically of complainants , in the application of Community law .
Within the limitations of its obligations in terms of confidentiality , the Commission is working to be more transparent and to publish more information in its annual report on the Europa website and in its correspondence .
The Commission is in the process of developing a joint European Union portal that should help citizens .
It is looking at the best way of presenting useful information to citizens and directing them towards the information that best matches their interests .
The Commission is in the process of finalising its work explaining the principle of State liability for breach of Community law , which could help citizens to obtain reparation in the national courts .
In terms of complaints , the Commission confirms the importance that it attaches to the formalities , to efficient processing of complaints and to keeping complainants informed about the progress of their complaints .
It also confirms its desire to find solutions as quickly as possible .
Finally , I would like to highlight , as has been rightly done by Mrs Wallis and Mr Medina Ortega , the importance of the national courts in the application of Community law .
Work is being done by the Commission in several contexts , with national judges , as Mr Zwiefka said , to raise their awareness of the different aspects of Community law and ensure that they have all the tools they need to access the relevant information .
With regard to the new ' European Union pilot ' method , it is not an additional stage in the procedure .
This method enables us to quickly examine whether a solution can be found directly and quickly with the parties concerned in a Member State .
It was constructed on the basis of the Commission 's practice over the years , adding better commitment from the Commission and the Member States taking part in terms of organising contacts and the results to target .
There are many specific points raised in the draft report under discussion today .
The Commission will provide explanations on the aspects that I am not able to respond to today in its response to the resolution .
Having said that , with regard to infrastructures , which are also part of my portfolio , I can only welcome the European Parliament 's invitation to ensure that infringement proceedings are dealt with and , where appropriate , closed , as they prevent Member States from investing in infrastructures that could affect the implementation of the European Economic Recovery Plan .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we welcome the common interest shown by Parliament and the Commission in the appropriate and correct application of Community law , in the interests of citizens and enterprises .
We confirm our joint assessment of the vital importance of this aspect of the ' Better Regulation ' programme .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to give my thanks to the President .
It is very interesting that the Commissioner has chosen , out of all the resolution , the point which I , as rapporteur , am least pleased with , but nonetheless I welcome all the things that he has said and the commitments he has made on behalf of the Commission .
I also wanted to take this opportunity to point out a few problems which I hope can be tackled by the Commission .
The first is a gradual reduction in the independence of the Directorates-General , subject to the combined effects of a legal service that is increasingly reluctant to go to Court and a General Secretariat that is increasingly reluctant to encourage the Member States ; the examples that I could give are , alas , numerous .
There is also a real problem of ineffective control of the application of Community law because of a lack of resources : Madam President , in relation to a directive that we have studied in depth , which is Directive 2004 / 38 / EC , there have been 1500 complaints .
This is the directive on the free movement of citizens , and there have been 1500 complaints by citizens but only 19 infringement cases have been opened .
Next , with regard to the pilot project issue , I have already spoken about the problem of a reduction in persuasive force and the fact that the deadlines cannot always be shortened .
Clearly , when issues are handled in the pilot project such as pollution that has already been confirmed , rules on hunting that obviously and openly conflict with Community rules , it cannot be claimed that the Member States are taking action , because this only serves to delay proceedings further .
Finally , Madam President , there is a problem which I consider to be worrying and which is relatively new , and that is the combined effect of the extreme formality , which is continuing to increase , of the replies given by the Commission , and the increasingly arbitrary nature of decisions .
Recently , an infringement case was closed for reasons of political expediency - I am referring to the MoSE project .
Clearly , when the concept of political expediency becomes involved in a monitoring process that ought to be , above all , a legal one , things can become complicated .
Finally , within our own institution , Parliament , we are faced with very serious problem because the reforms that we are about to debate and to vote on in May include proposals to significantly reduce the powers of the Committee on Petitions .
This would be a very serious mistake , because a reduction in the power of petitions means a reduction in the power of citizens , of complaints and of the handling of infringements of Community law .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Cross-border payments in the Community - The business of electronic money institutions ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mrs Starkevičiūtė , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on cross-border payments in the Community - C6-0352 / 2008 - , and
- the report by Mr Purvis , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the taking up , pursuit and prudential supervision of the business of electronic money institutions , amending Directives 2005 / 60 / EC and 2006 / 48 / EC and repealing Directive 2000 / 46 / EC - C6-0350 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( LT ) Today , as the European Union 's economy experiences a period of recession , it is very important to stimulate economic growth .
One of the sources of the European Union 's economic growth is the expansion of the common market , which is still very fragmented , especially in the area of financial services .
The proposal before us should help solve this problem and establish a common European payment area .
In English this is called the Single Euro Payments Area .
This document already has some history .
As soon as the euro was introduced and the currency exchange rates were abolished in euro zone countries , it became clear that prices for cross-border payments still differed from prices for local payments .
For this reason Regulation ( EC ) No 2560 of the European Parliament and of the Council on cross-border payments in euro was adopted and entered into force at the end of 2001 .
It set equal charges for corresponding local , national payments and cross-border payments and strengthened this principle .
The aim of this was to reduce prices for consumers and ensure greater competition in the payment services market .
Implementing this regulation reduced payment fees ; for example , a cross-border transfer of EUR 100 used to cost an average of EUR 24 in the European Union , now it costs EUR 2.50 .
On the other hand , the document revealed certain deficiencies .
For this reason it was decided that it should be revised .
The document before us is an improved version of Regulation No 2560 .
What is new in the document ?
Firstly , the principle of equality of charges for cross-border and corresponding domestic payments has been extended to include direct debit .
This was not previously available .
Once the SEPA had been created and the Payment Services Directive had been adopted , the payment environment in Europe changed ; therefore , it is important that from November 2009 it will be possible to use the popular electronic payment method , direct debit , on a cross-border basis .
In order to help create that common direct debit model , the regulation states that in the absence of a bilateral agreement between the payment service providers of the payer and the payee , the level of the default interim Multilateral Interchange Fee for a direct debit will be set at EUR 0.08 for a transitional period until 2012 .
The document also outlines how to improve the defence of consumer rights and remove obstacles to business .
It is proposed that Member States appoint competent authorities to supervise the implementation of this regulation , and those authorities should also actively cooperate across nations , so that there are fewer obstacles to business ; they could also lay down guidelines on how to assess procedures for determining compliance with the principle .
Another novelty the revision of this document offers is the proposal to gradually abolish obligations imposed on banks in certain states to provide balance-of-payments statistics and the laying down of other procedures for providing balance-of-payments statistics .
I am very sorry that an agreement with the Council could not be reached on this point and for the time being the balance-of-payments revision procedures and implementation procedures have still to be defined .
Parliament and the Commission have declared that a strict deadline would be set .
rapporteur . - Madam President , this directive responds to the growing importance of electronic commerce and of electronic money and the need for a clear legislative framework .
Its aim is to facilitate the use of electronic money for on-line payments accounts , pre-paid mobile phone accounts , top-up travel cards and gift vouchers .
E-money is no different from other forms of money in that it stores monetary value and provides a convenient means of exchange .
But , unlike account-based payment instruments , such as credit and debit cards , it works as a pre-paid bearer instrument .
It is used to cover payments - usually of relatively small amounts - to undertakings other than the user , thus differentiating it from single purpose pre-paid cards like telephone cards .
There is no need of a bank account in order to use e-money , so it is particularly relevant to those in society who do not , or cannot , have bank accounts .
It was all of eight years ago that a Benjamin Cohen , in his article , ' Electronic Money : New Day or False Dawn ? ' , stated that the era of electronic money will soon be upon us .
Sadly , this prediction was both over-optimistic and premature - for Europe , at least .
Electronic money is still far from delivering , in Europe , the full benefits which were expected when the first e-money directive was adopted in 2001 .
Probably this was because of the high initial capital requirement and other over-cautious restrictions .
The number of e-money institutions differs remarkably from one Member State to another .
For example , the Czech Republic has over 40 EMIs , or Electronic Money Institutes , while France and Germany between them have a grand total of 12 .
In fact , two German EMIs were even constrained to move to the UK jurisdiction because of major differences in regulation , even under this directive .
In August 2007 - two years ago - outstanding electronic money was only EUR 1 billion , and that compares with EUR 600 billion of cash in circulation .

So , clearly , e-money has a long way to go to become a serious alternative to cash .
However , it is growing significantly , despite the restrictions , and this new directive should enable new , innovative and secure electronic money services to operate , to provide market access possibilities for new players and to foster real and effective competition between market participants .
New and smaller operators will have an opportunity to enter the market , as the amount of initial capital needed will be reduced from EUR 1 million to EUR 350 000 .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs would certainly have preferred less .
Providers can extend the outlets where e-payments can be made , for example the customer paying for his metro ticket with e-money could also purchase a coffee , a newspaper or a bunch of flowers at the station kiosk , as is already - and very successfully - the case in Hong Kong , for example .
We have been rushed through the legislative process for a first-reading agreement in order to get this measure enacted before the European elections .
I thank most warmly Ivo and Melanie from the Economic Committee staff , the Socialist and Liberal shadows , Mr Pittella and Mrs Raeva , the Commission services and the Czech Presidency , notably Tomáš Trnka and his team , for their very positive cooperation .
None of us achieved all we would have wished , but I believe we will have made a significant step forward , and I would very much welcome Parliament 's support for this project .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to express the Commission 's appreciation of the speed with which Parliament has dealt with these two issues , which are so important , and on this point I would like to thank both the rapporteurs and Mrs Berès , chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , for making a crucial contribution to the speed of the work .
We are now only a couple of months away from the final deadline for transposition by the Member States of the directive on payment services .
These two measures , alongside the noteworthy efforts of the payments industry to develop SEPA products , constitute a crucial and timely step towards the completion of the single market for payments .
These measures , together with the directive , will complete the legal basis which is indispensable in providing clarity , certainty and stability to the market .
The negotiations that have been conducted in recent weeks have made it possible to obtain a very rapid agreement concerning these two issues .
With regard to the revised regulation on cross-border payments , I am pleased to announce that the Commission endorses the proposed amendment , which has come about as a result of a compromise .
The Commission is particularly pleased by the inclusion in its original proposal of articles governing the matter of the multilateral interbank fee for direct debit transactions .
The market was looking for these provisions and we consider them to be vital for a timely launch by European banks of the SEPA direct debit .
These rules will give the payments industry three years to put forward a long-term commercial model for automated debits that abides by competition rules .
In a spirit of compromise , the Commission is willing to replace the unconditional removal of these obligations with a review clause , as proposed by Parliament and the Council .
With regard to the revised directive on electronic money , this is a particularly ambitious piece of legislation that will offer a well-received second chance for the establishment of a market in electronic money that will be genuinely useful .
The directive aims to provide the market with a clear and balanced legal and prudential framework , removing unnecessary , disproportionate or excessive barriers to market entry and making the business of issuing electronic money more attractive .
The new directive should promote genuine and effective competition between all market participants , and at the same time ensure equal conditions for all payment services providers and a high level of consumer protection .
The compromise reached establishes an excellent balance , fully protecting our initial objectives and at the same time providing an appropriate response to the legitimate concerns expressed during the adoption process .
We therefore fully support this proposal .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - Madam President , the Legal Affairs Committee supports the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on cross-border payments in the Community .
The aims of the Commission initiative are as follows : firstly , to replace the existing regulation in order to adapt it to market developments ; secondly , to advance the protection of consumer rights and to provide an adequate legal framework for the development of a modern and efficient payment system within the EU ; and thirdly , to achieve an internal market for payment services in euro .
The Legal Affairs Committee was appointed to submit an opinion to the lead Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
In the opinion it was proposed that Member States may appoint existing institutions to act as competent authorities and to utilise or extend existing procedures concerning cross-border payment services .
It is important to apply and improve already existing measures and redress bodies to deal effectively with complaints and disputes regarding this proposal .
It is important to point out that the principles of proportionality , subsidiarity and especially the extended principle of equality of charges for cross-border payments should comply with the EC Treaty , Article 95 ( 1 ) .
Cross-border payments in euro require a Community-wide approach because the applicable rules and principles have to be the same in all Member States in order to achieve legal certainty and a level playing field for all European payments market stakeholders .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I am going to comment only on the regulation on cross-border payments and the report drawn up by Mrs Starkevičiūtė .
The regulation , as she has explained very well , responds to the needs that have been perceived as a result of the introduction of the euro , and lays down a relatively clear principle : charges must be the same for domestic payments as for cross-border payments .
This is a common-sense rule in an internal market , but one that was far from being adhered to prior to this regulation .
The regulation has thus become a launch-pad for the Single Euro Payments Area , to which the rapporteur also referred , and I therefore have some additional observations .
With time , this regulation has become outdated and it has been necessary to revise it in order to adapt it to the changes on the financial markets and also to the directive on payment services .
The Commission set itself three goals in this revision : firstly , to include cross-border direct debits within the regulation 's scope ; secondly , to establish procedures for the out-of-court handling of problems that might arise from the application of the regulation ; and , thirdly , to ease the balance-of-payments statistical reporting obligations .
The European Parliament has , on the whole , agreed with this approach , but it has made three significant changes : a clarification to the legal definitions laid down by the regulation , a warning or reminder to the Member States that they should comply with the regulation more effectively than they have done in the past and , thirdly , a call for significant cooperation between the Member States .
My concern was the issue of balance-of-payments statistical obligations , which has been resolved by agreement between the separate institutions .
I can therefore say that I am fully satisfied with the result achieved .

Madam President , I would like to talk about the report by Mr Purvis on electronic money .
First of all , I think that if we consider the reasons why electronic money is less developed here than in Hong Kong , it is undoubtedly because European citizens have become used to using their bank cards much more easily .
This Parliament has had two concerns in drawing up this legislation : firstly , at a time when the issue of supervision is on everybody 's lips , we do not want to deregulate the supervision of electronic money institutions solely because of the latter 's lobbying .
This is why the European Parliament has above all insisted that these institutions that issue electronic money and manage electronic money should be subject to genuine supervision , and I think that we have obtained a number of guarantees in this area .
I welcome this .
In the same way , we were anxious to take into account the interests of citizens and those who use electronic money , particularly when they want to end their contracts , so that they did not have restrictions and fees imposed on them by the institutions managing electronic money that we would have seen as excessive .
This is the spirit in which we have supported this proposal , in the hope that it would make our fellow citizens ' lives easier through the use of electronic money , but that this would not result in excesses , particularly in terms of supervision mechanisms .
The proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on cross-border payments in the Community , which aims to replace the current applicable regulation , is linked to the creation of an integrated European payments market .
The proposal is also aimed at increasing the protection of consumers ' interests and rights and easing the burden with regard to reporting statistics .
Article 5 on the balance of payments and Article 12 relating to the review clause are the subject of a compromise which our rapporteur , Margarita Starkevičiūtė , is aiming for and is supported by Bulgaria .
The compromise offers an opportunity for a timely , adequate assessment .
The current global financial crisis focuses attention on the need for relevant statistical data .
Bulgaria is in favour of removing settlement-based reporting obligations on payment service providers for balance of payments statistics under a threshold of EUR 50 000 .
Bulgaria supports the removal of Article 5 ( 2 ) as the reservations which have been expressed are made in the context of the potential loss of information and a deterioration in the quality of the balance of payments statistics , as well as to do with the need for a technical period for implementing the switch to the direct reporting system .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , once again I would like to express my appreciation for the way in which Parliament has managed these two issues .
It means that the new regulation on cross-border payments will enter into force as scheduled on 1 November this year , and the e-money market will thus have a second chance to take off .
In parallel with the directive on payment services , these two pieces of European legislation will make it possible to create a modern , comprehensive legal framework for the Community market in payments and will smooth the path so that the European payments industry will be able to fully develop the Single Euro Payments Area project .
This project will offer European consumers and firms a fully integrated payments market that is efficient in terms of costs and is of the highest quality .
The Commission therefore thanks - and I do so with particular pleasure - the European Parliament for this latest sign of its commitment to the SEPA .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , electronic money that can be used across borders represents considerable progress .
It is important for the EU to improve the internal market in this way by promoting its use .
However , I would like to take the opportunity to recall what it is that we are actually talking about .
When we introduced the euro in a large number of European countries , it was based on the analyses carried out on the value of a monetary union .
The value is that we reduce the costs involved in exchanging money as well as other transaction costs .
We reduce information costs by having a common currency .
The price that we pay for this is to have more unstable economies .
It is more difficult for us to maintain even and high rates of employment and to maintain stable state finances .
We are seeing this right now as everything is going pear-shaped in this regard in countries such as Ireland , Spain , Italy and Greece .
Take note , then , that the victims should be counterbalanced by the benefits gained in lower transaction costs as a result of a common currency , but the benefits are continually diminishing precisely because progress with regard to the payment system is so rapid .
Within a short time , we will be in a position where we find that we have such an effective payment system that the costs have become negligible .
Then we will have a common currency that actually only guarantees us instability in our European economy .
This is something I have said before and now you can see it happening .
I urge you all to reflect on this .
rapporteur . - ( LT ) I would like to say that the text before us is a compromise , which has been reached through complex negotiations between the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
However , it is a positive result and I would like to thank the Council representative Mr Trinka and the Commission representatives for their cooperation , and would also like to thank staff of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , who helped to prepare this document .
It will answer those questions which were raised by Mr Lungren , that is , it will help to bolster the whole euro area , because the procedures for euro transactions will be strengthened .
As a representative of a country , which is not in the euro zone , I am delighted that this regulation can also be applied , if non-euro zone Member States wish , to payments in national currency , which in Lithuania would be the litas .
For the time being , in our countries prices for cross-border payments and prices for domestic payments in the national currency still differ .
This is partly determined by the fact that we are not euro zone Member States .
I think that the first step and one of the steps towards the euro zone would be for us , non-euro zone Member States , to begin to apply this principle to national currencies .
The other important thing is that the fostering of cross-border payments by this regulation opens the way to modernising the European banking sector , because banks have a transition period of three years to prepare a new business model , which would make payments more efficient .
This is very important as we often talk about innovations , new initiatives and modernisation .
This document creates exactly the right conditions for all this .
rapporteur . - Madam President , just to satisfy the prudential concerns mentioned by Mrs Berès , I would point out that we have insisted in this directive and report that e-money funds are not deposits ; credit cannot be created upon them .
We have opened the door for e-money only a bit wider .
The basic capital requirement is reduced to EUR 350 000 ; the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs would have preferred EUR 200 000 .
The own-funds requirement is to be 2 % of outstanding e-money funds ; we would have preferred 1.6 % , but with the 20 % flexibility up or down that is allowed , the more liberal Member States can go down to 1.6 % and the conservative Member States can go up to 2.4 % .
It is not ideal that we still have the prospect of such an uneven playing field in the European Union , especially when we have insisted that e-money users ' funds will be fully safeguarded and there are also other important user-friendly protections , for example in redemption , as Mrs Berès mentioned .
Because of the level of capital required , the waiver level has also had to be set for purely national e-money operators at EUR 5 million instead of EUR 2 million .

All in all , this is a very cautious step forward .
It is not perfect .
Compromises seldom are .
Almost certainly it will have to be revisited in three or four years ' time and , by then , I hope more operators will have entered the business .
Users and merchants will be clamouring for more choice .
The more doubtful regulators , banks , Mrs Berès - and even the European Central Bank - will have become reconciled that this is a beneficial , user-friendly service which holds no risks to the European economy .
We in Europe can at last take up all the opportunities which e-money offers .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Animal by-products ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the report by Mr Schnellhardt , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down health rules as regards animal by-products not intended for human consumption ( Animal by-products Regulation ) - C6-0220 / 2008 - .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have produced a good report and we have succeeded in achieving a consensus on the regulation on animal by-products at first reading .
For this , I owe my thanks to the French and Czech Presidencies , the Commission and the rapporteurs from the individual Groups .
The cooperation in drafting this report was characterised by a spirit of trust and we were able to finish the report quickly , although - and we must think of it like this - the report before us now has significantly changed the Commission 's proposal , less so in the way of content , but more in terms of structure .
Many of the details have been reordered .
The new proposal was necessary , because a few shortcomings emerged in the application of the 2002 regulation which led to problems in practice .
Although the 2002 regulation controlled animal diseases such as BSE , dioxin contamination and the spread of other animal diseases such as foot and mouth disease or swine fever , in order to make further progress in this regard it was vital to lay down requirements with regard to the questions of responsibility , traceability and the end point for slaughter by-products .
It was also necessary to eliminate the legal uncertainty with regard to the scope of the regulation concerning by-products from wild game .
In line with the previous regulations on hygiene issues , operators will in future also be responsible for their products .
I have said this already in connection with the other regulations .
However , this must not lead to a reduction in official control .
Through the new regulation we want to increase safety for citizens and not merely shift the responsibility .
It is therefore important for operators handling by-products to be subject to approval .
The particular operators that will require approval are clearly regulated .
The fact that , in addition to a process of approval , there is also a process of registration is due to the desire to reduce bureaucracy .
In future , we will certainly have to examine carefully whether the registration procedure will ensure a sufficient degree of safety .
I also think that the uncertainty previously caused by the provisions on animal by-products from wild game has been eliminated .
It is now clear that good hunting practice is crucial .
Game gathered in the woods must not be used .
I also think that we have complied with the wishes of many Members in allowing the appropriate feeding of necrophagous birds in certain regions .
The ability to establish the end point of the life-cycle of by-products is a significant step forward .
This will eliminate legal uncertainty and resolve many shortcomings and difficulties .
We will have to examine whether the setting of the end point by the European Commission complies with the aforementioned criterion , namely legal certainty .
I realise , of course , that it can vary from product to product and for that reason flexibility is needed , but I will also say to the Commission now that transparency is also needed so that it is also clear to the user .
Then we come to the crucial point , which , for me , is always the issue of comitology .
Too many rules in the new regulation are implemented using the comitology procedure .
We must examine this carefully .
We know , of course , that as MEPs we have the chance to play our part here , but we also know from practice that we are not at all in a position to monitor or examine all comitology procedures .
For this reason , I welcome the fact that the Commission has said that it wishes to present its proposals to the Committee on the Environment prior to their adoption .
That is a good approach , because there are very many forms of comitology .
I believe that we are on the right path here .
I will make a couple of comments on other topics at the end of the debate .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today Parliament will be asked to vote on a common position based on the proposal for a new regulation on animal by-products presented by the Commission .
At this time , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work , which has made it possible to arrive at this common position , and for his knowledge of the rules in the veterinarian sector that has made it possible to achieve a positive and agreed outcome .
My colleague , Mrs Vassiliou , apologises for not being present at this debate in person , but she has asked me to give her personal thanks to the rapporteur for all that he has done and the efforts he has made to achieve the goal .
At the Commission , we are , of course , also grateful to the shadow rapporteurs , who have seen this this work through in a constructive manner , as the rapporteur stressed in his speech , and through this collaboration it has thus also been possible to incorporate into the common position the chief concerns expressed by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Like the rapporteur , I would also like to thank the French Presidency , which did a lot of work , although it was aware that it would not itself attain the final result , and the Czech Presidency , which invested great efforts to obtain a clear and consistent mandate for the negotiations with Parliament .
The Commission therefore gives its definite support to the common position .
This text clarifies the relationship between health rules and environmental rules and thus contributes to the objectives of ' better regulation ' .
The rules on which Parliament is about to vote will permit a wider use of by-products of animal origin , which currently cannot be put to any good use , but does so while ensuring appropriate safety conditions .
There will also be a reduction in administrative costs , and this will enable operators to be more competitive .
All this will be of vital importance in allowing them to respond dynamically to the challenges of the future , whether these derive from imports from non-EU countries or from new technological developments in the use of by-products .
The new rules will also be fully consistent with the goal of protecting biodiversity and - the most important aspect of all - will make it possible to maintain a high level of protection within the European Union against public health and animal health risks .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I very much welcome the draft report by Mr Schnellhardt and would like to thank him for his fine work .
After the numerous crises in recent years in connection with products of animal origin that pose a risk to human and animal health , a comprehensive statutory regulation is essential .
A revision of the current regulation was necessary .
Now , as before , we need to ensure a high degree of safety .
Although we essentially support the report , there are a few points which give me cause for concern .
Many points in the regulation have been made less stringent and thus make trade in animal by-products somewhat easier .
Let me give some examples of what I am talking about .
It is permitted to use certain Category 1 material in pet food .
Category 2 or 3 material may , irrespective of the risk associated with it , be disposed of more easily , under official supervision , if there are only small quantities of waste per week .
The risk associated with animal by-products of any category is only partly determined by its quantity .
It remains the case that it is the European Commission that will enact the implementing regulation and , like its predecessor , the draft contains a lot of authorisations for the Commission .
This means that the Commission can lay down comprehensive and fundamental regulations for handling animal by-products in the comitology procedure , with the result that Parliament - as is unfortunately often the case - is excluded .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Schnellhardt for his very ambitious piece of work in the form of this very technical report .
On behalf of our shadow rapporteur , Mrs Westlund , I would also like to thank the other shadow rapporteurs for their constructive cooperation , which has resulted in us being able to vote , today , on a proposal that we are all able to support .
The proposal that we are to vote on now is both clearer and easier to use than the very complicated legislation that is currently in force in this area .
We in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament are particularly pleased to have succeeded in gaining a hearing for our amendment to also allow scavenging animals the opportunity to find the food they need to survive .
We are also pleased that we have managed to place the focus both on health risks and on safety , while still having the necessary flexibility .
Thank you for your work and we are pleased that we have a constructive proposal .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my sincere thanks go to Mr Schnellhardt for his excellent work and cooperation .
It is good that we have had a first-rate expert in the field as our rapporteur on this issue .
The main objective of the regulation before us is the guarantee of hygiene and human health and safety .
I would now , however , like to mention another detail , which is important for protecting biodiversity and small-scale entrepreneurship in nature tourism in my country .
I am pleased that political consensus was found within Parliament and also with the Council of Ministers to resolve this issue .
This is about small-scale operations which take the carcasses of dead animals on farms with livestock , in pigsties for example , directly to feeding sites in the country for wild animals to feed on .
This is important , for example , in Spain , to maintain the wild bird of prey population .
In Finland such practices saved the white-tailed eagle from extinction back in the times when its natural food supply was too contaminated owing to chemical toxins , and when white-tailed eagles would not have been able to breed just by surviving on natural food sources .
In the northern , very sparsely populated parts of Finland , nature photographers use this method to attract wild animals to places where they can be photographed , and small travel companies also organise bear watching safaris , for example .
I am very glad that this legislation would provide a solution which would safeguard human health and safety but also preserve small-scale tourism entrepreneurship and the use of the method to protect biodiversity .
Madam President , I agree with all contributors that public health , food safety and hygiene have to be at the top of all our agendas .
I would put very high on my agenda , too , making maximum use of all natural resources , including animal by-products .
I should like to thank our rapporteur , Horst Schnellhardt , for his excellent work in accommodating all our concerns and also for the excellent outcome of his discussions with the European Council .
Personally , I regret the removal of the reference to the Waste Incineration Directive , but I do not have time to expand on that here .
I had one amendment tabled asking for assurances that there should be a clear distinction made between animal by-products moved in large volumes between Member States and at risk of entering the food or feed chain and specialist animal by-products for pharmaceutical and other diagnostic and research use ; the latter are safe-sourced high-value products which are transported between Member States in very small volumes to and from registered suppliers , processers and users .
I should like confirmation , both from the Commissioner and Horst Schnellhardt again in his winding-up words , that my concerns in this area are taken care of and that this particular use of animal by-products will continue without any disruption .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today 's debate has shown broad support for the common position on animal by-products , and this enables the Commission to proceed with the next stage .
The Commission will prepare the implementing provisions for the new regulation in the light of your comments today , we will listen attentively to the experiences of operators , we will talk with our partners at international level and we will be fully transparent with Parliament during the whole of the process .
I can thus confirm to the rapporteur the commitment already made by the Commission in relation to comitology and the optional provisions .
Regarding the question raised by Mrs Doyle , I wanted to say that the current regulation already recognises the particular food needs of certain wild species and allows the Member States to use by-products for feeding wild animals , provided that the health risks are appropriately controlled .
However , recently it has been stressed that the Commission should step up efforts to preserve biodiversity .
For this reason , the Commission agrees with the decision by the legislator to extend the terms on the feeding of animal species protected in their natural habitats with by-products of animal origin ; whereas the current rules refer to vultures and eagles , the new regulation will also make it possible to find appropriate solutions for wolves and bears .
On the basis of recent experience , we are also considering the advisability of laying down arrangements which would go beyond the current system of fixed points for the feeding of protected species with animal carcasses , particularly for extensive breeding systems , provided that specific health standards are abided by .
On this point , the Commission is ready to enter into dialogue with all the parties involved .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Ulmer , I have of course taken note of the concern you expressed about the possible mixing of Category 1 and 2 materials and we also consulted the industry regarding this problem at the end of the negotiations .
I think that one would already need to act extremely illegally in order to be able to mix in this material .
We will check whether a more stringent regulation is needed here .
What we wanted to achieve with this new regulation was to enable the by-products of slaughter to be used in many ways and in that regard I can also say to Mrs Doyle that your concern is unfounded .
Everything is the same as before .
By establishing the end point for slaughter by-products , we have also very clearly stipulated that they will then become subject to totally different provisions , in other words we have clearly indicated the transfer to the Waste Framework Directive .
I believe that we are on the right path here .
I would also like to mention that we naturally also want to address the issue of the rotten meat scandals with this new regulation .
We are not completely on the right path yet in this regard , but with the labelling and the guaranteed traceability , I believe that we are heading in the right direction .
Of course , we now need to see what sort of labelling the Commission will propose .
This will not be particularly easy , as we all know the problem of the blue Chappi dog food - no one wants that .
In this respect , we definitely need our researchers to choose an approach .
As regards the issue of organic fertilisers , which was also up for debate and has not yet been properly discussed , the Commission actually intended to provide for more thorough mixing-in of the material so that the animals did not even notice it .
However , that would result in a change to the quality of the fertiliser and I believe that we have formulated a good regulation in this regard and that our small-scale gardeners who like organic fertilisers so much can also be appropriately provided for .
By and large , then , this is a good regulation .
I am very happy with it and with the cooperation , and I hope that we will not have to amend it again too soon .
The cooperation with the Commission was very agreeable and for that I am very grateful .
( DE ) Madam President , with regard to the planning of the sitting , I would like to mention that we had a very long voting session yesterday and that led to a lot of problems with subsequent appointments .
We will be adjourning very shortly today and we will not start the voting until 12 noon .
Perhaps it would be possible to plan the sitting so as to divide the time up more efficiently .
That would help the Members and , in particular , the visitors , who yesterday had to wait for us for a considerable length of time .
These are , of course , citizens , who also have a right to talk to their Members , and in this regard I would be very pleased if , in future , in the planning of the sitting we could schedule such procedures to everyone 's satisfaction .
Thank you , Mr Rübig .
We shall note and pass on your comments .
It is a very difficult time as we approach the end of the mandate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 .
( The sitting was suspended at 10.15 and resumed at 10.50 . )

1 .
Women 's rights in Afghanistan
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions concerning women 's rights in Afghanistan .
author . - Mr President , gender responsiveness is a measure of good governance anywhere in the world , but even more so in Afghanistan after the suffering endured by women for decades there .
There cannot be true peace and recovery in Afghanistan without priority being given to respecting the human rights of women .
This Shia family law allows marital rape , approves child marriage and bans wives from stepping outside their homes without their husbands ' permission .
Women 's human rights and dignity cannot fall victim to pre-electoral negotiations with Islamic fundamentalists .
The international community present in Afghanistan must put much more pressure on President Karzai and the Afghan authorities to come up with proper laws which respect the human rights of women , and policies that are committed to enacting those rights and respect their dignity .
Like the Shia family law , the delaying of the Afghan media law , which was passed by the Afghan Parliament months ago by two thirds of the Parliament , is a tool by President Karzai to continue control of the state media , vital propaganda ahead of the presidential elections .
The international community cannot allow this to go on .
This law is fundamental to ensure that there is freedom of expression and of the media in Afghanistan .
Without that , anything that we are doing in Afghanistan is not worth it .
It is crucial that action is taken on these two laws and that the international community makes sure that the authorities in Afghanistan abide by their commitments , by their words , in terms of human rights , and respect in particular the rights of women .
author . - Mr President , the international community has been absolutely appalled at the information that we have all heard about the law that is being drafted in Afghanistan on the status of Shia women .
It is appalling to believe that , at the beginning of the 21st century , a country that wants to be a democracy and wants to abide by its international commitments can have a law that limits the rights of women .
However , I believe that in our debate , and in everything that we do with Afghanistan , we have to be very careful how we approach things , because Afghanistan is a country that has come through a violent , repressive religious dictatorship ; it has endured years and decades of civil war ; it is a society in which people , more than buildings , have been hurt and destroyed .
We have to be very consistent in our messages , but we also have to be very careful in how we phrase those messages .
We should call on the Afghan authorities to take a look at the law , to revise it and make sure that it is entirely in line with the international commitments of that country , as well as its constitution .
We should not use this as an election opportunity here for us in Europe but as something that we can pass on to our colleagues and friends in Afghanistan to make sure that they can fulfil the obligations that they have voluntarily undertaken themselves .
In this case we have to assist President Karzai and the Government of Afghanistan in revisiting this law and making sure that it is in line with international commitments and the constitution .
It is part of our dialogue , and we have to be absolutely firm that no measures should be adopted that impede the rights of women .
I agree entirely with what Ana Maria Gomes has just said .
But let us be very careful because , when we deal with a society that has been so traumatised , it is far more important how our messages are heard there than how our messages are understood here .
Let us be very consistent in that and let us call on the Commission and the Council to pass on this message via all of our assistance programmes to the government and authorities in Afghanistan .
Mr President , the final declaration of the Durban II Review Conference , which Afghanistan is taking part in , concluded only today on the absolute need to make all forms of violence against women criminal offences punishable by law and on the condemnation of any judicial arsenal based on discrimination , including religious discrimination .
At the same time , Afghanistan is promoting legislation that applies solely to the Shiite population and that clearly discriminates against women in the areas of marriage , divorce , child custody , inheritance and access to education .
This is completely schizophrenic .
What Afghanistan signs up to in Geneva , it cannot reject in Kabul .
By taking part in the Durban II conference , Afghanistan has made firm commitments to eradicating multiple discrimination .
It is imperative , for its credibility , that it starts taking action now .
By refusing to pass this law , the minister of justice and the president would be showing their will to commit their country to complying with its human rights obligations .
Equality between men and women is clearly enshrined in the Afghan constitution and in international conventions to which Afghanistan is a party .
The authorities have a duty not to give in to extremism in any way and not to retreat .
It is ultimately the future of a society that is being decided through this draft law , and Afghan society has already expressed its desire not to remain excluded from these debates .
Women are fighting and deserve all the support and all the protection of their country .
It is up to the authorities to meet their obligations and demonstrate their ability to fulfil their commitments , and to the European civilian forces on the ground to support them in this ambitious reconstruction , and to set an example .
Let us not forget that the acts of violence committed by our armies and the fact that war is plunging Afghanistan into poverty are simply swelling the ranks of extremists .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , two arguments are put forward for the foreign military presence in Afghanistan .
The first argument is self-protection for the world outside of Afghanistan .
Since 2001 , the United States has lived in fear of new disasters if al-Qaeda were to use the territory of Afghanistan to prepare attacks once more .
This is , therefore , about the self-interest of other states .
This objective has largely been met .
The second argument , however , pertains to the position of the people of Afghanistan .
It was the intention to free them from coercion and backwardness .
The argument touches on the freedom of the press , the rights of religious minorities , individuals ' freedoms and , in particular , the protection of equal rights for women .
For years , international news about Afghanistan has been dominated by stories about how girls were going to school again , women were no longer required to wear a veil , how they were now able to live as equal citizens , independent of their husbands , and how more and more women were entering the world of politics .
The invasion resembled a feminist project .
Meanwhile , we can see that the events in Afghanistan more or less mirror those in Chechnya .
Both countries were run by fundamentalist Islamic groups , something which external forces wanted to put an end to in both cases .
A monstrous alliance was formed in both cases , one by the Americans , the other by the Russians , which means that , in a bid to control a particular group of Islamic fundamentalists , agreements are concluded with other Islamic fundamentalists .
The upshot is that the pursuit of freedom , which was an important justification for the invasion , has been sacrificed in the process .
In Afghanistan , women are more and more being pushed back into the position they were in under the Taliban regime .
Girls no longer go to school and women are disappearing from the political scene .
There is now even a law that protects the right of men to sexual gratification without any say from the women involved .
This is tantamount to rape .
Meanwhile , journalists are now also being threatened with the death penalty by the State .
This is a dead end .
Europe should refuse to lend any more support to this situation .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the international community we are undoubtedly staking much of our credibility on events in Afghanistan .
Emma Bonino , the leader of my political party , was arrested by the Taliban for her mere presence , as a European Commissioner , and was held in detention for some hours precisely because of her presence in defence of women 's rights .
Despite the divisions and differing views on armed intervention , and regardless of the positions that have been taken , we cannot allow the situation to deteriorate in this way with regard to women 's rights .
Six years ago , we , the Nonviolent Radical Party , organised a satyagraha : a non-violent world action advocating the presence of women among the ministers of the Afghan Government .
Today what is needed is a new mobilisation of the international community to ensure that not only are women 's rights protected , but that women play a full part at the highest levels of political and institutional life .
We need to clearly ensure that any collaboration we have with the Afghan Government is subject to prudence and caution , which has in any case been called for , but also to the greatest possible firmness of purpose , because it would really be misguided to think that some sort of Realpolitik towards the fundamentalist parties could end up producing peace in the long term in Afghanistan , as well as in our own cities and countries .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , 30 years ago during the autumn of 1979 , this House adopted the first urgent resolution in relation to Afghanistan , the author of which was Otto von Habsburg , whom I worked with at that time .
It related to a warning of the impending Soviet invasion of Afghanistan , which then actually occurred a few months later .
Since that time , this country has had a terrible history of suffering , and we ought to ask ourselves the question : what is Afghanistan ?
Firstly , it is in many respects a very ancient tribal society , which we cannot catapult into the 21st century in one fell swoop .
Secondly , it is a country that attaches a great deal of importance to its independence , which it protected against British and Russian imperialism with a huge amount of effort .
Thirdly , it is a country that suffered a lot during the 20th century and , as a result of a rather questionable intervention - this I say quite openly - by Western powers , is currently in a situation in which it has a president who many people there do not feel to be their own .
This is a very difficult mixed situation .
In order to ensure that there is no misunderstanding , Mr Cappato knows that I am not one of the so-called ' realist politicians ' , I am , as far as human rights are concerned , not open to compromise .
We must uncompromisingly oppose this law and the oppression of women .
However , we must proceed in such a way as to succeed and so as not to create the impression that this is a form of external control .
We must therefore find partners in this multi-ethnic society in Afghanistan and gradually build a modern society there .
This means that we must support a political concept for Afghanistan rather than a purely military solution , as has been the case thus far .
Therefore , the law needs to be revised .
On this , we are totally unwilling to compromise , as we are paying out a great deal for this country in which we have a military presence .
However , we must do this in a way that involves the Afghans and that respects their dignity , and as a top priority this of course includes - whether some people like it or not - the dignity of women .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , in light of the signing of the Shia family law , which shows contempt for women , in Afghanistan , I urge the Commission to make the rights of women a central part of its Afghanistan strategy once again .
In November 2002 , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament sent a delegation under my leadership to Afghanistan in order to make sure that women were not being excluded in the reconstruction of the country .
We held talks with President Karzai , numerous government representatives , women 's and human rights organisations , and we were very encouraged .
An awakening to more in the way of safety , stability and prosperity for women , including without the burka , seemed to be within reach .
The health system , education , training and the chance to earn a living were opened up to women after the Taliban rule .
The highest child mortality rate in the world seemed to be improving .
Through our intervention , a 25 % quota for women was included in the new constitution for the first parliament that was to be elected and around four million refugees returned to their war-ravaged country .
Unfortunately , however , very little has happened in the last five years .
Warnings from women 's rights organisations , such as medica mondiale , that violence must be stopped seemed to go totally unheeded , and at the beginning of April the radical Islamic Taliban in Kandahar murdered the German-Afghan women 's rights campaigner Sitara Achikzai .
We were forced to discover that other women had been shot , such as the highest-ranking police officer .
We must not sit back and watch this happen and do nothing about it .
The civilian awakening is at serious risk .
We must put a stop to this new Shia family law .
The European Parliament resolution must state loud and clear that the law must be thrown out .
If that does not succeed , international support for Afghanistan is also at risk if women 's rights are not respected .
Either an awakening into the international community , which respects human rights , or regression into oppression by the Taliban is what is on the cards .
This must be said loud and clear to Mr Karzai !
Mr President , what disturbs me most about the change to the law introduced in Afghanistan is that women have had their right to medical treatment taken away .
This is a result of the ban on going out of the home without the husband 's permission and also of the ban on undergoing medical examination .
Afghanistan is a country where , as a result of many years of civil war , the state of hospitals and their equipment is catastrophic .
Access to water is hindered because of the deployment of landmines .
Hygiene skills and knowledge about how to manage minor ailments without medical help are no longer passed from one generation to the next , as was traditionally the case .
Mothers do not pass on to young women the fact that camomile can be used when bathing a baby , because of its disinfectant properties .
All too often the mothers have simply been murdered .
In addition to this dramatic situation , the obstruction of access to a doctor or a healthcare facility could have catastrophic consequences for an entire generation .
We should strive to resolve this problem , in spite of cultural differences .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) A saying in my country has it that ' paper can wait ' , which illustrates the chasm between lofty ideals and regulations on the one hand and day-to-day reality on the other .
When we apply this saying to women 's rights in Afghanistan , we are left with a shocking picture .
The joint resolution is right to refer to the Afghan Constitution and the international agreements ratified by Kabul , which all claim equal rights for men and women and gender equality before the law .
The real position of the women of Afghanistan tells a different story , however .
In summary , the position of Afghan women can , roughly speaking , be outlined in 12 brief points , namely an average life expectancy of 44 ; a high death rate during childbirth ( 1 600 per 100 000 childbirths ) ; only 14 % of all women over the age of 15 can read ; a low status , because women are owned by men ; a frequent and increasing number of threats and intimidation of women in public roles , including murder ; hardly any protection of Afghan women 's organisations from the local authorities or foreign troops against targeted attacks ; it is the family that decides , in the main , whether girls can be educated ; persistent attacks on girls ' schools - for example , in November 2008 , eight schoolgirls and four women lecturers were mutilated in the town of Kandahar by the Taliban spraying acid in their faces ; the continued threat of sexual violence in and outside of marriage ; approximately 57 % of all girls are married off before their 16th birthday ; crimes committed against women are hardly reported for fear of retaliatory action by the family , tribe , perpetrators or even by the police ; and self-mutilation , and even suicide , by Afghan women on account of their hopeless situations .
This depressing image of the position of Afghan women , which only scratches the surface , underlines the ultimate need to turn the paper reality of the legal status of Afghan women into a national , international , but also European political priority .
Mr President , Afghanistan 's new law , effectively legalising rape in marriage and also child marriage for Shia women , threatens to take the country back to the medieval days of Taliban rule .
Certainly this law makes it harder to distinguish , in terms of modernity and respect for women 's rights , between the elected Afghan Government and the Taliban terrorists against whom it is fighting .
The law also makes it hard to justify the international community 's massive military and financial assistance to Afghanistan .
I feel very uneasy about soldiers from my country , the United Kingdom , dying to defend a government that panders too much to extremist and obscurantist sentiments .
To his credit , President Karzai has said this law will be repealed , but it has taken a great deal of international pressure , including this resolution from our Parliament , to get us to this stage .
Also the repeal of this law should not obscure the fact that women in Afghanistan continue to suffer lack of schooling , injustice and discrimination on a daily basis .
There is still a very long way to go to bring Afghanistan fully into the modern world and hold it to its binding international commitments .
( PL ) Mr President , despite the fact that Afghanistan is a signatory to the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women , and that the government of President Karzai has decreed the equality of both sexes in the eyes of the law and has guaranteed women a quarter of the seats in the Afghan Parliament , Afghan women are still being treated as second-class citizens in their own country
For many Afghan fundamentalists the place of women is in the home , and not at school or at work .
An example of this is the law approved recently by both chambers of the Afghan Parliament and signed by the president , which states that only with the consent of their husband or father do women have the right to go out of their homes , study , apply for a job or receive medical care .
In addition , the law gives legal custody of children exclusively to fathers and grandfathers .
Fortunately , this law has not yet come into force .
As a result of numerous protests , both in Afghanistan and from abroad , the draft law has been referred to the Afghan Ministry of Justice so that the conformity of the text with the constitution and international treaties can be verified .
The European Parliament should demand strongly that the Afghan authorities revoke this law , which without any doubt contravenes the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women .
In addition , we should make a clear call for the Afghan Ministry of Justice to abolish all other laws which discriminate against women .
The European Union , as a community , must express support for all those who are fighting for women 's rights in Afghanistan , so that we do not allow the destruction of all that has up to now been achieved in this area .
- ( SK ) I would like to express my sincere thanks to President Hans-Gert Pöttering for accepting my request and including this point among the urgent resolutions of this session .
A woman 's dignity is intrinsic to her person .
It must be respected in partner relationships and in the family and all societies should encourage awareness of this .
Young women must be able to make decisions freely and autonomously .
We cannot accept the current situation in Afghanistan .
Discrimination against women is a violation of basic human rights , humiliating women and destroying their individuality .
Our policy must be conceptual but unambiguous .
We cannot on the one hand allow President Hamid Karzai to speak in the European Parliament and on the other hand accept that laws violating basic human rights are passed in his country .
( RO ) It concerns all of us , of course , that a law is about to come into force in Afghanistan which allows discriminatory and degrading treatment towards women in the family and society .
This act blatantly contravenes the agenda which we are promoting in Afghanistan , all the more so as the majority of NATO countries have announced that they are going to step up their involvement in the effort to bring stability to Afghanistan .
The military aspect of the international presence in this country is certainly very important , perhaps even decisive , but this involvement is not only about guaranteeing peace and infrastructure investments , but also about a much more complex project : modernising Afghan society .
Who are we building schools for , when Afghan girls are discriminated against and not allowed access to education ?
No one is , of course , assuming that the new Afghan society should be a copy of Western societies , but we cannot let ourselves turn a blind eye to abuses and human rights violations in the name of respecting local cultural identities .
This is why I consider that it is European institutions ' duty to convey a firm message to the president ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Afghanistan has had a difficult history .
I believe that families in particular stick together very strongly in that country and that the woman of the family has an important role .
It is therefore very important above all to promote economic development and in particular support for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Of course , a modern infrastructure is also needed to enable the country to develop better .
I believe that it is precisely infrastructure projects that could help to create a greater understanding for one another in this country and that also through the agency of information and communications technology a different world view could slowly develop there , whilst fully retaining the country 's identity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the legislation on human rights for the Shiite community in Afghanistan has rightly attracted a great deal of attention .
We are closely monitoring the political developments on the ground , through our delegation and with the European Union special representative and the representatives of the Member States .
We naturally respect the independence of the legislative process in Afghanistan , in particular with regard to the Constitution , which does indeed make provision , under Article 131 , for the possibility of legislation devoted solely to the Shiite community .
Nevertheless , along with our partners we have supported an approach targeting certain articles of that law that are scarcely compatible with the Afghan Constitution or the international law that the Afghan Government has signed up to .
The European Union therefore made a representation to the Afghan Government on 12 April .
In our representation , we specifically reminded the government of its obligations with regard to international conventions on civil and political rights , discrimination against women and children 's rights .
We pointed out that the proposed legislation would to a large extent prevent women from fully enjoying their rights and from participating fairly in the economic , social. cultural , civil and political life of Afghan society .
It is likely that the international reaction and the reaction of Afghan civil society contributed to the Afghan Government 's decision to refer the legislation back to the minister of justice for a general review , with the latter being focused in particular on Afghanistan 's obligations in terms of international law .
It goes without saying that this review will be conducted entirely under the authority of the Afghan Government .
In view of the political background of this country , it is essential that its government assume its responsibilities in full within the framework of the legislative and institutional process .
We are going to follow this review very closely with our international partners , and also within the context of our support for the institutional reform of the judicial sector .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Mr President , every human being has a right for a humane life , meaning that a person should not be discriminated on any basis including gender .
Unfortunately the human rights , that for us , Europeans , are natural , are being widely violated in various countries around the world .
Since the overthrowing of Taliban , the situation in Afghanistan has improved , however in reality , there have not been many positive developments as far as human rights are concerned .
The continuous violations against women are absolutely unacceptable and it is highly important for the European Union to put pressure on Afghan government in order to get the situation under control .
Even more outrageous than several controversial laws concerning the equality between men and women , is the fact , that men are still widely being regarded higher than women in Afghan society itself .
Therefore the European Union must support the awareness campaigns promoting gender equality and human rights .
2 .
Support for the Special Court for Sierra Leone
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions concerning support for the Special Court for Sierra Leone .
author . - ( RO ) One of the problems affecting justice systems in many countries around the world is not so much the absence of a well-structured legal framework , but more particularly the lack of enforcement of the judgments made by the justice system .
In countries afflicted by the scourge of civil war , a permanent state of conflict or massacres , the consequences of this situation are catastrophic from a humanitarian and development perspective .
In the case of the Special Court for Sierra Leone , it is all the more important that legal judgments are enforced because this court is establishing a series of important precedents in international law .
It is not only the first court of this kind set up in the same country as where the events being tried took place , but it is the first which has indicted and convicted , in the person of Charles Taylor , the former president of Liberia , an African head of state still in office at the time when the trial started .
These aspects , combined with the recent conviction of three former rebel leaders from the civil war period , are strong indications of the determination of the international community and Sierra Leone Government to fight hard against the feeling of impunity displayed by those who have committed atrocities for an entire decade .
The international community must fully complete the implementation of the project proposed for reinforcing the process of justice and law in Sierra Leone .
The Court 's mandate comes to an end soon , in 2010 , and the Sierra Leone Government has been totally frank about not being able to ensure that the sentences passed will be enforced .
It is vital therefore for the European Union and its international partners involved in the peace process to uphold and support the enforcement of the sentences passed by the Special Court .
It is not only the progress towards peace and stability in the region which depends on this , but also the credibility of the Special Courts set up with the support of the international community in other countries .
author . - Mr President , international humanitarian law is a relatively new and somewhat imperfect body of jurisprudence , but it has already achieved some major successes .
In Europe the International Criminal Tribunal for former Yugoslavia has paid an immensely important role in bringing justice to a region torn apart by a series of savage wars .
Similarly , a tribunal in Tanzania has been prosecuting those responsible for the Rwandan genocide of 1994 .
We therefore know the potential of such courts to help war-torn regions by ending a climate of impunity and moving on .
In many ways justice delivered in this way is as valuable as financial assistance from the European Union .
That is why the international community should continue to support the Special Court for Sierra Leone by providing secure jail facilities in the Member States , if necessary and when required , for jailing convicted tyrants .
One of my proudest achievements in this Parliament was my role in this Parliament 's resolution calling for Nigeria to hand over Charles Taylor to the Court , which is what eventually happened through the mediation of the UN .
But there are plenty of others who will escape unpunished without a robust and well-funded special court for Sierra Leone .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , two years ago I had the opportunity , as part of a mission headed by Mrs Isler Béguin , my colleague , who is in the Chamber here , to visit Sierra Leone , to attend the Special Court and to become aware of the huge task that it was accomplishing , not only for Sierra Leona , but also for mankind as a whole .
The Special Court for Sierra Leone has of course set a precedent , as has already been mentioned here .
It has set a precedent in that , as the resolution states , it is the first international court to be funded by voluntary contributions , the first to be established in the country where the alleged crimes took place and it was also the first court - as has already been pointed out - to indict a former head of state .
For all these reasons , not only because it constitutes a precedent , but also because it is a benchmark for other courts that have been created and modelled along the same lines - such as the courts of Rwanda , the former Yugoslavia , Cambodia or Lebanon - we consider it vital that this resolution , on which we have now been working together with the court for several months , be adopted .
Two years ago we adopted a resolution to support its funding , since at that time the Special Court was going through a difficult period , was without any funds and did not have the necessary support - and here we should thank the European Commission too , which gave the court its financial support .
Now we are asking , above all , for two things : firstly , that those who have been convicted should serve their sentences - what is at stake here is not the operation of the Special Court , which will conclude its work next year , but the legacy that it is to leave us - and , secondly , obviously , that all this should be accompanied by more funding .
In short , the Special Court for Sierra Leone is a fine example and a benchmark for all of us and for all courts that have dealt with war crimes .
It is a fine example and a benchmark and it is a lesson being given to us by the second-poorest country on the planet : as we entered the court , we saw the slogan ' no peace without justice ' .
That is exactly why we have a moral obligation , not only as Europeans , but as human beings , to ensure that the legacy of this Special Court leaves its mark on history .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , Sierra Leone , like its neighbour Liberia , has been faced with full-scale atrocities , as a result of which many citizens lost their lives or became seriously injured , mentally or physically .
The criminals who got child soldiers to cut off the limbs of innocent citizens should be punished and not be given an opportunity to repeat their crimes .
It looks like the attempt to organise this punishment between 2000 and 2010 is set to fail .
The UN 's Special Court for Sierra Leone is unable to function .
Anyone found guilty cannot be locked up in Sierra Leone for any decent length of time .
The question now is what can we still do to guarantee a better outcome ?
The Court will not succeed without external funding , an extension of its mandate or without prison places outside of Sierra Leone .
The resolution is right to draw attention to these options .
This statement must lead to measures quickly .
Otherwise it will be too late .
Mr President , in Poland we sometimes say that ' what you begin , you should also finish ' .
This is very relevant to today 's debate , which , above all , is about financial support for the Special Court for Sierra Leone .
It is true that we are in the middle of a crisis , and the Court , which is maintained from voluntary contributions made by various countries , absorbs large sums of money .
We must not , however , allow this body , which is the only one of its kind , to end its work in international disgrace - and it would be a disgrace , if for financial reasons the Court ceased to function and the accused were released .
The European Union , and especially , in my opinion , the United Nations , are obliged to carry the work of the Court through to completion , to ensure financial support and to carry out the sentences handed down by the Court .
The work of the Court and its high costs are the subject of much controversy in Sierra Leone itself , because a great many people there are waiting for compensation , and Sierra Leone is one of the world 's poorest countries .
This is why , when judging the past , we should not forget the future .
Mr President , the Special Court for Sierra Leone has sentenced Issa Hassan Sesay , the Commanding Officer of the Revolutionary United Front , to 52 years ' imprisonment .
It has also sentenced Morris Kallon , one of the commanders of the RUF , to 40 years ' imprisonment , and Augustine Gbao , responsible for security in the RUF , to 25 years ' imprisonment .
They organised one of the most cruel rebel movements of modern times .
Drastic mutilations of the civilian population , and in particular amputations of limbs on a massive scale , sexual violence as a weapon , enrolling children in the army - these are only some of the brutal methods used by the RUF , which was commanded by the defendants .
A heavy sentence in their case is a strong signal which should restrain others from committing similar acts , and a sign that the civilised , democratic world will not stay silent , and has a strong tool for reacting to the perpetrators of such atrocities .
That tool is the Court , and the Court should be supported , both financially and politically .
( FR ) Mr President , I am in fact glad that this debate is taking place , because we have been trying to put it on the agenda for several sittings .
So today , not long before the end of this mandate , we would really like to stress that Sierra Leone , one of the poorest countries in the world , which has really succeeded in establishing this Special Court to try those responsible for the atrocities , should be supported .
Having been the head of the European Union Election Observation Mission in Sierra Leone , I really believe that it is our political and moral responsibility to support this court , because it would be truly unacceptable and unimaginable for this court to be unable to continue its work for what are potentially financial reasons .
I therefore urge the Commission to support it , financially , of course .
Moreover , at the time the judges of these courts asked us to provide financial support to help keep this Special Court going .
However , now it is at political level , because it is coming to an end in 2010 .
We must ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Commission has made a strong commitment to assisting the transition by Sierra Leone from a post-war situation to a situation of growth and development .
The Commission certainly supports the country 's commitment to the consolidation of peace , stability and , above all , democracy .
In this regard , the Commission recognises and welcomes the vital role that the Special Court for Sierra Leone has played and continues to play within the context of the reinstatement of peace and stability in Sierra Leone .
We are convinced that the Special Court 's activities can transmit to all the message that no serious crime against humanity , no genocide and no war crime will remain unpunished .
The Special Court for Sierra Leone has , in fact , played an essential part in the development of international law , by virtue of the case law that has been created on issues such as the recruitment of child soldiers and forced marriages , which were the subject of the Special Court 's first judgments .
To this end , the Commission has been supporting the Special Court 's activities since 2003 .
We have given the Special Court EUR 2 700 000 through the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights .
The aim of this funding is to support the activities of the Special Court on communicating its objectives of promoting the rule of law , international humanitarian law and human rights in Sierra Leone and the region of western Africa as a whole .
Furthermore , in 2008 the Commission adopted a project , funded by EUR 1 million , under the 10th European Development Fund , conceived together with the Special Court and the Sierra Leone Government .
The project , which is to be carried out during 2009 and 2010 , will integrate previous activities and sets out to ensure a lasting legacy on which to rely after the conclusion of the Special Court 's activities , in particular through the capacity-building of legal professionals and the strengthening of institutional capacity within the Sierra Leone legal system as a whole .
Having been informed of the Special Court 's budget problems , in 2008 the Commission provided it with emergency aid to the tune of EUR 2.5 million , funded from the Instrument for Stability and intended to cover the funding costs , and chiefly the salaries , of the Special Court 's employees .
On this point , the Commission was pleased to learn that the Special Court has managed to cover the budget deficit for several months .
We are confident that , despite the world financial crisis , the international community will manage to find the resources necessary for the Special Court to carry out its tasks successfully and in full , and to complete the trial of Charles Taylor , former president of Liberia .
Before I conclude , I would like to express my support for the request for further examination and investigation into the roles and functions of the various special courts , and on this point I am pleased to inform you , on behalf of the Commission , that two initiatives are to be funded in this sector under the human rights ' conflicts and security ' heading within the Seventh Framework Programme on research .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
3 .
Humanitarian situation of Camp Ashraf residents
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions concerning the humanitarian situation of Camp Ashraf residents .
author . - Mr President , some in this Chamber want to present the People 's Mujahedin as heroes or a true alternative to the Iranian regime .
They are neither .
In my trips to Iraq , I have heard Kurdish , Sunni , Shia , Christian , Turkman leaders and others complain about the role of the People 's Mujahedin as a tool of Saddam Hussein in the 1988 Anfar campaign , which culminated in massacres such as Halabja .
That is what the Iraqi delegation which was here this week also confirmed to us , while assuring us that the Iraqi constitution binds the Government of Iraq to fully respect the human rights of the residents of Camp Ashraf , who , with the help of UNHCR and ICRC , wish to leave for Iran or any other destination , or wish to stay as political refugees abiding by the laws of Iraq .
We must understand the reluctance of the Iraqi Government to let Camp Ashraf continue to be a nuisance to their good neighbourly relations with Iran .
For Iraqis , Iran cannot be wished away .
It is there .
It is a powerful neighbour .
It is true that the People 's Mujahedin are no longer on the terrorist list , but they are still an opaque cult which brutalises those of its members who wish to defect .
Above all , the people in Camp Ashraf are human beings whose human rights have to be respected , irrespective of the fate of the organisation itself or of its past .
They are to be treated under the 1951 Refugee Convention and no one - I repeat , no one - should be forced to return to Iran .
But let us make one thing clear .
This resolution is not about the Iranian regime , which has been repressing its people , mismanaging the country and destabilising the Middle East for decades .
Anyone who presents a vote for the PSE and Green amendments , which aim to balance the tone of this resolution , as a vote for the Iranian regime , is either arguing in bad faith or has simply run out of arguments .
The spirit of our amendments is quite simple .
We want to present the whole picture of human rights violations and threats in and around Camp Ashraf .
For example , we request that all Camp Ashraf residents be allowed to be interviewed by the ICRC and UNHCR at a neutral location and without People 's Mujahedin officials in attendance , in order to clarify their real wishes .
Also we must call on the Mujahedin leadership to stop controlling the lives of the residents of Camp Ashraf , namely by not letting them leave the camp .
Above all , we express our concern about the reported practices of mental and physical manipulation and severe human rights violations within the cult .
In short , this is about the individual human rights of the people in Camp Ashraf .
Let us have these people and their human rights in mind when we vote .
author . - Mr President , this morning we will be voting on a joint motion for a resolution co-signed by four political groups on the situation of the Ashraf refugee camp in Iraq .
Three thousand five hundred Iranian men and women , members of the democratic opposition to the fundamentalist regime in Iran , live there completely defenceless .
In the last few weeks they have been under pressure and harassment by the faction of the Iraqi Government under the influence of the Iranian regime , and there is a high probability that at any moment a tragedy could happen that would parallel the ones we witnessed in the Balkans not so long ago .
We all remember Srebrenica , and I have no doubt that no Member in this Chamber wants a second Srebrenica in Iraq .
Our motion for a resolution is a call to alert public opinion all over the world before a disaster takes place .
Unfortunately , some colleagues have tabled amendments that could increase the danger for the residents in Camp Ashraf and provide the Iranian regime and its proxies in Iraq with arguments to massacre them .
I recently visited the camp myself and I assure you that the allegations included in the amendments tabled are absolutely unfounded .
People in Ashraf are there on a volunteer basis .
They are free to leave whenever they want and they live in the best friendly relations with the Iraqi population of the region .
The intention of our motion is to protect these people .
Nobody would understand - but if these amendments are adopted the result of the motion would be exactly the opposite .
This is not a political issue , colleagues : it is purely humanitarian and it is very urgent .
I beg you to vote against all amendments tabled to this joint motion supported by these four groups and support the motion as it has been agreed by these four groups that are of very different political stances .
The lives of many innocent and harmless people depend on your vote .
Please do not let them down .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my group has not signed this resolution and we will only vote in favour of it if the amendments that I have tabled together with the author , Mrs Gomes , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance are adopted .
It relates to the dispute over the Mujahedin or the MKO .
This is not a democratic opposition .
I would like to say a few things about it .
The MKO is a degenerate organisation , which is tantamount to a religious sect and which severely oppresses its own members , including within the camp .
Mental and physical pressure is used to force the members to stay in this camp .
Those who refuse have their relationships destroyed , they are forced to divorce and their children are taken away - one of the most brutal means of oppression .
The MKO has totally isolated all MKO members living inside and outside the camp .
All access to the international press or media is prohibited .
All of the interviews conducted by the US took place in the presence of MKO cadres , which meant that the people could not talk about their real problems and concerns .
In the past , MKO members from northern Iraq were handed over to Saddam Hussein 's henchmen and were shamefully tortured and killed in camp Abu Greib .
These are just a few examples and explanations for the joint amendments which I urge you to support .
Anyone who rejects these - and I want to say this very clearly - and anyone who adopts the present resolution text unchanged , is voting in favour of allowing the MKO to carry on its policy of oppression in a camp that it controls .
You will then also be partly responsible for what the MKO is currently threatening to do , namely that if the camp is broken up under international supervision , it will call on its members there to incinerate themselves .
That is clearly the opposite of what we want to do here and therefore I urge you to vote in favour of the amendments tabled by the PSE and my group .
author . - Mr President , for 30 years Iran has been ruled by a theocratic dictatorship .
That dictatorship not only forces the inhabitants to live in conformity with its religious standards but also tries to kill everyone who does not conform to its system .
The consequence is that many Iranians have to live in exile , not only in Europe but also in the neighbouring countries .
After the Anglo-American military invasion in Iraq , the Iranians who live there in exile got a guarantee of protection from Iran .
Now the foreign troops are preparing to withdraw from Iraq .
I support this withdrawal , but an unforeseen consequence could be that the theocratic regime in Iran would get an opportunity to attack the opposition outside its own borders .
It strives for the deportation of those people to Iran in order to kill them .
Inside Iraq there is much solidarity with the Iranians in exile .
However , the power of Iran in Iraq has grown because the majority of the inhabitants in Iraq , too , is Shiite Muslim .
Through written questions to the Council I have drawn its attention to the position of the 3 400 people living in Camp Ashraf .
The only answer was that the Council had not discussed this matter .
Today , we are discussing a very important urgent resolution on Camp Ashraf .
In two previous resolutions in 2007 and 2008 , our Parliament confirmed the legal status of the Ashraf inhabitants under the Fourth Geneva Convention .
Today , our Parliament is paying special attention to the current situation by adopting a resolution only on Ashraf .
This text is a joint text , adopted by most political groups , and it is balanced .
It wants to send a strong message to the Iraqi Government that the rights of these 3 400 people in Ashraf , including 1 000 women , cannot be violated because of the pressures of the mullahs in Iran .
So we must send a united message , without amendments that would undermine and weaken this resolution , which only covers the humanitarian issues of Ashraf residents .
We have to avoid any changes to the final text of the resolution that would complicate the situation or endanger the lives of these defenceless people .
The inhabitants of Ashraf were bombed by US forces at the beginning of the invasion in 2003 .
Later on , they were screened by the USA .
The Iraqi Government has also screened every one of the people in Ashraf - this took place during April this year .
Every one of them was interviewed , outside Ashraf .
They were encouraged and urged to leave the camp or go to Iran .
Only six of them agreed to leave - six out of 3 400 people !
So we have to respect their decision .
author . - Mr President , the situation of Camp Ashraf , home to 3 500 members of the main democratic opposition of Iran , the PMOI , has been of great concern for some time and has been the subject of several resolutions in this House in recent years .
Together with a delegation of four Members of this House , I visited Camp Ashraf in October last year and met with American , Iraqi and UN officials there .
They all reinforced our concern for the legal status of Ashraf 's residents , because its security was transferred from American troops to Iraqi forces at the beginning of this year .
The situation has got much worse since then .
The Iranian supreme leader , in an official announcement at the end of February , asked the visiting Iraqi President to implement the mutual agreement to close down Camp Ashraf and expel all its residents from Iraq .
Since then Iraqi forces have started a siege around the camp .
Iraqi troops have been preventing entry of families of Ashraf residents , parliamentary delegations , human rights organisations , lawyers , journalists and even doctors to the camp , and do not allow many logistical materials to get into Ashraf .
This Parliament therefore found it absolutely necessary to address this as an urgency issue at this stage .
We have now worked together with all groups and produced a common text , which is well balanced and addresses all our concerns on this matter , and calls on international bodies to find a long-term legal status for Ashraf residents .
Unfortunately there are some amendments tabled by some of the spokesmen for Tehran , those who believe the lies told by Tehran .
I think we should understand clearly that these are contrary to the security of the residents of Ashraf and we should vote against them .
We urge all colleagues to stick to the joint text and reject any amendments .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , here we are talking about a ' camp ' , which is in actual fact a small town of people who have laid down their weapons on the basis of a difficult political decision ; people who have entrusted their own defence , in fact , to the international community .
The reason why we are debating this point today under the urgent procedure is the risk that these persons may be deported en masse and that all their rights with regard to the Iranian regime may be infringed once and for all .
Certainly , questions can be raised about the level and extent of democracy in the People 's Mujahedin of Iran , their organisation , but this is not the subject of the debate that we must have , and this is not the reason why we asked for the urgent procedure to be used .
The reason why we have requested the application of the urgent procedure is to prevent this small town from being attacked as a whole , for its fundamental rights to be swept away and for it to be consigned to the hands of the Iranian dictatorship .
This is why the amendments that have been tabled are liable simply to confuse the naked urgency and necessity of this message , and that is why I hope they will not be adopted .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , we are here today to prevent a potential , large-scale , human tragedy from taking place .
Almost 4 000 people , members of the Iranian opposition , are in imminent danger of being deported by the Iraqi authorities back to Iran , whose regime has already executed more than 22 000 of their friends .
By the way , these are the people who have exposed the Tehran secret nuclear programme and are opposing the terrorism-exporting regime by peaceful means .
It is in the interests of the democratic credibility of the Iraqi Government , as well as the US Administration , which has granted their status as protected persons , to protect their lives , respect their free will and dignity and guarantee their safe future under international law .
But , first of all , we call on the Iraqi Government to lift the blockade of Camp Ashraf .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I believe that Alejo Vidal-Quadras , a good friend of mine , and others who have spoken are profoundly mistaken and that we should support the amendments , because the Iraqi Government has announced on more than one occasion recently that it has no intention whatsoever of forcing the inhabitants of Camp Ashraf to leave for Iran or to go to any other country .
The Iraqi Government has repeatedly requested different countries , including many EU Member States , to receive them , and we have not agreed .
Of the 3 400 people living in the camp , 1 015 hold residence permits from , and enjoy resident status in , different countries , many of which are EU Member States , and we are not accepting these people .
Why ?
Most of the camp 's inhabitants received professional military training during the previous Saddam Hussein regime and they participated with his presidential guards and with other security forces in the violent crushing of the Iraqi people 's popular uprising after the liberation of Kuwait in 1991 .
There is ample evidence that these people harmed the Iraqi people when the Iraqi army refused to carry out the killings that Saddam Hussein required .
The families of the victims in Iraq cannot forget this fact , and the Iraqi Constitution does not permit the presence of groups such as the NKO or the PKK on Iraqi soil .
Two thousand of these people have registered themselves with the High Commissioner for Refugees , hoping to be transferred to other countries ready to accept them , and for several years now the Iraqi Government has been working closely with UNHCR asking other countries to accept them .
Dear colleagues , this is the business of Iraq .
The sovereignty of Iraq is at stake , and we should place our trust in this democratically elected Government of Iraq .
This is their right , their duty , and I can assure you they are fulfilling it correctly .
Mr President , I have never been a great fan of the People 's Mujahedin of Iran , whose philosophical origins are Islamist-Marxist - which is a contradiction in terms - and they were of course for many years under the protection of Saddam Hussein , the butcher of Baghdad , whom they supported militarily .
Nevertheless , in recent years they have reformed , and have given valuable information to the West about human rights violations in Iran and the geographical location of Iran 's secret uranium enrichment facilities .
It was therefore questionable if they should have remained on the EU banned terrorist list .
What is unquestionable , in my view , is that the residents of Camp Ashraf deserve legal protection in Iraq from its Government and the allied forces , and do not deserve deportation to Iran , where they face almost certain torture and possible execution .
Mr President , this debate once again demonstrates the limitations of urgencies , with huge numbers of representations because there has been insufficient time for proper negotiation and consultation .
I want to put on record that the original Socialist text clearly opposes any question of forced deportation , and calls for full compliance with the Geneva Convention and full access by international human rights organisations .
To Mr Vidal-Quadras and others , having myself sought to get a compromise by getting cross-party support only for Amendments 2 , 3 and 6 and then the Socialist support for the joint resolution , it is a complete distortion to say that these amendments could be used as a pretext to massacre residents .
Whether people support or criticise the PMOI , in a human rights debate no one in this Chamber should disagree with amendments which seek to support human rights obligations on any or all parties anywhere in the world .
- ( CS ) Mr President , 30 seconds will be enough for me .
I would like to say that I am delighted the PMOI was taken off the EU 's list of proscribed organisations during the Czech Presidency , and I am pleased that we are continuing to protect the Iranian opposition against the regime through today 's resolution on Camp Ashraf .
I would like to thank everyone participating from all political groups regardless of their colours or convictions and I hope the resolution will go through in the proposed form without the amendment proposals which would somehow deform it .
( PT ) Mr President , I too want to call for this joint motion for a resolution to be voted on as it currently stands .
The amendments tabled here in this House are profoundly mistaken .
It is absolutely incorrect to say that even one refugee from Camp Ashraf or the alternative camp has been transferred to Europe or even within Iraq with the support of the High Commissioner .
I challenge anyone to ask the High Commissioner if any refugees have been transferred at any time .
All this is absolutely false , and is solely intended to facilitate a massacre .
That is what it is all about , nothing more , and I would ask the authors of these absolutely shameful amendments to withdraw them , as they are an insult to this Parliament .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , I ask to be able to speak , but to do so in conditions where this is possible .
With all the MEPs walking around it is , truly , very difficult ; I have a lot of respect for Parliament , but it seems to me truly impossible to be able to speak under these circumstances .
You are right .
Ladies and gentlemen , we will not close the debate until everyone is seated in silence .
Would those Members who are talking in the aisles please note that we are not going to close the debate until they stop talking and we can listen to the Vice-President of the Commission with proper respect .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , I would like to thank you , because I believe it is right to participate in debates by listening to what is said and by speaking in an appropriate manner .
( FR ) I am now going to speak in French .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission regularly monitors the development of the situation in Iraq , particularly in relation to Camp Ashraf .
As we all know , in January 2009 the Iraqi Government took back control of that area .
With regard to the humanitarian situation in the camp , the Commission has been informed by the International Committee of the Red Cross and other international organisations that have been monitoring the development of the situation that no significant deterioration in living conditions or any breaches of international conventions have been reported .
The Commission entirely agrees with the view that the closure of the camp should be within a legal framework , and that the lives and physical or moral well-being of its residents should not be threatened .
International humanitarian standards should be applied , not least the principle of non-return .
On several occasions the Iraqi Government has said that it is prepared to treat the residents of the camp decently and that it did not have any intention of illegally deporting the members of this organisation or forcing them to leave Iraq .
With this in mind , the Commission nevertheless stresses the need , as always , to respect the rule of law , and is counting on the Iraqi Government to act accordingly .
When they met with the Commission in March 2009 , the Iraqi authorities reiterated their commitment to respecting international humanitarian standards and not using force , and in particular to not conducting forced returns to Iraq .
The Iraqi Human Rights Minister is currently holding individual meetings with the residents in order to establish their rights and determine whether they wish to return to Iraq or leave for a third country .
Over recent weeks , some members have chosen to leave the camp and have been able to do so without encountering any difficulties .
The Commission supports these efforts .
If the residents of the camp wish to leave , the Iraqi Government must authorise them to settle in another country and facilitate the process .
The Commission , in cooperation with the representatives of the Member States on the ground , will continue to monitor the progress of the situation .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place next .
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( debate )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting

Madam President , I rise once again on Rule 28 ( 2 ) , which says that any Member may ask the President of Parliament a question and receive an answer within 30 days .
I asked the President a question on 19 March .
Today is 24 April .
I have had no answer .
I raised it yesterday and I was promised the matter would be dealt with .
It has still not been dealt with .
I find it very difficult to understand that the President of this Parliament shows such contempt for Parliament 's rules and for its own Members that he is prepared to completely ignore them .
I think it is absolutely despicable the way the President is behaving .
Mr Titley , I will of course pass on your request .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
1 .
Women 's rights in Afghanistan
2 .
Support for the Special Court for Sierra Leone
3 .
Humanitarian situation of Camp Ashraf residents
- Before the vote
Madam President , it would appear that there has been some error in the text published on the internet by Parliament 's services .
It is incorrectly worded and inconsistent with the text which was actually tabled in the joint resolution by my group and others .
I do not know whether you have been informed of this and whether you can take it into account , but the text in paragraph 2 should read ' Respecting the individual wishes of anyone living in Camp Ashraf as regards to their future ; ' .
That is not what is actually published and that is what should be in the text .
Mr Tannock , I have been informed and all of the linguistic corrections will be made .
After the vote
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that behind me , among the far-right radicals , there are people who are not Members , and as far as I can see , they are also using the voting cards .
( Uproar )
Mr Martin , all of that will be verified .
4 .
UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (
- After the vote
Madam President , a vote was defeated because there was an equal number of votes just a couple of moments ago .
A Member has made a very serious allegation about voting in the Chamber .
I would ask you to halt proceedings until we find out whether there are Members voting who should not be voting , or whether this allegation is false .
It is a very serious allegation .
( Applause )
I have just said that it will be verified .
That means that it will be verified immediately .
We are dealing with it .
- ( FR ) Madam President , I will be very brief on this point .
As one of our fellow Members has made an accusation , I will ask him to clarify his accusation .
As you said , the verification needs to take place immediately , and if , as I believe , it turns out after verification that the accusation is false , I ask that all the conclusions be drawn from this .
I said that the verification would be done .
It is going to be done immediately , so I will keep you informed in the next few minutes .
5 .
Optional Protocol to the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (
6 .
Problem of profiling , notably on the basis of ethnicity and race , in counter-terrorism , law enforcement , immigration , customs and border control (
7 .
Protection of the Communities ' financial interests - Fight against fraud - Annual report 2007 (
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( HU ) I will not need to take up two minutes .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to draw your attention to two very important facts regarding the report .
These reports have been compiled for years , but the Council has not even once yet included these reports on its agenda .
I think that it would be very important for the Council to make Member States aware of the content of this report .
This would help , to a large extent , to also make the Council 's and other institutions ' discharge procedure work successfully .
This is why I am suggesting that the postponement of the Council 's autumn discharge procedure should only be accepted , provided that the Council also puts this report on its agenda .
This would be extremely important to ensure that the Council also accepts those regulations which are pending and would guarantee transparency in the spending of European funds .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to those who helped draft this report , including the shadow rapporteur and those who submitted the proposed amendments .
We adopted this report by consensus in the Committee .
8 .
Parliamentary immunity in Poland (
9 .
Governance within the CFP (
10 .
Statistics on plant protection products (
11 .
Ecodesign requirements for energy-related products (
12 .
Harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products (
I can tell you that , after verification , there has been no abuse of voting rights .
In order to avoid any further discussion , I will inform the President , and President Pöttering will tell you what the repercussions will be .
13 .
Cross-border payments in the Community (
14 .
The business of electronic money institutions (
15 .
Animal by-products (
- Before the vote
Madam President , I would just like to make two brief comments .
The translation may give rise to confusion in the different languages .
I would therefore like to state for the record that the amendment made to Article 2 ( 2 ) ( a ) with the wording ' except wild game ' must always be considered in conjunction with point aa .
This will remove the confusion .
I can assure you that all of the linguistic versions will be checked in this respect , Mr Schnellhardt .
16 .
Facility providing mid-term financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments (
17 .
Taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments (
18 .
Common system of VAT as regards tax evasion linked to import and other cross-border transactions (
- Before the vote :
( NL ) I should like to revisit the vote on my report , which was at second reading .
All the groups in Parliament had a political agreement with the Council to adopt a number of amendments so that this regulation could become a proper regulation .
Due to the absence of many MEPs - more than 400 are absent - we have been unable to adopt the package of amendments , which requires a qualified majority of 393 votes at second reading .
We only managed 387 of the 395 votes cast .
Due to the absence of many fellow MEPs , we have had to break our agreement with the Council .
I should therefore like to ask the Bureau and Parliament 's administration to look into how we can salvage the situation at this point before Parliament goes into recess after 7 May , so that we can discuss and restore this situation during the next part-session .
I must say , Mr Staes , that we had already considered this issue , and that we are indeed going to look at this because it is a real issue and a real problem .
19 .
Facility providing mid-term financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments
- Before the vote
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to speak at this point , because we in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs had a significant debate on the issues surrounding the loan , and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats had tabled an amendment considering that there was no legal basis for a European loan .
We had agreed on an amendment that we drew up following an agreement with Mr Langen , who was the principal negotiator for the PPE Group , although not the shadow rapporteur for this matter , to add that there is no specific basis for the Community loan .
It was under these circumstances that we tabled Amendment 2 , so I am quite surprised that well-informed experts have told me that on the PPE list there was a minus against this amendment , and I would like to give Mr Langen the opportunity to correct the PPE list .

( DE ) Madam President , there is no reason for me to explain how my group 's voting list is put together .
We have discussed it and , after re-examining it , we are able to give our full support to this motion .
20 .
Nanomaterials (
Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Madam President , I would simply like to say that the Commission tabled a proposal in this new , important political area which meant that we thought implementing measures in the current legislation would be sufficient .
Parliament is now very clearly requesting that the Commission carry out an overhaul of all of the relevant legislation so that we can protect consumers , workers and the environment from the negative effects of nanoproducts and so that they can have a market that is safe and that is able to develop .
I would like to remind you that the Commission has two years to comply with Parliament 's request and that , thanks to a compromise , it will be very clear in today 's vote that Parliament almost unanimously supports this .
It is now time for the Commission to make an immediate start on its work on an overhaul so that nanotechnology can be regulated in a way that protects citizens .
21 .
Annual debate on the progress made in 2008 in the Area of Freedom , Security and Justice ( AFSJ ) ( Articles 2 and 39 of the EU Treaty )
22 .
Conclusions of the G20 Summit
23 .
Consolidating stability and prosperity in the Western Balkans (
24 .
Situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
After the vote on Amendment 3
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to ask whether you realise that , in Article 6 , the word ' central ' before the word state needs to be deleted to make the wording consistent with the other texts .
Yes , yes , we are definitely going to check all of the language versions , Mrs Pack .
25 .
Non-proliferation and the future of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons ( NPT ) (
26 .
Rights of persons with disabilities
27 .
25th annual report from the Commission on monitoring the application of Community law ( 2007 ) (
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Let us now proceed to the explanations of votes .

( PL ) Madam President , I would like today to comment on the serious accusation which was made in this Chamber against Members of the European Parliament , and on the slander of the European Parliament uttered by Mr Martin when he said that some MEPs do not vote themselves , but send proxies , who vote using the MEPs ' voting cards .
This is unacceptable behaviour , because the proceedings of the European Parliament are transmitted live .
The citizens of Europe are sitting in the balcony and they heard today , in an election year , something extraordinary .
It is slanderous , and I would ask that at its next meeting the Bureau instruct Mr Martin to withdraw his words and to apologise to all the MEPs who sit in this Chamber .
Mr Rogalski , you saw that I asked for it to be checked immediately whether it was true or false .
It is therefore on the record .
It was false .
It is therefore recorded in the Official Journal .
I now ask for the President of Parliament to take the necessary action , and we will discuss it in the Bureau .
Madam President , you did indeed deal with it very speedily , but I do think that it is not acceptable that a Member should rise in his place and make such a serious allegation against other Members of the House .
I hold no support for the gentlemen of the extreme right , but the President of Parliament must uphold and protect the rights of Members .
We are being accused of all sorts of outrageous things , and we are entitled to proper conduct and ethical behaviour by our colleagues here in this House , and indeed outside the House .
If you please , I have recorded everything that you have said .
You have seen that we have tried to deal with these matters quickly , because they are important .
I am entirely in agreement with you , and we will see what action is to be taken .
Madam President , following that exchange and your very helpful reply , I was unable to catch your colleague 's eye yesterday to report that the same Member - I decline to use the world ' honourable ' - had published an article in the Austrian press naming a member of Parliament 's staff .
This seems to me , whether the allegations are true or false , to be yet another example of wholly improper behaviour .
It may well be that the character involved would not have his credentials verified if the Austrian electorate are foolish enough to support him .
I have recorded what you have said , Mr Beazley .
We are all in agreement that we need to be sensible here , but you are right , Mr Beazley , that in general this sort of thing always backfires on the person responsible .
Oral explanations of vote
Madam President , this report was about the rights of people with disabilities , and I wanted to put on record and acknowledge the work done by Richard Howitt , a Labour Member of this House , in his fight for people with disabilities .
I have always been a great fan of opening sporting opportunities for people with disabilities .
We have all heard of the Para-Olympic movement , but this year , for the first time , the European Parliament and the Commission are recognising the magnificent work done by the Special Olympics movement for people with intellectual disabilities , run by Mr Tim Shriver .
This has programmes across the globe , and one of them is now going to be part-funded by the European Union budget .
I have been privileged to go both Summer World Games in Shanghai and this year 's Winter Games in Boise , Idaho , and it is difficult to describe the range of emotions you feel when watching the athletes compete and participate .
I just wanted to put on record my complete support for this resolution .
Madam President , I think once again this is one of those reports that many people can welcome .
In the battle for better energy conservation and more efficient energy use , I think we all want to see more energy-efficient products .
But once again I have to draw attention to the fact that we should be leading by example in this House .
When we talk about energy efficiency , we should make sure that we put our own House in order .
The European Parliament has three buildings - two Parliament buildings and one administrative building - one in Brussels , one in Strasbourg and one in Luxembourg .
That clearly shows that we ourselves are not walking the walk when it comes to energy efficiency .
It is time to lead by example .
It is time to put the battle for energy efficiency at the forefront .
We need to close down the Strasbourg Parliament , close down the Luxembourg administrative buildings and stay in Brussels .
( DE ) Madam President , I wanted to speak because these cross border payments are very advantageous and indicate that , through a positive solution and the elimination of further barriers , the European Union is consciously relating to citizens and is establishing regulations that will make things easier for them in their day to day lives .
I am firmly convinced about this report and am therefore positive that we have taken a significant step forwards here in facilitating activities within the European Union .
I hope that this will set a precedent for other areas .
Madam President , I hope that when I give my explanation of vote I do not provoke the same sort of petty responses that one can expect from the other side of the House .
I think we all agree that we need to tackle tax evasion , but at the same time we need to understand that , in the case of those entrepreneurs who work hard , who create jobs and wealth for others and then are taxed heavily for doing so , it is quite understandable when they legally want to transfer their money to lower-tax regimes .
I think we all agree that we need to fight fraud , but let us not crack down on legal transfers of money .
We may think that the result of such actions will lead to the removal of low-tax regimes and that we will all have to pay higher taxes , and I know that is something that , particularly on the other side of the House , people welcome .
But we also have to understand the unintended consequences of our actions sometimes , and if we seek to crack down too much on lower-tax regimes and lower-tax areas , rather than just driving money from one country to another , we will drive much-needed capital , much-needed innovation and much-needed entrepreneurship out of Europe altogether .
( FR ) Madam President , I did of course vote against the Hamon report , which is even worse than the Commission 's proposal on the taxation of savings , because , against all logic , a majority of Parliament - although it far from represents the majority of the Members of this House - voted to abolish the system of taxation at source , which works , in order to retain only the system of exchange of information , which is costly , bureaucratic and inefficient .
This is incomprehensible !
I am happy to admit that the majority of the Members here did not have a good knowledge of the issue , otherwise they would not have been able to vote to abolish a system that is efficient , cheap , and that ensures that everyone pays tax on capital income , instead advocating exchange of information .
Mr Hamon told me that he is not interested as to whether everyone pays their taxes .
Last night he told me : ' I want to know that French people ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , this is on the same issue in relation to the free vote .
I do not have an objection in principle to the withholding tax system , but I do think we have to put down a marker that tax evasion is not acceptable .
I agree with the comments that have been made about tax competition being a good thing .
I think it is a good thing .
I think anybody who looked at this independently would say it is a good thing .
People often say , well , isn 't it easy for you - you have 12.5 % corporation tax in Ireland , and I say , well why don 't you have a 12.5 % corporation tax in your country , if that is the problem ?
But there is an issue here , and we need to put down the marker about tax evasion .
That is a criminal offence , and we really have to ensure that we do not become too close to those who practise these types of evasions .
We have seen in the past where bad regulation and bad practice have brought the financial world .
So in principle I am not opposed to the withholding tax , but I do want to put down the marker that we do need to do something more emphatic about the whole question of tax evasion .
My political group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , welcomes the result of today 's vote on the Catherine Neris report on harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products .
First-reading approval with the Council was not possible because some of the Member States did not agree to a compulsory statement of conformity .
Today 's vote establishes the European Parliament 's position on some politically sensitive issues , particularly the CE mark , which should convince the Council to reach a common position followed by approval from the European Parliament and the Commission at second reading .
My political group , the PPE-DE , in an agreement with the Socialist Party in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , has only supported technical improvements to the text and through our additional amendment proposals we have brought the text passed by the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection closer to the working text of the Council .
The PPE-DE did not support Amendments 17 and 54 which were passed in committee , because it agreed with the Commission proposal - we are opposed to the introduction of intra-state markings , because they represent a barrier to the internal market and we agree that Member States should eliminate all national references demonstrating conformity other than the CE mark .
I am delighted that this position received clear backing from Commissioner Verheugen in yesterday 's debate .
I wish the legislation success .
( NL ) This resolution certainly contains a few positive elements , such as a call to strengthen Frontex 's mandate and to take initiatives for a European internal security policy , which should complement national security plans .
In the end , I decided to vote against it , though , because I find it totally unacceptable that this Parliament , which , after all , is supposed to represent Europe 's citizens , should tenaciously cling to the Lisbon Treaty .
The appeal to submit proposals at the earliest opportunity to make the import of foreign workers easier likewise failed to meet with my approval and , in my view , warranted a ' no ' vote .
Madam President , like others in this House , I welcome the new drive to revive the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty , including the Security Council resolution to close loopholes in the existing legal framework .
However , I reject the direct implication within this report that the European Union should replace the key Member States as the major actor in this particular process .
I think it beggars belief for this place to try and believe that it should extend its tentacles into this area , especially considering the fact that only two Member States are nuclear weapon states , with an additional four participating in NATO nuclear weapon sharing .
This report is more interested in grabbing the chance of replacing Member States around the top table of international governance than paying sufficient attention to the danger of proliferation by terrorists and rogue states .
Madam President , I think when we start from first principles , we can all agree that nuclear weapons are bad .
I think we all agree that war is a bad thing - that is motherhood and apple pie .
As the great philosopher Edwin Starr once said : ' War , huh , what is it good for ? Absolutely nothing ' .
But when we look at this , we have to ask the question : should the EU really replace the two nuclear Member States in the whole process of non-proliferation , given the lack of expertise that exists outside those Member States ?
Is it not premature to suggest that the UK should dismantle fissile material production when there is so much of this material that can get into the hands of terrorists and other rogue Member States ?
This is nothing but a power grab and will actually do much less in the battle against nuclear proliferation , and we should forget about power grabbing and actually tackle the problem itself .
Madam President , a couple of weeks ago I was having one of my favourite meals , a curry , in the village of Long Buckby near to where I live , and I was hosting a group of people who are new to politics in a political discussion .
Like everybody - and you all know this - as a Member of the European Parliament they immediately think a number of things .
Firstly , that you are on the gravy train and you do not really care about ordinary people , and secondly that Europe is not working : there are too many regulations .
Maybe in some cases they are right - there should be a cost-benefit analysis of what the regulations are - and they are badly implemented , in fact not uniformly implemented across the continent .
This report talks about the monitoring of Community law , and that is a good thing .
If you look at the Eurobarometer web site , you will see the number of infringement cases that the Commission takes out against individual Member States .
But this lack of implementation and equal implementation is one of the biggest problems that people in this Chamber who are not like me - who are Europhile rather than Euro-sceptic - have to face in the future .
Madam President , I think , once again , there is room for consensus when we look at this issue , whether one is sceptical about future European integration or one wants to see their own country subsumed into a supernational state .
I think we all agree , at the moment , that we are all members of the European Union and we should abide by Community law , because we have been through the due process , the debates and legal processes .
Therefore , we need better monitoring - I think we all agree - of the application of Community law .
So when I have constituents in London and cheesemongers complaining to me about the fact that they have had to invest lots of money to make sure , for example , that the facilities they use to sell cheese meet EU standards that have been gold plated by British civil servants , and then they travel across to other Member States and see cheese being sold openly in street markets and melting and they wonder about the application of Community laws in other countries , it is time for us to show that we are strict about application of Community law right across the EU .

Madam President , I just wondered if it was actually in order for Mr Kamall to urge the European Parliament to ignore the Treaties and ignore its legal obligations and , indeed , to increase the powers of the European Parliament in addressing the issue of the buildings in three different locations .
He knows perfectly well that , unfortunately , it is the governments of the Member States who decide on the seats of the institutions and , unfortunately , under the chairmanship of the former leader of his party , John Major , at the Edinburgh Summit in 1992 , they imposed a legal obligation on the European Parliament to have 12 part-sessions a year in Strasbourg .
That is unfortunate , but surely the answer is not to break the law .
Surely the answer is to ask the governments to revise that unfortunate decision that was taken under the leadership of the former leader of his party .
Written explanations of vote
I voted for the European Parliament resolution on women 's rights in Afghanistan , because I believe that the new draft law on the personal status of Shiite women is unacceptable .
This legislation , which was recently approved by both chambers of the Afghan Parliament , places severe restrictions on women 's freedom of movement , legitimises ' marital rape ' and promotes discrimination against women in the areas of marriage , divorce , inheritance and access to education .
This is not consistent with international standards of human rights in general , nor with women 's rights .
I believe that the European Union must send a clear signal that this draft law needs to be repealed as its contents contradict the principle of gender equality , as enshrined in international conventions .
I voted for the joint motion for a resolution on support for the Special Court for Sierra Leone , as it is vital to ensure that the perpetrators of violent crimes under international humanitarian law , notably war crimes and crimes against humanity , are punished and serve out their punishments .
Established in 2000 by the United Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone , this was the first international court to be funded by voluntary contributions , the first to be established in a country where the alleged crimes took place , and the first to indict a sitting African head of state for war crimes and crimes against humanity .
The residents of Camp Ashraf are one of the visible faces of the Iranian regime 's oppression and of the resistance to this violence .
The link that people have repeatedly attempted to make between members of the Iranian resistance and terrorism is unjustified , as newspapers , politicians and courts have been able to prove .
On the contrary , the situation in Camp Ashraf is in the public domain and numerous people , including members of parliament and journalists , have visited the camp and drawn their own conclusions .
The residents of Camp Ashraf are protected persons under the Geneva Convention .
For these reasons , the signal sent by the European Parliament is vitally important : the Camp Ashraf residents have a right to be protected and not to be handed over , under any circumstances , to the Iranian regime .
This is a question of the most basic respect for human rights .
We therefore hope that this resolution will bear fruit .
Finally , I have one point to make about the Iranian regime .
It is vital that the errors made at the start of and during the intervention by the United States ' allies in Iraq are not now compounded by errors made on their exit .
If , at the end of this process , the Iranian fundamentalist regime has reinforced its influence in the region , in particular by controlling the internal affairs of Iraq , then that region will be further away from peace and the world will be facing a greater threat .
in writing . - Mr President , I encouraged all my Liberal colleagues to vote against the amendments of the Greens / EFA and the PES , as the draft resolution was well balanced already and those amendments did not accord to the spirit and essence of the resolution .
Criticizing and accusing the PMOI , one of the most prominent opposition movements of the Iranian people with no substantial evidence looks awfully like an attempt to appease the authoritarian regime of the Islamic Republic of Iran .
I cannot imagine how anyone could feel comfortable doing a favour to this oppressive regime by supporting the amendments that provide an opportunity for Iran to attack and weaken the opposition movement that has been advocating for human rights and democracy in Iran .
I would like to thank all my colleagues who supported the original draft resolution that by no means threatened the lives and integrity of the people in Camp Ashraf .
We must engage them to bring about a regime transition in Iran that would ensure peace and security in region that has been one of the must unpredictable and instable for more than decades .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , I voted in favour of the report .
Over recent decades the tendency to approach the issue of persons with disabilities from a right-based perspective has matured and has been widely accepted internationally .
Respect for the rights of disabled persons has always been one of the key aspects of European social policy and in this sense the United Nations convention on human rights constitutes a step in this direction .
The principles of the convention are respect for dignity , autonomy , freedom of choice , independence , non-discrimination , social inclusion , respect for difference , equal opportunities , accessibility and equality between men and women .
Of special importance , with a view to promoting social inclusion , are Articles 24 , 27 and 28 on subjects connected with education , employment and social protection .
I therefore hope that the convention is adopted by as many votes as possible and that all the Member States will ratify it as soon as possible .
I voted for Mrs Jeleva 's report on the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities , responsibility for which will , for the first time , be shared by the Community and its Member States , as it defends respect for dignity and individual autonomy and promotes non-discrimination , inclusion in society and acceptance of persons with disabilities as part of human diversity .
I voted in favour of adoption of the Jeleva report on the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities .
These matters are especially important to me , and I have demonstrated this many times , for example at meetings of what is known as the Rehabilitation Parliament of the Voivodeship of Sub-Carpathia - there have been 18 of them .
I constantly emphasise that people with disabilities must be treated just as people without disabilities are treated .
This means not only with noble declarations and legal regulations , but above all in the practical matters of everyday life .
The principles of the Convention are as follows : respect for inherent dignity , individual autonomy including the freedom to make one 's own choices , and respect for the independence of persons , non-discrimination , full and effective participation and inclusion in society , respect for difference and acceptance of persons with disabilities as part of human diversity and humanity , equality of opportunity , accessibility , equality between men and women , respect for the evolving capacities of children with disabilities and respect for the right of children with disabilities to preserve their identities .
In this context I think that the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities are very positive .
In the EU they apply to about 50 million people , and in the whole world the number is estimated to be 650 million .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Greek Communist Party did not vote for the report on the conclusion , by the EU , of the UN Convention and Protocol on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities , because it considers that the EU is not entitled to sign and ratify such agreements with the UN on behalf of the 27 Member States .
The signature on the part of the EU infringes every concept of independence and sovereignty of the Member States of the EU , which are members of the UN and have the right and obligation to sign .
In this particular case , the Greek Communist Party supports the Convention and Protocol on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the obligation of the Member States to apply it , despite the fact that this matter relates to the overall policy of the capitalist countries which apply an inhumane policy towards people who need special care .
in writing . - British Conservatives share to some extent the concerns in this report that there are serious civil liberties issues about some abuses in the practice of carrying out profiling in a small minority of cases , and welcomes the fact that the European Parliament is seeking to draw this to the attention of Member State governments .
We believe , however , that our law enforcement authorities need to be able to use adequate tools for them to carry out their tasks effectively , of which profiling , particularly intelligence-led profiling , is one .
We could not , however , support this particular text , as the tone of the recitals in particular is unbalanced and overly alarmist .
The rapporteur calls for the principle of proportionality to be observed , which makes it a source of particular regret that this principle was not respected in drawing up this report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , I voted in favour of the report .
One of the obligations to be met by any state in which the rule of law holds sway is to ensure that that prevention activities carried out for the safety of civilians are conducted not on the basis of a person 's ethnic identity , but on the basis of that person 's conduct .
Ethically speaking , no individual can or should be placed in detention of any kind unless there are acts that provide a basis for charging him or that provide evidence of his guilt .
In order to contain the problem of immigration and terrorism , we have now reached the stage of developing ' profiles ' : this method has been created by police organisations and is able to identify , in advance , associations of people considered to be potential advocates of terrorist and criminal activities .
One of the most effective methods of profiling goes by the name of ' data mining ' , and consists of seeking out persons , using computerised databases , through indicators that have been drawn up in advance and which are based on race , ethnicity , religion and nationality .
We must act to regulate profiling through legal parameters with the facility to guarantee the rights of any person , regardless of his or her race or religion .
Profiling is already now used in numerous areas ranging from keeping the peace to administrative and customs control of borders , and also the fight against terrorism .
There is increasing interest in the use of this investigation technique , based on gathering information about individuals from various sources , which may include more sensitive data such as ethnic origin , race , nationality or religion .
However , the use of these techniques has developed considerably without there having previously been any opportunity to debate them and arrive at a conclusion as to how and when they might be used , and when their use might be regarded as necessary , legitimate and proportionate .
It is also clear that the necessary safeguards must be established to protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals .
This situation is even more worrying if we take into account that there must be cross-referencing between the various databases , such as SIS II ( Schengen Information System ) , VIS ( Visa Information System ) and Eurodac .
I therefore congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Ludford , on her initiative and on the opportunity that this has given us to start this debate , based on this report which I feel is fairly balanced and respects the commitments negotiated between us .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List supports the wording that expresses the need to address profiling carried out by automated data ' mining ' in a political debate , as it deviates from the general rule that decisions relating to combating crime should be based on a person 's behaviour .
We are strongly opposed to ethnic profiling , which entails the arbitrary use of information by the authorities on grounds of race , skin colour , language , religion , nationality and ethnic origin , among other things , and we see an obvious risk that innocent people may be subjected to arbitrary detention .
However , we do not believe that this problem is best solved at EU level .
It should be solved at the international level by means of international agreements and conventions , such as via the United Nations , perhaps .
We support many of the wordings in this report , but , for the reasons stated above , we have chosen to vote against the report as a whole .
in writing . - ( EL ) The report deals with the method used by repressive mechanisms and secret services in the EU , based on the standards of similar mechanisms in the USA , to standardise and classify persons as suspects of ' terrorist ' and criminal activity on the basis of their ethnicity or race , their behaviour , their political , social , religious and ideological persuasions and their social action .
Of course , this method is not new .
The repressive mechanisms of the bourgeoisie have a rich history of criminal activity against communists and social fighters for whom this classification was used in order to label them as being dangerous to ' public order and security ' .
Today , on the pretext of ' terrorism ' , they are hauled in again from the darkest ages in the history of the bourgeoisie in Europe .
Although the report takes a critical stand towards these methods , it refuses to condemn them categorically and to demand an immediate ban on them .
On the contrary , it considers them legitimate methods of police investigation , provided that they are subject to strict terms and limitations .
There are no guarantees and limitations on such fascist-inclined methods , nor can there be any .
That is why the Greek Communist Party voted against the report .
It calls on the workers to raise their heads high and , with disobedience , to break and overturn the EU of repression , prosecutions , terrorism and violations of democratic rights and freedoms .
in writing . - British Conservatives support initiatives to ensure success in the fight against fraud in the context of the EU budget .
In this respect , there are a number of sensible proposals contained in this report , including the strengthening of the independence of OLAF .
We wish to make clear , however , our opposition to the creation of a European Public Prosecutor , and therefore the proposal contained in paragraph 57 of the report .
in writing . - I visited the horticulturalist producer Johnson of Wixley in my constituency last week , where they expressed concerns about some elements of the recent pesticides package , particularly the strict cut-off criteria on certain pesticides where there are , as yet , no substitutes .
However , I was pleased that , in this case , the proposal seems to be less controversial .
With consensus seemingly breaking out between Parliament and Council , I was pleased to be able to support the Council 's text and the agreed amendments , even if the latter were , in the end , not adopted .
Regular collection and dissemination of data on the use of pesticides should help increase awareness and control of pesticide use , and play a small but significant role in ensuring that pesticides are safe both to human health and the environment , whilst avoiding the concerns expressed about the previous package .
I voted for the amendments to the recommendation for second reading in the report on statistics on plant protection products .
I believe that this report will supplement other existing initiatives on pesticides , agreed at the end of last year .
This report makes several important amendments , such as , for example , changing the words ' plant protection products ' to ' pesticides ' , extending the scope to include biocidal products , and including pesticides for commercial non-agricultural uses .
With this regulation , the European Union will ensure much safer use of pesticides .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Regulation concerning statistics on plant protection products is part of the review of European plant protection products policy , of which the Approval Regulation and the Directive on the sustainable use of pesticides , which were successfully adopted at the beginning of the year , also form part .
The objective is to reduce the negative effects of plant protection products as much as possible by reducing the risks .
In order to measure this we need indicators and in order to develop these indicators we need reliable data , determined by statistics , which ensure comparability between Member States .
That is why I voted in favour of the report .
However , we must not forget that only those who market the products in accordance with the regulations will provide data .
Up-to-date reports on the Europe-wide illegal trade in pesticides indicate that this needs to be brought more firmly into our sights .
The same applies to the importing of products from third countries .
We need to step up our controls in this regard .
Our stringent European approval procedure guarantees the comprehensive protection of people and the environment .
Anyone who sells or uses plant protection products without approval and anyone who does not adequately check residue limits not only creates avoidable risks , but also brings the manufacturer of the product and the agricultural industry into disrepute .
Existing law provides a sufficient level of protection in this regard . However , it must be complied with and monitored .
I voted for the proposal on ecodesign of energy related products as current patterns of consumption have very significant environmental impacts , principally through the emission of greenhouse gases and pollution .
I believe it is important to change consumption and production habits , without this leading to significant additional costs for both companies and households .
I voted for the report on harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products to promote the movement and use of this type of product .
The use of a common technical language to indicate the performance of construction products clarifies and simplifies the conditions of access to CE marking , ensuring greater safety for users .
I am very pleased that today 's plenary session has eliminated some serious shortcomings from the proposed regulation on harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products , which were inserted into this technical standard by the socialist rapporteur .
The shadow rapporteur Zita Pleštinská deserves our applause .
It is thanks to her professional experience and diligence in the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection that the current version is of a professional standard .
Through harmonisation and the CE mark for batch production there will be simplification and reduced costs particularly for small firms .
The disparate requirements of the 27 Member States will no longer apply .
The CE mark of conformity for batch production provides a sufficient guarantee that products conform to European standards .
Harmonisation is not necessary for prototypes and one-off products .
Only if construction products are imported into countries where there is an earthquake risk , for example , will they have to fulfil the requirements for those specific conditions as well .
I appreciate the Czech Presidency 's support for this version .
in writing . - ( IT ) Thank you , Madam President . I voted for the report .
The core subject-matter of Regulation ( EC ) No 2560 / 2001 is cross-border transfers and cross-border electronic payment operations .
The regulation was adopted on 19 December 2001 and its aim is to ensure that the cost of a cross-border payment is the same as a payment made within a Member State .
Up until 1 January 2006 , it applied only to transfers , withdrawals from automatic teller machines and to payments made with a debit or credit card up to EUR 12 500 in EU countries , whereas , from that date , the amount has been increased to EUR 50 000 .
This change has led to a fall in prices and greater competition on the payment services markets .
Regulation ( EC ) No 2560 / 2001 also has drawbacks , however , such as the failure to define ' corresponding payments ' and the failure to include a review clause , and it is necessary to take action on these points immediately .
I would like to conclude by saying that we are in favour of the proposals to update and amend Regulation ( EC ) No 2560 / 2001 , since it is our duty to make cross-border payment transactions easier and more economical .
I voted for the Schnellhardt report on the regulation laying down health rules as regards animal by-products not intended for human consumption , as I consider that the proposals contained in this document will substantially improve the safety of these products , particularly by ensuring traceability throughout the treatment process .
Food safety and consumer protection in the EU will thus be reinforced .
This report will enable the European Union to equip itself with a more precise legislative framework with which to increase the level of safety throughout the food production and distribution chain .
The merits of this text are that it proposes a method that is based more on risks and controls , and makes the regulations on animal by-products and the legislation on hygiene more consistent , while also introducing additional rules on the traceability of animal by-products .
I can also tell you that Mr Schnellhardt 's previous report on the hygiene of foodstuffs ( 2002 ) had a very positive impact by making the European game sector aware of its responsibilities .
The transposition of this regulation into national law has had positive effects on the ground , including by improving the training of seven million European hunters , who , as a result of working in that environment all the time , are in a position quickly and effectively to detect health crises affecting wild fauna .
I therefore support this report , which will enable the European Union to better anticipate and react to any potential food crises linked to products of animal origin .
I voted for this report because in Romania as well as in other Member States we are sometimes faced with crises which affect public and animal health safety in relation to animal products , such as transmissible spongiform encephalopathy , dioxin , swine fever and foot-and-mouth disease .
Such crises can also have a wider adverse impact on the socio-economic situation of farmers and the industrial sectors affected , including a decline in consumer confidence in the safety of animal products .
Disease outbreaks can also have adverse consequences for the environment : disposal of the bodies and biodiversity .
We needed to review the regulation on animal by-products ( ABP ) not intended for human consumption from a legislative perspective .
This will therefore resolve problems linked to differences in interpretation of the scope of the regulation and the problems caused by this , such as : distortion of competition and the different levels of protection against the risks to public and animal health ; ABP classification based to a larger extent on risks ; clarification of derogations ( e.g. impact of ABPs on research , disease outbreaks , natural disasters ) ; reduction in the administrative burden by eliminating the duplication of permits for certain types of economic units .
The review upholds the principles used to regulate in the EU the use , processing , disposal , traceability and allocation of ABPs not intended for human consumption , thereby ensuring a high level of food safety and consumer protection .
This report concerns the draft European Parliament legislative resolution on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 2003 / 48 / EC on taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments .
I voted for this report on the taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments , because it reinforces the principles of transparency and fiscal justice .
The Hamon report advocates the general use of exchange of information , which is a bureaucratic and ultimately inefficient system .
I am in favour of a withholding tax , that is , enabling each citizen to pay his tax in full to the Member State of which he is a taxpayer , by paying a reasonable tax ( 20 or even 25 % ) .
This tax should be applied to natural and legal persons , should be collected at source by the financial body where money ( securities , bonds , and so on ) is managed , and should be transferred to the taxpayer 's taxation department .
Ideally it should be made a Community resource .
in writing . - ( SV ) It is crucial that we tackle tax fraud within the Member States of the EU .
However , the Commission 's proposal and the committee 's report have been overloaded with wordings which , if they were to be given backing in this House , would only contribute to an over-regulation of EU cooperation .
We have voted against the report as a whole and request a thorough overhaul of the entire legislative proposal .
in writing . - I support this proposal on taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments , with a view to closing existing loopholes and eliminating tax evasion .
Experience has shown that the current directive can be circumvented allowing the wealthiest to evade paying taxes whilst those earning much less continue to pay their taxes , this proposal will start to bring an end to this process .
in writing . - This report recognises the reaction of global leaders that tax havens are a part of a global economy which should contribute positively to the wider interests .
Much work has been done already on withholding taxes , and this report adds to the current interest in raising transparency of savings and transactions in such tax havens .
It is particularly important to the issue of dealing with corporate and individual tax avoidance .
in writing . - ( SV ) It is very important to create sound systems which prevent tax fraud .
This applies , in particular , to value added tax .
However , we believe that , in their current form , the Commission 's proposal and the report before us raise more questions than they provide answers to .
The EU has a long-term ambition to reduce the regulatory burden .
The Commission 's proposal seems to be heading in the opposite direction and runs the risk of increasing the administrative burden , in particular for small businesses in Europe .
The proposal also contains wordings which will result in large changes to Swedish legislation .
We have chosen to vote against this report at first reading , but nevertheless look forward to the Commission 's original proposal being developed further in a constructive manner .
in writing . - The EPLP welcomes Mr Visser 's report into tax evasion linked to import and other cross-border transactions .
Although VAT is sometimes complex , its effects across borders may cause specific problems which this report helps to identify and clear up .
in writing . - The EPLP can support this report in terms of the wider perspective of Member State economic actions during the current economic crisis .
While Eurobonds may be regarded as a clever idea which can deliver funds to governments , there seems no legal base on which this can be achieved , so it looks unlikely that this option can be exercised .
I voted for the report on nanomaterials as nanotechnologies promise fantastic results , particularly in energy and the development of biomedicine .
However , I feel it is important to ensure the safety of products before they are placed on the market , bearing in mind that nanotechnologies involve risks that are not yet fully understood .
Materials made of particles which measure less than 10-9 m are called nanomaterials .
They occur in free form or as nanoparticle emissions in a matrix of other materials , such as composites .
These are nanomaterials obtained with ' top-down ' technology and the use of high-energy attrition .
Nanoparticles have a high surface area and significant surface energy , which give them the following characteristics :
ability to catalyse chemical reactions ;
significant reactivity ( potential ) ;
can easily penetrate living cells .
Uncontrolled release of free nanoparticles into the environment may be hazardous to health .
Free nanoparticles of various materials may cause carcinogenic chemical reactions if they enter living cells , but this has not been confirmed .
Sources of nanoparticles released into the environment include :
products manufactured by the ' top-down ' method , for example nano zinc oxide particles used in UV filter creams , and bacteriocidal additives such as silver nanoparticles ;
unintended by-products in the form of nanoparticles , for example as a result of combustion , friction of tyres , and other uncontrolled processes which create nanoaerosols by Brownian motion .
Will the use of nanoparticles in sun lotions , whose purpose is to block ultraviolet radiation , cause side effects on health ?
This can and should be investigated .
Does the catalytic action of the nanoaerosols which are all around us have dangerous effects on health ?
This , too , requires urgent scientific research , which , however , is difficult to conduct , for physical and chemical reasons .
in writing . - ( NL ) This resolution certainly contains a few positive elements , such as a call to reinforce Frontex 's mandate and to take initiatives for a European internal security policy , which should complement national security plans.In the end , I decided to vote against it , though , because I find it totally unacceptable that this Parliament , which , after all , is supposed to represent Europe 's citizens , should tenaciously cling to the Lisbon Treaty.The appeal to submit proposals at the earliest opportunity to make the import of foreign workers easier likewise failed to meet with my approval .

in writing . - ( NL ) Although I voted against this resolution , I wanted to make clear that it certainly contains many positive elements , not least with regard to the reinforcement of Frontex and a better , complementary European internal security policy .
The key problem for me , though , remains the fact that Parliament tenaciously clings to the Lisbon Treaty as if it were the great saviour .
Naturally , we will not make any progress in this way .
It remains a fight to the finish , and eventually , only democracy and the credibility of a democratic European project are set to suffer .
Needless to say , I completely disagree with extending the application of the ' blue card ' system .
This is something I feared from the beginning , and this fear has become reality .
As ever , the typical European salami policy , whereby decisions are taken piecemeal and the effects of subsequent decisions are kept secret in the meantime , must be rammed down our throats .
The G20 Summit and the awareness of the need for a coordinated and cooperative response to the current world economic situation are an expression of the positive side to globalisation .
No longer are there solitary powers , independent economies or dispensable globalised countries .
On the contrary , those countries experiencing much worse conditions than these ' victims ' of the crisis , but which have not been involved in globalisation , as is the case with most of the African countries , still have their problems and remain outside the solution .
That is the problem to which no solution is being given .
The other lesson of these times is that the only alternative to the market economy is a market economy that functions better .
That is the road to be taken .
Finally , I must underline that the capacity to respond to the crisis very much depends on whether or not there is the capacity to reform national economies and create conditions of flexibility .
At the same time as responding to the financial crisis , we need to respond to the paradigm shift in the world economy .
Otherwise , we will experience a deep but cyclical crisis , without solving the structural problems in our economies .
in writing . - I agree with the recommendations emerging from this resolution , which comes at an urgent time to address the financial crisis .
It must first be said that we are not through the crisis yet and that the authorities cannot relax in the thought that it will pass .
Several key aspects are important to be acted on .
First , dealing with ' systemic risks ' : the international institutions need to be strengthened to face future threats .
Inside the EU a sole authority such as the ECB must be considered for reasons of coordinating strong actions when urgently required .
Secondly , the revamping of existing legislation and introduction of new legislation which recognises the specific needs of sectors of the financial services industry , in particular Solvency II and CRD , are vital elements which contribute to the management of risk .
Also , credit rating agencies are now going to be regulated .
On the fiscal measures currently being envisaged by Member States , it is important to continue with sensible , balanced approaches which also do not add up to protectionism .
We will face rising unemployment and falling demand .
Social policies , too , have to reflect the concerns of European citizens and need to be of higher concern than seems apparent from the recommendations currently known .
in writing . - ( IT ) The Western Balkans region has for years been the scene of the most barbarous massacres in Europe .
The prospect of membership of the EU represents , as things stand , the main guarantee of stability and reform .
Some progress still needs to be made : we should remember that neighbourhood and cooperation policies underpin the region 's progress towards EU membership and that in the Western Balkans region certain bilateral issues between the various states , both Community and non-Community , are still to be resolved .
The influence of the EU , however , and its ability to act as a mediator , supporting the reforms underway in the Balkans , will allow those states to fully meet the Copenhagen criteria and to join the EU as fully-fledged members .
To support ever-increasing integration , chiefly between young people , it is our duty to back the increase in funding and the number of study grants available in the EU for students and researchers from the western Balkans within the framework of the Erasmus Mundus programme .
This will not only represent another educational opportunity for many youngsters , but it will allow many young people to get to know personally other people of their own age within the EU , so that they feel themselves to be full citizens of Europe , each with his own identity , but united in diversity .
in writing . - ( NL ) All in all , this resolution has been drafted in balanced terms .
Nevertheless , I voted against it because a ' yes ' vote would imply that I support the Lisbon Treaty and the accession of all the Western Balkans countries .
Both my party and the absolute majority of Europeans are opposed to the Lisbon Treaty , should they be given the opportunity to vote , and to further accessions .
This Parliament may ignore the wishes and lamentations of the European citizen , but I certainly do not .
in writing . - ( EL ) The PASOK parliamentary group in the European Parliament voted in favour of the report on the Western Balkans because it is an important report , in that it clearly underlines the European prospects of the Balkans , which is the standard view taken by PASOK .
At the same time , however , it notes that finding a solution to bilateral differences comes within the framework of good neighbourly relations and must be a precondition to the opening of and progress in accession negotiations .
in writing . - ( NL ) Two key reasons prevented me from supporting this resolution .
First of all , I think we need an absolute ban on enlargement , except for Croatia .
We should first try to keep the 25 or 26 current EU Member States on track and make them run efficiently .
Rushing to further enlargements and a Lisbon Treaty that has come about in an undemocratic manner is absolutely not the way forward .
There is no doubt that the forthcoming European elections will once again reveal the voters ' large-scale apathy where European issues are concerned .
What do we expect , though , when voters see that their views are not taken into consideration anyway ?
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted against this report .
After all , the paragraph which states that European integration is in the interests of the entire population of the Western Balkans and which regrets that the politicians of Bosnia-Herzegovina state it as their objective to accede to the EU out of short-sighted and nationalistic motives indicates that a vote for this resolution would have been a vote for Bosnia 's accession to the EU .
Taking the view that Europe is in urgent need of bringing a halt to enlargement , I have voted against this resolution .
in writing . - ( NL ) Bosnia-Herzegovina is mainly inhabited by three peoples , none of whom are in the majority in that country .
Some of these people feel a very strong bond with Serbia , others with Croatia and a third group would like to underline its own independent Bosnian identity .
In actual fact , this is a pocket-sized Yugoslavia , a federation in which different peoples have the option of either living together peacefully or battling out internal conflict over their territory .
Since Yugoslavia fell apart in 1992 , attempts have been made to make a united state out of Bosnia-Herzegovina , but to no avail .
I do not expect this to be possible in the near or distant future .
Agreement among three peoples and their political leaders on effective governance is only possible when nobody feels threatened any more by the others or by the outside world .
Only when the EU 's High Representative and foreign military have withdrawn from this country will a compromise be possible .
Until then , this period of stagnation will persist .
That is why I do not agree with the proposed resolution on this country , which can only lead to the continuation of the protectorate and , consequently , stagnation .
in writing . - I supported the Beer report on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons , including Amendments 5 and 8 that called for Europe to become a nuclear weapons free zone , because I am in favour of nuclear disarmament .
I welcome President Obama 's initiative i