Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 17 February 2011 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Parliament 's calendar of part-sessions - 2012 : see Minutes
Parliament 's calendar of part-sessions - 2013 : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Opening of the session
I hereby declare the 2011-2012 session of the European Parliament resumed .
Opening of the sitting
Good morning , ladies and gentlemen .
Today , 8 March , is International Women 's Day .
Parliament has planned numerous events .
This is an opportunity for us to join in the celebrations of the centenary of this day and to express our thoughts on what women have achieved and what still remains to be done .
Documents received : see Minutes
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Guidelines for the 2012 budget - other sections ( debate )
The sitting will now continue .
The first item is the report by Mr José Manuel Fernandes , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the guidelines for the 2012 budget procedure , Section I - European Parliament , Section II - Council , Section IV - Court of Justice , Section V - Court of Auditors , Section VI - European Economic and Social Committee , Section VII - Committee of the Regions , Section VIII - European Ombudsman , Section IX - European Data Protection Supervisor , Section X - European External Action Service ( Α7-0049 / 2011 ) .
Madam President , first of all , let me offer my greetings to you , Madam President , to the Commissioner and to all my fellow Members who are here .
Allow me to start by thanking all those who took part in this report and , in particular , the shadow rapporteurs from the various political groups .
The work has resulted in a broad consensus , as shown by the vote last week in the Committee on Budgets , where this report was passed by 34 votes to 1 , with 1 abstention .
This report aims to be in harmony and in line with the current moment : with the economic , financial and social situation through which we are struggling , with the crisis that we are experiencing , and , at the same time , with what the European public wants from the European Union and its institutions .
We will have a budget of restrictions , a budget of austerity and , at the same time , a budget which will have to provide the institutions and Parliament with the means to keep up with the European project and to keep up with the European public 's expectations .
Our objective is excellence in lawmaking and it would be very bad if we lacked sufficient means to achieve this : it would be a terrible sign for our times and it would have a cost , which the European public would still have to bear .
In order to achieve this , we will need the necessary resources .
We have new powers resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , given the current situation , we advocate a neutral increase , which means that we advocate an increase equal to inflation .
We are in line with the Commissioner 's letter , with the recommendation that he sent to Parliament and the other institutions .
Therefore , when it becomes necessary , if it becomes necessary , we will draw up a letter or an amending budget for the purpose of commitments such as that which the European Union has to Croatia , or that resulting from the eight new members of the Treaty of Lisbon .
In order for us to achieve a savings budget , it is clear that we have , more than ever , to follow the principles of good management and economy , the principles of efficiency and effectiveness .
These principles will have to translate to budgetary rigour , simplicity and transparency .
With these principles , we will already be able to successfully identify cuts , not only in the estimates that we will now prepare , but we also want savings in the implementation of the 2012 budget .
In this way , we will manage to keep up with our responsibilities .
We would also like - and introduced this concept - a budget that is a zero-based budget , in which each expense is justified and in which variable expenses are well known ; wherever justified , there can be a cost-benefit analysis for these expenses .
Clearly , we will not endanger projects under way because that would not simply be a backward step , but would rather be a loss .
I am referring to projects such as the extension of the Konrad Adenauer Building , projects such as the House of European History ; these projects will go ahead under this budget of restrictions .
We also argue , on this basis , that forthcoming budgets should be multiannual budgets , so that there can be overall planning right from the outset ; overall planning that is in accordance and in line with the multiannual financial framework .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , my best wishes on the occasion of International Women 's Day .
I welcome the principles set by the rapporteur , Mr Fernandes , on budgetary vigour , especially as regards the administrative budgets of the European Union .
For me , this is sure that this is the line to be taken under the present economic conditions in the European Union .
Therefore , with this in mind , I asked my colleagues in the Commission to be particularly sensitive to increases in administration and we can promise that our increase should be less than 1 % .
This means , given that there are some contractual obligations , that there are cuts for 2012 in the areas of information technology , meetings , conferences and mission costs , as well as in the area of studies and publication .
I have written a letter to the heads of the other institutions and here is their response .
I think this is really the line to be taken for 2011 as regards administrative expenditure .
We have indications from the Council that they are also to be very restrictive .
The same principle should be applied as regards future enlargement .
I think the estimates should be included in the budget when the formal decision on the date of accession is taken , in the form of an amending letter or amending budget .
However , I have to remind you on this very occasion that administration only accounts for less than 6 % of the European Union budget , so this is quite a decent proportion .
As for the operational expenditure , the European budget has its own internal logic .
The programmes are gaining maturity with time , so we now have maturity of major programmes that started in 2007 .
The European budget is mainly about investment and not consumption and social transfers .
On the one hand , we should be very restrictive as regards administrative expenditure , but on the other hand , we should understand the logic of the internal dynamics of European budgets , otherwise we will produce a lot of so-called ' RAL ' ( reste à liquider ) , which constitute a mountain of unspent money , unspent commitments , and this is not in line with a decent budgetary procedure
I therefore welcome once more the principles we can see in the report by Mr Fernandes .
We are to hold discussions on the basis of guidelines on 30 March and I am looking forward to our meeting towards trialogue on 30 March .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to express my regret and dismay that neither the Secretary-General nor the two vice-presidents with responsibility for the European Parliament are present .
We normally expect from the Commission that its responsible members should be present ; we should also expect the same from our most senior representative .
Secondly , I would like to address the subject of the management of the House 's buildings .
I welcome the fact that the KAD project in Luxembourg is making progress , that it would seem that the costs are under control , and that things are going according to plan .
When the KAD extension project is complete , bringing staff together under one roof should lead to greater efficiency and synergy , as well as reducing annual costs , because eight offices will be closed .
It is essential that this target should be met as we need some of these funds for other purposes , as Mr Fernandes has pointed out .
I believe that the House of European History is an important project because it will attract many visitors , who will be offered an insight into the significance , aims and purpose of the European Union in the context of European history in a very effective way .
Thirdly , I would ask that the staff appointed in Luxembourg should be relocated to Brussels .
Because they frequently need to work in Brussels , they are constantly travelling back and forth , also causing problems for the Members .
This only applies to a small number of sub-areas and relocation really should be considered on efficiency grounds .
Fourthly , I think it a very good thing that the European Parliament is only making provision for moderate expansion .
The fact that other areas are only expanding on a modest scale should not be taken by the EEAS as a reason for massive expansion .
I would call on all institutions to cut their cloth to their measure in these times of economic and financial difficulty .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur for his report , but also for his approach to putting together the other sections ' budget .
He is right to balance the need to ensure that the European Parliament and other sections are able to function properly against ensuring that budget increases are kept to an absolute minimum .
I particularly welcome his proposal to keep increases within the rate of inflation .
I believe the initial proposal of 5.2 % is far too high .
Of course , to achieve the moderate savings pursued by the rapporteur and others within the Parliament , we need to ensure we also identify savings within the budget .
I have therefore offered to work with the rapporteur to ensure those savings are found .
I believe there are potential savings to be found in things like the buildings policy and in terms of enlargement - which the Commissioner has mentioned himself - but also in things like the proposed cost of a non-European office , which I believe at this time is an unaffordable luxury .
Finally , can I say we also need to work very closely with other institutions , particularly the Committee of the Regions and the European Economic and Social Committee , which I know were very concerned about their budget for 2012 as well .
We need to ensure that they , like us , are able to function properly but also , at the same time , limit their spending increases for the future .
So I can say that the Socialists and Democrats Group is very keen to work with the rapporteur ; we do support the proposals for these guidelines , and we look forward next week to discussing the estimates .
I should like to reply to Mrs Hohlmeier 's comment .
Mr Pittella , the Vice-President responsible for the budget , is here in the House listening to the debate .

Madam President , thank you Mr Fernandes for this excellent report .
The key principles of good budgetary management are efficiency , thrift and the responsible deployment of the financial resources entrusted to us .
However , something that arises again and again in all budget negotiations , and which we need to avoid here once again , is greed and the desire to hold on to our old ways .
We need to distinguish between greed and need .
There is little doubt that the job increases outlined in the Treaty of Lisbon and required as a result of the Treaty of Lisbon are something necessary .
Care should be taken to ensure a balance between the jobs in political groups and committees and administrative posts .
As my fellow Member has already observed , it would have been good to have the Secretary-General attend this session to hear what we have to say .
The new departments referred to by Mr Vaughan are not needed in this form if we make sensible use of the synergy effects within this House .
We have plenty of competent people in the various Directorates General and I am sure that we will be able to bring them together in an effective way .
With regard to the House of History , I would agree with Mrs Hohlmeier that it is important that such a project should have a business plan from the start .
We should not regard this as something of a request show in which everyone gets what they want ; we need to manage our resources wisely on the basis of a reasonable budget .
Finally , I would add that we should not make the mistake of failing to invest in the future because of a misguided wish to save money .
The investments we make today , for example in IT resources , can save us a lot of money in the coming years , which is why thrift should not be allowed to become an end in itself .
It must make sense and must be reasonable in terms of the future .
Madam President , Commissioner Lewandowski , ladies and gentlemen , the issue currently under debate is the Parliament 's budget for 2012 and I would like to emphasise that from the perspective of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , the right balance must be struck between limited and justified increases , which are mainly the result of the new powers and responsibilities under the Treaty of Lisbon , and self-discipline and self-restraint in times when public funds are in short supply .
To the outside world , the Parliamentary budget is still something like the European Parliament 's calling card and continues to have a symbolic significance : How do we deal with the austerity policy - the necessity for this policy - as it impacts directly on us ?
Mr Fernandes uses words like consolidation , containment and self-restraint .
However , we have heard few real proposals so far about where he intends to make the cuts and where resources are to be pared back .
Of course , it is right to call for greater efficiency in the administration of Parliament and , from my own point of view , I can see some scope for improvement .
I would now like to address the issue of the House of European History : I am all for this idea in principle .
However , I believe that the project must have clear business plans .
If there is a desire to prioritise such a project - I am directing these words specifically to Mr Fernandes once again - if terms like self-discipline and consolidation are really meant seriously , then we must also be prepared to propose cuts in other areas .
If priorities exist as a result of political will , then , by definition , other areas must be given secondary priority in order to produce a consolidated budget .
To talk about consolidation without making the relevant recommendations is to fudge the issue .
The matter will only work if people are prepared to say where the cuts are to fall - particularly in the case of new priorities .
This is what I meant when I referred to the European Parliament 's calling card : limited increases , as well as clear self-restraint .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on what I find is a very well-balanced report , particularly in its seeking of consolidated resources and an austerity budget .
The principles that he sets out - legislative excellence , good management principles , being able to have accuracy and simplicity , and submitting cost-cutting plans - should apply not just to all institutions other than the Commission , but also to the Commission budget itself .
However , looking at the technological points that the rapporteur makes , it is not just in the longer term that we should be looking for savings , but also in the short term , when we should be able to come up with cost-cutting measures .
One particular point of concern to my group is security .
We seem to place too much emphasis on stopping people coming into the institutions .
We do not allow them enough freedom of access or the possibility to circulate .
Could I suggest that , when the Vice-Presidents come to this particular point , they should be looking at the US Congress , which does ensure the security of people going into the building , but then allows them to flow freely through it .
Having a professional security service enables that to happen .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , it is a disgrace that in the present economic crisis , a proposal for a 5 % increase for 2012 is already being put forward for this Parliament 's budget .
Members ' assistance allowance was increased once again by EUR 1 500 per month only last week .
No attempt is being made to tackle the outrageous waste caused by the three seats of this Parliament .
Worse , the European Parliament has now engaged in a EUR 60 million refurbishment of a building to be used as the European History House - as if we did not have museums in Europe .
Does the EU want to rewrite history ?
And what about the External Action Service that will employ , among others , 50 officials who will earn 20 % more than the British Prime Minister , and will need a new building that will cost EUR 10.5 million per year .
Madam President , on behalf of the British taxpayer , I beg you to stop this rip-off .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the draft produced by Mr Fernandes for the 2012 financial year refers to cost-efficiency and consolidation .
As representatives of the citizens of Europe , we in Parliament must comment on this .
Cost-efficiency is essential .
However , the additional expenditure arising through the accession of Croatia , the establishment of the EEAS and the three new financial authorities have all impacted on the EU budget .
The fact is that new expenditure should not necessarily - and indeed absolutely must not - lead to budgetary increases .
Potential savings can be found in all of the Union 's institutions , for example , in personnel and building policy , or in administration .
I would once again suggest that the various agencies should be subjected to an audit and that synergies should be sought with the various Member States .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I wanted to congratulate Mr Fernandes for his excellent work .

It is not easy to speak about institutions ' budgets and resource management , especially if you try to discuss the improvement in their performance in parallel with the need for economic consolidation which Member States and the European Union must face up to in a context as sensitive as it is today .
It is precisely for this reason that I fully support his appeal to the values of legislative excellence and sound financial management , which are guiding principles on which all the institutions ' activities should be based .
Indeed , at a time of crisis in which our primary objective must be to relaunch the European economy , the prime example of virtue must come from the institutions themselves .
Virtue does not just mean austerity , but rather increased administrative efficiency to ensure a fair and improved use of resources , which will enable all the institutions to work both effectively and efficiently , rendering them capable of reaching the main objectives that Europe has set itself in recent years .
Turning more specifically to Parliament 's budget , I believe , as does Mr Fernandes , that the 2012 budget should be one of consolidation , taking into account that it could become a point of reference , rather than the current debate on the future multiannual financial framework .
I think , however , that part of the resources should be used to bring in some necessary improvements to enable Members to carry out their duties with the help of quality services .
I therefore think savings should be made in common services , but that further efforts should also be made on the property policy , by rationalising the space already available to us and by adopting a medium- and long-term plan that allows advance planning of expenditure on buildings as well as making our decisions in this area more transparent and rational .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Lewandowski , ladies and gentlemen , naturally , we should discuss the costs that are to be avoided or saved in this budget .
However , I would call on you all to be a little more objective in your knee-jerk responses to the discussion in relation to the agencies .
Why is this ?
Firstly , because the Committee on Budgetary Control is permanently engaged in this debate and also draws attention to ways in which cooperation between the agencies and the performance of their duties can be improved , and also because we are expecting a special report on the agencies this year from the European Court of Auditors and will then have a more objective basis for what is , at present , a somewhat ill-considered discussion , particularly with regard to the question of how the agencies are managed and how we may be able to achieve these savings .
Speaking of savings , I would like to come to my next topic , our building policy .
The fact is that when it comes to the buildings of the European Union , we can certainly save resources .
Speaking personally , I would question whether it is really a good idea to build new buildings for the European Parliament in Brussels because this strategy really only makes sense if real estate prices in Brussels continuously rise .
At present , the market would not seem to support this .
If real estate prices on the market do not rise , then the option of renting rather than buying really does make sense , particularly when you walk around the European quarter with your eyes open and see how much office space is actually available to rent in the area .
Which brings me to the issue of the House of European History .
I believe that greater legitimacy is required here because it is not enough that to date , all the initiatives for the establishment of the House of European History are simply based on resolutions by the Bureau of this House and have no democratic legitimacy .
This needs to change .
Above all , we need to know how the operating costs and follow-up costs of this institution are to be covered .

( DA ) Madam President , I would also like to thank Mr Fernandes for an excellent report , and I would like to thank Commissioner Lewandowski in particular for his letter to the institutions regarding reining in our administrative expenditure this year .
I think that this letter was very apt , and it will help to establish the approach that we believe will make it easier for us to insist on savings being made , and I think that has to apply to all institutions .
It has to apply to the Committee of the Regions , to the Economic and Social Committee , and to the Court of Justice , whose expenditure has , of course , been rising sharply .
It must also apply to the Court of Auditors .
It is a little more difficult for small institutions like the European Ombudsman and the European Data Protection Supervisor , and that , of course , is something that we need to take into account .
However , I think that we in Parliament have a particular responsibility to demonstrate that we can show restraint .
We have had new tasks conferred on us by the Treaty of Lisbon which involve additional expenditure , but the forthcoming year , 2012 , must be a year of consolidation .
We have talked about enlargement .
We will include Croatia 's accession in an amending budget . Many people have also mentioned the question of the House of European History .
I think it is an excellent idea to have this House of European History as part of our visitor services .
Many young people do not know the history leading up to the establishment of the EU very well , and it is said that if we do not know our history , we are doomed to repeat it .
I think it is very , very important for Europe 's recent history to be told , and therefore we will support this House of European History .
Last but not least , I would like to say that our expenditure is , of course , very much linked to the fact that we have several seats , and that costs money . We need to look closely at this .
Unfortunately , our biggest cost is something that we cannot do anything about .
That has to do with the fact that we have to move between Strasbourg and Brussels .
If the European Council really believes that savings have to be made , Europe 's Heads of State ought to address this matter .
Thank you , Madam President .
( CS ) Madam President , it is clear that the entire European Union and its Member States will still be feeling the lingering effects of the economic and financial crisis in 2012 .
The European Parliament must therefore adapt its budget strategy to this fact .
We must strive for maximum budgetary discipline and austerity .
I am pleased to find this fact in the report , and to see that the report emphasises this fact .
Austerity , however , cannot mean that expenditure rises in line with inflation .
Our aim must be to keep Parliament 's expenditure at the same level as this year .
All possible effort must be directed towards savings and the better use of existing parliamentary resources .
This must apply to all areas of European Parliament activity , starting with a rationalisation of the administration of buildings through to the better use of information technology and the human resources policy .
There are potential savings here and we must have the courage to implement them .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in a period of general economic hardship , the fundamental task of European institutions is to lead by example .
This report is rightly focused on fulfilling the criteria of efficiency and on the management of costs and services .
I therefore wonder whether a real and immediate check on the effectiveness of certain outsourced activities might not be necessary .
I am referring , in particular , to Parliament 's information technology and internal security , partly in the light of recent events of which we are all well aware : the theft at the post office last month .
A further criticism needs to be levelled at the European External Action Service .
Created at theoretically zero cost to reduce waste and improve the effectiveness of the European Union 's external relations , it is proving to be a failure on both fronts , politically and economically .
I would not want the European Parliament to be anything less than rigorous in this area .
( NL ) Madam President , last week , I was asked by several voters in Flanders how it could possibly be that we , as members of the European Parliament , are still receiving EUR 1 500 a month to recruit additional staff at a time of economic problems and uncertainty , and at the very time when ordinary people are having to tighten their belts .
What we are doing at present is actually spending even more .
The voters ' questions and comments are absolutely spot-on .
We , as the European Union , should be setting an example .
We should be cutting our coat according to our cloth and , at precisely this point , we have no choice but to come to the unfortunate conclusion that this report by Mr Fernandes is something of a missed opportunity .
Calls are being made - and rightly so , I think - for us to exercise responsibility and restraint with regard to the budget .
Recital A even mentions , quote , ' employing strict management procedures so that savings may be achieved , ' unquote .
Well , it is unfortunate that this report fails to specify where exactly we could make those cuts .
There are , of course , quite a few areas where they could be made - I am thinking of the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions , and the trips between Brussels and Strasbourg which cost EUR 200 million per year .
I challenge the Commission and the Council , but Parliament too , to carry out an exercise and put all these things in order , to look at where we can make savings and then translate this into an actual plan , so that we can put a number of things to debate and bring about savings .
( FI ) Madam President , I , too , wish to thank the rapporteur for a very wellbalanced , excellent report .
Everyone here is talking now about thrift , and that is an excellent thing .
We need budgetary discipline and efficiency , and we should adhere strictly to what our main task is and not expand beyond that task , which is legislative work .
Most are saying that we must be frugal , but nonetheless talk about what we should not save .
We should be talking about concrete measures that would enable us to make savings .
We can make savings if we stop travelling between three places of work .
We , of course , know how politically difficult it would be to carry this through .
I would like to raise one matter , and that is the notion of security , which Mr Elles mentioned here .
In a year , we have had a bank robbery , the canteen has been held up , and so has the post office .
No one has even been caught .
The security is little more than a joke .
We fail in one obvious area : Members of Parliament enter the building where there is no proper controlled entrance .
We should acquire an electronic signature .
At present , we have lists and an office where a lot of people work and which takes down names and enters them in a computer .
This is a waste of money : we should be making savings and introduce a better , credible system of security .
We only have to do it , but Members say no all the time and that they do not agree with electronic signatures , even though that way , we would make obvious savings and have a better system of security .
I do not understand how this works in the US Congress ; there , everyone agrees with this system , but here , somehow , these things do not get done .
I hope that we will now focus on areas where savings can truly be made .
( SK ) Madam President , I regard it as very important from a political perspective that the guidelines for the 2012 budget reflect the economic and political circumstances under which it was drawn up .
At a time when Member States are forced to make savings , and our citizens are bearing the consequences of the financial and political crisis , we cannot expect a big increase in the budget compared to the previous year .
On the contrary , we must look for areas of our operations where we can save the tax resources of our citizens , without reducing the quality of our work .
I believe we have some direct spare capacity in the way we organise our work .
The three headquarters of the European Parliament and the regular shuttling of thousands of workers and MEPs from Brussels to Strasbourg 12 times a year are well known to the public .
Ladies and gentlemen , such a squandering of public resources shows nothing more than contempt for the realities of the situation .
Any talk about cost-cutting will appear false until this performance of shuttling to and fro for European Parliament debates is brought to an end .

( PL ) Madam President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Fernandes for drafting guidelines for the European Parliament and the other institutions .
In my opinion , the guidelines he has drafted combine the need to make savings , or rather the necessity of making savings , of which we are all aware given the European Union 's current economic situation , with a guarantee of the appropriate conditions for good law making .
I would like to emphasise at this point that we should not forget that the Treaty of Lisbon and the forthcoming enlargement mean that the European Parliament will be faced with new tasks .
It is therefore absolutely vital , for the good of the citizens , to introduce solutions which will facilitate the proper and due functioning of the European Parliament .
I would like to emphasise that I will continue to hope for cooperation with the rapporteur which ensures that the 2012 budget being drafted by the European Parliament is a budget which is characterised by financial discipline , but also one which does not only think about the following year or the two or three years which come after it , but which is able to introduce modernising instruments which facilitate the European Parliament 's work , and investments which I hope will make savings in the future .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mr Fernandes on his excellent report .
I , too , believe that the 2012 budget should be realistic and adapted to the current economic situation .
As a result of my many years of experience of managing a regional budget and my membership of the Committee on Budgets , I attach particular important to discipline when it comes to planning expenditure .
I believe , however , that we should avoid false economies , which may result in an economic slowdown and a reduction in economic competitiveness .
Increased employment levels and the creation of high quality , sustainable jobs are a prerequisite for economic growth and overcoming the effects of the crisis .
The European Union budget must promote increased employment .
The key to growth lies not in reducing expenditure , but in increasing efficiency and linking European funds to the achievement of strategic and measurable results . Thank you .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to Mr Fernandes for his work and for focusing on the possible savings that may be made in our administrative expenditure .
Staff and buildings policies are the two main areas in which our administrative expenditure is concentrated , as is clearly demonstrated by the report .
Taking into account the future accession of Croatia to the European Union and future personnel requirements , it will be necessary and appropriate to manage staff procedures , particularly through mobility .
If , on the one hand , this choice of human resources policy offers greater flexibility , on the other , it will require increased training for European Union staff .
Concerning the buildings policy , the text explicitly mentions the principle of centralisation .
The tough policy we are applying to budgets - starting with those of Member States - should , in the medium-term , also make us consider the desirability of retaining three seats of Parliament , an admittedly complex issue , but one which we cannot fail to address .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened very carefully to the debate and I can assure you that the Bureau 's proposal is a model of rigour , transparency and sound administration , and I wish to emphasise three points in particular .
The first point is that the increase suggested in our proposal does not exceed the average rate of inflation in the European Union .
Secondly , I share the concerns and we are working towards a prudent and far-sighted buildings policy for security and for staff .
The third point is that the EUR 1 500 increase was agreed and put into reserve by the Committee on Budgets .
The Committee on Budgets has released the reserve ; this is not money going into the pockets of Members of Parliament - it is worth clearing up this misunderstanding and falsehood - but to assistants who will help Members to better perform the duties they are assigned by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Madam President , I would like to point to one minor area in which we could save money , which is software .
We pay Bill Gates a huge sum of money annually for using his Windows software .
He may be a nice chap who donates a lot of that money to good causes , but if we were to use open software more bravely in this House , it would be a step towards cleaner , cheaper and modern management .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to ask Commissioner Lewandowski what the specific procedure is for accessing the euro safety net , in other words , the money put up by the European institutions , in 2012 .
Will the Commission make a proposal if a particular state expresses the desire to make use of the safety net ?
Does the European Parliament have a full role in making this codecision and is this also to be an issue this week in the context of the widening of the safety net ?
Secondly , I have a comment to make on the EUR 1 500 increase in the secretarial allowance .
I would ask all the Members who do not make full use of the secretarial allowance to state publicly how much money they save themselves - after all , this is an area open to abuse .
It may be that there are some Members who do not need to use the secretarial allowance at all because they very rarely attend Parliament .
In such cases , these funds should not be used up in full .
Only those who work particularly hard could use up the entire allowance .
Everyone else should return this money to the taxpayer .
( SL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I , too , would like to start by congratulating Mr Fernandes on an excellent report .
However , I would agree with those members who have said that savings are necessary , especially making budget savings .
It is a fact that the European budget has been shrinking for decades .
Looking at the GDP we have generated in the EU , its volume has constantly decreased .
Recently , the Commissioner has said that , at the very beginning of the financial perspective , EU gross domestic product was approximately 1.3 % .
That figure today is barely 1.12 % .
At the same time , though , national European budgets have increased significantly .
For example , over the past ten years , the proverbially modest UK budget has increased by 100 % , hence two and half times more than the EU budget .
I would like to hear the Commissioner comment , in particular , on whether he is likely to encounter any difficulties in implementing the next budget in 2012 because of this actual decrease in the European budget as compared to the national budgets of the Member States .
Madam President , I would thank all my fellow Members for their contributions .
I should like to mention that our objective at this time was the guidelines .
However , we have already gone further than guidelines and set a specific objective : we want a neutral increase , which means that the 2012 budget will not increase above inflation .
I am well aware that we have new powers .
I am well aware that we need resources for these powers , but we have to take on board the principles of good management , and achieve savings with the principles of economy , efficiency and effectiveness .
These principles will not be used to seek blind savings : savings that will become costs in the future .
We will make savings that do not put at risk the objective that we have set out : the objective of excellence in law making .
I am certain that I would also call this budget one of reconciliation : reconciliation of current needs , of the current time of crisis , and the requirements that these times impose on the institutions to respond efficiently , in terms of keeping up with what the people want , with what the European public wants .
Just one paragraph about a confusion that remains : there was no increase in the budget for Members and there will be no increase for next year .
The sum to which everyone is referring - which is not for Members and which refers to the possibility of taking on another assistant - was already set out in 2010 and there has been no change in budgetary terms , no budgetary increase in 2011 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11 : 30 on Wednesday , 9 March 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - As elected representatives , everyone in this Chamber will be aware of the many sacrifices which our constituents and national governments have had to make over the past three years .
Education , health , transport and other frontline services have all seen their funding slashed across the EU .
It is important that the European Parliament has the necessary budget to properly fulfil the mandate which has been given to it from the European people .
However , it is also necessary that the parliamentarians represent the same European people by ensuring that there is no frivolous spending , no unnecessary price increases , and that value is found in a market where suppliers and businesspeople are fighting for every last euro .
I trust that both my colleagues in this Chamber and those working throughout the European institutions will consider these principles in the years ahead .
Female poverty - Equality between women and men - 2010 ( debate )
Τhe next item is the topical item of the day , the joint debate on the following reports on women in the European Union :
the report by Mrs Mariya Nedelcheva , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on equality between women and men in the European Union - 2010 ( Α7-0029 / 2011 ) ; and
the report by Mrs Rovana Plumb , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on the face of female poverty in the European Union .
Madam President , Mrs Reding , ladies and gentlemen , I was born in 1979 at a time when European citizens were directly electing their representatives for the first time .
I am proud of the fact that in this same year , for the first time ever , a woman - Simone Veil - a valiant supporter of women 's rights , assumed the Presidency of the European Parliament .
Today , I am one of the 35 % of women represented here in this Chamber .
Never before has this figure been so high in the European Parliament .
So whom do we owe it to ?
We owe it to all those women who had the intelligence , the strength and the courage to join together and demand their right to vote , their right to work and to education .
We owe it to those women who , quite simply , wanted to champion respect for their dignity and for their rights .
We have been fighting for 100 years now to combat unfair and groundless discrimination .
Significant progress has certainly been made , but combating gender inequalities is a day to day task and we have still a long way to go .
The European Union has always led the way when it comes to gender equality .
I believe that this House of ours must ensure that it stays at the forefront of this momentum even when it comes to the most sensitive of subjects .
The present economic crisis has made us face our own contradictions .
As highlighted in my report , the effects of the crisis have been felt more severely by women and its effects longer lasting for them than is the case for men .
As I also pointed out , however , we need to stop feeling sorry for ourselves , get a move on and come up with the answers !
We should take this opportunity to alter our frames of mind and move forwards .
It is now vital to emphasise the role that schools play in combating gender stereotypes .
By providing wider opportunities in education , vocational training and employment , we can improve women 's access to higher levels of responsibility .
It is also time to put a stop to the persistent pay gap between men and women and I also believe we need to step up a gear when we look at the composition of boards of publicly listed companies .
Only 3 % of board members of publicly listed companies are women .
That is not acceptable .
Time to step on the gas .
What if , despite all our efforts , the big companies keep applying the brakes ?
Well then , unfortunately , we will have to raise the spectre of quotas and binding targets .
It is with reluctance that I speak of quotas because , in principle , I am not in favour of them .
But if the carrot does not work , well then , the only alternative would be the stick .
There is no denying it : the presence of women on the labour market can only benefit economic growth .
The European recovery plan will have a greater chance of success today if gender equality policies are an integral part of it .
Concrete proposals to achieve a better work-life balance must be put forward to demonstrate that our ambitions can be more than mere dreams , because that is what is expected of us .
It is all very well being driven by values and ideals , but we must also be pragmatic and effective in our work .
Finally , Madam President , I should like to raise one last point .
I was pleased to hear that the European Commission was going to make a proposal in the spring to combat violence against women .
The scourge of violence against women in all its forms needs to be fought with all our might .
I would like to thank you , Commissioner , for being so proactive on this matter
Madam President , I am not a pessimist so I would like to end on a positive note , if I may .
I think that on this day , the one hundredth anniversary of International Women 's Day , we should pay tribute to the courage , strength and determination shown by women in Tunisia , Libya , Iran , Egypt and by countless others in their struggle to defend human rights .
The wind of freedom sweeping across North Africa should wipe out the last vestiges of authoritarianism , poverty and social exclusion , so that women in these countries become socially , politically and economically emancipated whilst respecting their culture and their traditions .
It is also our role in the European Parliament to pay tribute to these women , encourage them and support them in their desperate struggle for democracy and human rights .
Please note that I mean human rights in the fullest sense of the term !

rapporteur . - Madam President , firstly , let me wish all women a happy anniversary on this important date , 8 March , the day which marks the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day , 100 years of struggle for women 's rights .
I would like to thank all my colleagues , the shadow rapporteurs and the members of the secretariat for their contributions to this report .
My report deals with an issue which is both general and eminently concrete in terms of its consequences : female poverty .
85 million Europeans live below the poverty line and 17 % of all women in the EU are classed as living in poverty .
These are the facts .
The economic , financial and social crisis affects all of us , but it particularly harms women in the labour market and in their personal lives , since they are more likely to be in insecure jobs , more likely to be made redundant and less likely to have social security .
This is how things stand at present .
What can we do ?
Women are expecting us to provide concrete proposals , concrete measures .
It is 8 March , and I shall try to summarise my report in eight points .
First and foremost , we call on the Member States to take into account the gender dimension in their plans for recovery from the recession by promoting and boosting the employment of women , and adopting specific measures as well as adjusting budgets to ensure equality of access to public sector expenditure , with a view to both enhancing productive capacity and meeting women 's social and environmental needs .
Second , we call on the Commission and the Member States to take the appropriate measures to eliminate gender inequalities in employment as part of Europe 2020 .
I strongly encourage establishing as an objective the reduction of the gender pay gap by 1 % each year , in order to achieve the target of 10 % reduction by 2020 .
I stress also the need for positive action to increase women 's representation in political , economic and corporate decision-making bodies .
The third issue is related to reconciliation between private and professional life .
I call on the Council and the Member States to renew and fulfil their commitments related to the Barcelona targets for the provision of accessible , affordable and high quality childcare , and to develop new targets for the care of dependent persons .
Fourth , we call on the Commission and Member States to frame health policies which aim to combat and prevent practices that harm women 's health and cause social exclusion and poverty .
Fifth , we call on the Member States to adopt the necessary measures in order to offer better opportunities for women in education while fighting stereotypes and eliminating traditional role models in school curricula .
Our sixth point is that there is a direct link between families ' social circumstances and children 's growth .
Therefore , we call on the Commission and the Council to develop and implement a strategy to halve child poverty by 2012 .
Seventh , we should not ignore violence against women .
It has an increasing impact on the risk of marginalisation , poverty and social exclusion .
I call on the Commission to establish a European Year for combating violence against women .
Eighth , let us underline the importance of the Structural Funds and , in particular , the European Social Fund , as key tools to assist Member States to combat poverty and social exclusion .
I think that we can do it .
We have the power .
We have the strength and the intelligence to tackle this important issue at European level and in all Member States .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , it is nice that on the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day , this House is guided by a woman .
I think that is very symbolic and it is also very symbolic that we can , during this day , debate these very important issues on the agenda - thanks to the rapporteur , Mariya Nedelcheva - which shows a great support for the Commission 's work towards gender equality and focuses on important issues that the Commission has emphasised and will continue to emphasise .
One hundred years of struggle and we still do not see the end of it .
I regret that because I always hope that we can eliminate , if you like , the yearly celebration of the struggle of women , but as long as we have not arrived there , we cannot do so , and we have not arrived there yet .
Parliament 's report shows very clearly what the gaps are .
The gaps are in poverty : we have heard the second report on this too .
On poverty , women are leading so there is not a gap in this sense , but what are we doing - and my colleague , Lászlo Andor will answer this - to get women out of the poverty trap ?
The second element is women in the world of employment .
There are still some problems concerning the balance between family life and professional life .
There is the problem of the pay gap where women still earn 17 % less on average than men - and you might have seen that on 5 March , we had the European Gender Pay Gap Day , with measurements to see how much more women have to work than men in order to reach the same level of pay .
The fact is that we were , in effect , not paid until 5 March ; we had to work until then without being paid .
Only from 5 March on did we start to be paid .
I hope that one day , the gender pay gap day will be on 1 January , which would mean that there would be equal pay at that moment .
The political commitment of the European Commission is contained in our new strategy .
The themes which are mentioned in our strategy for gender equality are the same as the ones the rapporteur has mentioned : economic independence for women , gender pay gap , violence against women and promoting gender equality in external actions .
To start with external actions , you might have seen Cathy Ashton and myself on 8 March speaking to women outside of Europe and saluting the courage of all those women who are fighting to survive and who are fighting for the establishment of a democracy ; we need to make it clear that we are standing by their side .
Speaking about all these upheavals , speaking about the wars and speaking about the genocides , which unfortunately continue to go on , you all know that women are in the front row .
Women and children are the most vulnerable in our societies but also in the societies outside , and that is why the Commission is working to streamline its various policy initiatives on violence against women and to create synergies between areas with similar objectives .
So this is where we are in developing a coherent policy response to tackle this huge problem : my link is concrete actions in areas where there are clear legal bases in order to have efficiency , and in this regard , I am going to present a victims ' rights package in May this year in which legislation to help women and children will , of course , be very high on the agenda .
Maybe I should finish with a theme which has been high on the agenda in these last few days .
You know that on 1 March , I brought the CEOs of large European listed companies around a table to tell them that we do not agree anymore with the 90 % quota for men on boards of directors - because that is what is happening .
There is only one woman for ten men on boards , which means a 90 % de facto quota for men .
So we think that this should be tackled , mainly because all the economic evidence and the scientific evidence on economic functioning shows very clearly that companies with an balanced decision-making structure have a higher return on investment and make more profits than companies with solely male decision-making structures .
So women mean business ; it is in the interests of economic development that women take more responsibility .
Here , I have challenged publicly listed companies in Europe to sign a ' Women on the Board Pledge for Europe ' by March 2012 : to pledge to replace outgoing gentlemen on the board by qualified women - and there are so many that it should not be difficult to find these women .
We are going to see , to observe , to analyse and to count what is happening between today and 8 March next year , and if nothing changes , then I am prepared to take action at EU level to redress the gender balance in corporate board rooms .
( Applause )
Thank you , Madam Vice-President , what you said was highly symbolic and rich in essence .
Now , for reasons of balanced representation , I shall give the floor to Commissioner Andor .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this is indeed a remarkable anniversary and it is a great responsibility to participate in this discussion .
First of all , I wish to thank the rapporteurs from the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and the associated Committee on Employment and Social Affairs respectively for their report .
This report is very timely because the issue it highlights has been on the agenda for a while , but it has become more pressing as a result of the impact of the financial and economic crisis on vulnerable groups in society .
Let me highlight some of the key elements in my employment and social policies that I believe will improve working opportunities and conditions for women .
There are indeed urgent measures that the Member States need to take in these areas .
For instance , they need to reduce labour market segmentation by readjusting the balance in employment protection legislation between those workers on permanent contracts and those on time-limited , precarious contracts - which is so often the case for women .
They also need to strike a better balance between work and private or family life and to remove other disincentives to participation in the workforce by second earners , who again are mostly women .
It is important to increase the employment rate in the EU and the key challenge in this area is the participation in the labour market by all workers , both male and female .
I believe that the European Social Fund will have to be better and more robustly used in the future to support the demand-side policies to open new opportunities for women , especially those returning to the labour market after childbirth .
It is a source of great concern to the Commission that over 80 million people are at risk of poverty in today 's European Union .
The Member States have the main responsibility for fighting against poverty , but the Union has a role to play .
That is what some three-quarters - 74 % - of our fellow Europeans believe , according to the Eurobarometer surveys .
The flagship initiative , the European Platform against Poverty and Social Exclusion , includes proposals for practical measures to achieve the numerical poverty reduction target .
The Platform focuses on the continuing importance of active inclusion for people furthest from the labour market .
As I have already pointed out , women make up an important component of that category .
In 2012 , the Commission will present a communication assessing in depth the implementation of active inclusion strategies at national level .
I mentioned that more than 80 million people are at risk of poverty in today 's European Union .
What is even more worrying is that over 20 million children are among them and the figure has not improved over time .
Helping to lift those children out of poverty means helping to lift their parents out of poverty too , in particular , the single parents , who are mostly women .
This calls for a multidimensional approach , covering employment policies to help parents find work , the design of tax benefit systems , and the provision of key services , such as housing , quality childcare and education , and protection of children 's rights .
As foreseen in the Platform , the Commission intends to put forward a recommendation in 2012 on child poverty .
It will outline common principles and effective monitoring tools to combat and prevent poverty in early life .
Providing the funding to meet those challenges is also crucial .
Almost a third of the European Social Fund 's allocation of EUR 21.7 billion for the present programming period goes to measures to improve access to employment .
In addition , almost EUR 3 billion - 2.77 to be precise - from that allocation goes to supporting self-employment and business start-ups , and the beneficiaries are very often women .
In addition , the European Progress Microfinance Facility has recently been established to support job creation and self-employment .
The Facility provides loans to people who have lost their jobs and want to start up or develop their own small businesses .
It pays special attention to women and young people .
A budget of EUR 100 million has been made available over four years but can be increased to more than EUR 500 million in the joint initiative with the international financial institutions .
Over the last ten years , EU cooperation under the open method of coordination on social inclusion and social protection has helped to raise awareness and promote the fight against poverty and social exclusion .
The European Platform against Poverty and Social Exclusion set the frame to reduce poverty across the whole range of policy areas .
Let us do our utmost to make sure it achieves its aim .
Madam President , as the rapporteur for the opinion on the report on equality , I concentrated on the labour market .
Unfortunately , the pay differential is still 17 % and women are still not always represented in management and supervisory boards .
There is an urgent need for action here .
We can no longer afford to waste the potential of females in society , whatever their age .
We have a good level of education and the state invests in these young women and mothers .
We really do need to make progress here and demand that companies finally put their fine words into action .
To this extent , I welcome the fact that companies really are taking a step in the direction of a voluntary quota .
However , on the other side , any report on equality should not forget that men are also disadvantaged in some respects .
In particular , boys are not always given the opportunity to develop in school .
Deficits exist in the area of housework and childcare and men can become more active here , too .
This is one task we should all adopt for ourselves .
Each of us , whatever our gender , should be given an opportunity to find our niche and live our lives as we see fit .
Madam President , one hundred years ago , women demanded the right to vote and stand for election and today , we are still campaigning for equality for women in many areas , particularly in terms of career options , but also in relation to payment for work and social entitlements , particularly in old age .
This is revealed not only by the earnings gap between men and women .
Despite their increasing involvement in the labour market , statistics in all 27 Member States of the European Union show that women are at greater risk of poverty than men .
There are many reasons why poverty is a female issue .
I can only go into some of them because of a lack of time .
The increase in the number of precarious jobs discriminates against women on several counts .
Over 30 % of women are employed in part-time work , compared with only 7.4 % of men .
Studies show that even in these part-time jobs , women are still paid significantly less than men for the same working hours and the same work .
This reduces the opportunities to integrate in the labour market and pursue a career .
Pension entitlements are reduced , so that poverty is pre-programmed , particularly for those who choose an independent , single life .
However , we believe that a life free from poverty can be achieved by political means by developing social security systems in which pensions and minimum wage levels above the poverty threshold are guaranteed and working hours are generally reduced .
We do not want to wait another hundred years to find out that it is self-evidently the right of women to organise their lives independently of male decisions , despite having child dependents .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today , as we celebrate the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day , we are voting on two reports that address areas in which women are marginalised and excluded from society .
Women are traditionally at a higher risk of poverty , especially single mothers and women over the age of 65 .
Among the five objectives proposed by the European Commission in the EU 2020 strategy is the fight against poverty , which makes the report by Mrs Plumb extremely relevant , especially in terms of gender policies in the light of the economic and financial crisis .
The vulnerability of individual women leaves them exposed to the risk of poverty , social exclusion and therefore isolation .
This makes it incumbent on the institution we represent to put in place concrete strategies and programmes .
I also congratulate Mrs Nedelcheva on a good report that promotes equality between men and women in the European Union .
The representation of women in the public sector , as in the private sector , is very low compared with men .
In the finance sector , the numbers are even less positive : women represent only 10 % of board members of the major European listed companies and 3 % of the chairpersons of those boards .
I therefore support the introduction of quotas to increase the participation of women in the public and private sectors and especially in education ; this must be supported because it plays a key role in preventing teachers from directing their students towards professional sectors according to gender stereotypes .
I will conclude by recalling the words of one of the first American female mayors who said : ' Whatever women do , they must do twice as well as men to be thought of as half as good ' .
In conclusion , let me say that luckily for us women , this is not difficult .
Madam President , today in Parliament , as we mark the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day , we are devoting particular attention to issues of gender equality and overcoming female poverty .
More than a hundred years ago , women fought for the right to work , and now they have to fight to obtain equal pay for equal work .
We are moving forward , but progress in the area of gender equality is slow .
Discrimination still thrives in the workplace , there is deep segregation of the labour market according to gender , the pay gap continues , there is still a shortage of women in decision-making positions and politics and insufficient support for motherhood and single mothers .
In the European Parliament 's report on equality between men and women , we established that it is crucial to strengthen the principle of gender equality in the family and society , to stop violence against women and trafficking in women , guarantee maternity leave , create suitable conditions to take advantage of the services of nurseries and childcare centres , reduce female poverty and assess the contribution made by women to the development of family , society and the economy .
In order to achieve these objectives , the European Parliament , the European Commission and the Member States must work together , and on this historic day , I would like to convey my greetings to all women and to call on them to continue to fight for their rights and equal opportunities .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , first of all , let me congratulate all my colleagues on the fruitful work done over the years as summarised in my report on inequality between men and women , and on the crucial issue of poverty addressed in Mrs Plumb 's report .
While celebrating the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day , it is crucial that this House take stock of the long way we still have to go to ensure gender equality across the Union and to mainstream it into all sectors and areas .
Let us start with the employment sector and the gender pay gap .
How long will we sit contemplating statistics showing unequal positions , with women paid up to 34 % less than men in some EU Member States ?
We must push for measures - legislative if necessary - to achieve concrete results in practice and not just on paper .
The place of women in the European labour market , and the numerous obstacles they have to face in the form of discrimination , contribute to the rising phenomenon of women 's poverty .
Too many women remain in a position of relative economic insecurity and dependence .
They tend to be concentrated in part-time and temporary jobs that are less-well paid , or in inferior positions .
Poverty gives rise to trafficking in women , to violence and , more generally , to exploitation of all kinds .
We also know that as a result of poverty , women victims of domestic violence prefer not to take steps for their own protection because of a lack of financial security .
Mrs Reding , on this symbolic day , we look forward to the EU strategy on combating violence against women , as you have already promised .
Madam President , 8 March 2011 , the one hundredth anniversary of International Women 's Day .
That calls for a celebration of everything we have achieved , such as the franchise for women , the right to equality and reproductive rights , at least in the more civilised countries .
However , this is also a day for feeling sad about all the things that are still not as they should be .
In the EU , women are still severely under-represented in decision making , caring responsibilities fall almost entirely on women 's shoulders and there is still a persistent income gap between men and women , including outside the EU , where some countries have not even begun working on giving women the franchise .
The hundredth anniversary of International Women 's Day also calls for an historical comparison .
The first really major step for women in the labour market was taken during the two world wars , especially the Second World War .
There were simply too few men to do the work in factories and offices .
Employers no longer had a choice and women entered the labour market in large numbers .
Such a period is upon us again .
This time , not because of a war , fortunately , but because of an ageing population .
In five to ten years , there will again simply be too few men to fill the vacancies at various levels .
Employers need to attract and retain women .
The ageing population could provide an ideal opportunity for gender equality .
It is up to us , as European politicians , and it is up to our colleagues in national parliaments , to encourage this development by providing quality maternity leave for mothers and quality paternity leave for fathers , by providing a sufficient level of affordable childcare , by providing the right to flexible hours and part-time work with good social rights , by establishing quotas for women 's inclusion in corporate executive bodies and politics , or making credible threats to that effect .
Together , we can ensure that it does not take another hundred years before men and women have equal rights and equal opportunities in every sphere .
Madam President , I am the shadow rapporteur for the report on the face of female poverty in Europe , so I will focus on this report .
The report brings together a whole range of issues which provide a very good description of the position of women in the EU .
I am pleased that the report sets out many points indicating the need to make use of flexible forms of employment , and by that I mean both fixed-term employment and part-time employment , because in my opinion , single mothers in particular , and families in general with young children to raise , need to make use of the broad range on offer on the labour market , so that they can combine work life and family life .
At the same time , of course , I welcome and fully support the fact that attention is drawn here again to the persistently large pay gap between women and men .
I would briefly just like to say that the report also includes some issues we would find it difficult to support .
This includes , for example , the call to create a European charter of women 's rights and the reference to the report on maternity leave , which , as we know , the Member States have not accepted .
In this spirit , we have supported some of the amendment proposals .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , as this is a genuinely good and comprehensive report .
Madam President , a hundred years of fighting for equality - I think it is important today to also consider the pioneers who started the fight for equality a hundred years ago and who prepared the way for the progress that we can nevertheless see has been made .
I would like to thank all my fellow Members , all the NGOs - all those who are continuing the fight for equality .
We are to debate the situation of women in the EU , but I think it is important for us today to also show our solidarity with those women who , right now , out on the streets and in the squares , are showing enormous courage by taking part in the fight for democracy and justice in other countries .
I think we should also remember these women today .
The reports we are debating here illustrate the inequality on the labour market , where women have precarious jobs and suffer pay discrimination of an average of 17 % .
Only 6 out of 10 women in Europe participate in the labour market , and when they have a job , it is often a precarious part-time job that does not provide a decent living .
There is nothing strange about this , because there are powerful forces opposing the expansion of childcare and other prerequisites for women to be able to work .
Equal opportunities on the labour market mean that we must have the Maternity Leave Directive - which I hope will also include paternity leave .
I hope that we will soon be able to discuss parental insurance , where men and women take equal responsibility for providing for the family , but also for looking after the children .
If women in the EU were to work to the same extent as men , prosperity would increase by more than a quarter .
We cannot afford to do without women on the labour market .
Quotas are called for .
I believe that quotas are a necessary instrument in a society in which only 3 % of large companies are headed by women .
I can compare the use of quotas with antibiotics .
I do not like the excessive use of antibiotics , but when someone is ill , I am very pleased that they exist .
It is certainly indicative of an ailing society if only 3 % of women are in the leading roles of large companies .
Quotas are therefore a necessary instrument for putting right what is wrong in our society .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , there is a lot of self-congratulation going on here in the European Union on International Women 's Day .
It is my opinion that you have made a complete dog 's breakfast of it .
You talk about maternity leave .
All that is happening with draconian maternity leave , let me tell you , Madam , is that fewer and fewer young women in my country are getting jobs because you would have to be stark staring mad to employ a young woman if you have a small business .
So you have done them no favours .
We have equal opportunities for car insurance now due to another lunatic judgment by the European Court , which means that even if young women could get a job , they could not afford to drive to it because they have just had their car insurance doubled .
And now you are talking about quotas .
What kind of madness is this ?
Women who have worked all their lives to get to a position of responsibility in business - professional women - are being patronised on quotas .
Now those women who have been successful will sit in a boardroom and people will look across that boardroom and say , are you a token woman or did you get there because you know your business ?
The whole thing is completely crazy and it is a tragedy that none of you have done a real job in your lives or you would understand this .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( SV ) Madam President , Mr Bloom , desiring parental insurance and believing it to be a good thing does not make someone raving mad .
You only need to look at those Member States that have a well-developed parental insurance system .
Those countries - the Nordic countries , Sweden for example - also have the highest rate of employment for women .
This proves that good parental insurance means that we will also have higher employment figures for women , and men , too , of course .
Parental insurance is good for equality on the labour market .
Women can also contribute to prosperity in the EU .
( Applause )
Madam President , this is simply not true and is not borne out by the statistics in my country .
Speak to any small businessman you like in my country .
I am not interested in the honourable Member 's country or other people 's countries , I am interested in my country and my economy , and I can tell you that all businessmen and women will say that they will not employ young women because of the draconian maternity laws .
I wish , I desperately wish , you would come into the real world ; hands up any of you who have had a real job !
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( ET ) Mr Bloom , you of course know that in Europe , women are better educated than men , including in your home country .
Why do you then think that , if quotas are imposed on companies , that one-third will include just those illiterate women that may also exist in our society ?
Madam President , in reply to Ms Oviir , I would simply counsel her to let companies do their business .
The less you regulate , the less you tax , the less you interfere , the quicker our economy will recover .
That is what it is all about , and that is something the honourable Member does not understand .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( PT ) Madam President , Mr Bloom , do you know what the United Kingdom 's problem is ?
It is having 52 weeks of poorly paid maternity leave .
Only the first six weeks are paid at 60 % , while 33 are at only a token rate and there are 13 weeks unpaid .
That is only for rich families , in which the women can stay at home and see the family budget reduced .
That is the problem of the United Kingdom , not our proposals regarding maternity leave .

Madam President , in reply to Ms Estrela , I can assure her that the problem with my country is that we have given up self-government and we are Members of the European Union : that is my country 's problem .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )


( FI ) Madam President , in fact , I want to thank Mr Bloom for these opinions of his , because they are quite prevalent .
If that were not the case , we would have made a lot of progress .
Only there are a lot of people who keep quiet .
I would have liked to ask you , Mr Bloom , if you think that children are just the children of women , and that fathers have no responsibility and no need for paternity leave or to look after their families other than by going to work .
( Applause )
Madam President , in reply to Ms Jäätteenmäki , I would say that I believe that children are the responsibility of their parents and nobody else .
I do not accept that somebody takes responsibility for his neighbour 's children .
It is for the parents to take responsibility for their children and that is how it should be .
The more self-responsibility we had in Europe - and indeed , the world - the better it would be , in my view .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is one of the signs of the absolute poverty of our society that we still need to discuss the issue of equality between men and women .
Women suffer disadvantage not just in the world of work , but also in society at large .
The list seems endless , which is why I will confine myself to a few keywords : wage levels , working and appointment conditions , precarious employment contracts , pension entitlements , childcare , social security and various forms of violence against women .
There are plenty of women who are better qualified than men and yet we find ourselves discussing equal pay for equal work - incredible .
Something equally incredible is the fact that women are at greater risk of poverty than men ; older women and single parents are particularly at risk .
Let me remind you that 2010 was the Year for Combating Poverty .
Poverty is a female issue .
This has serious consequences for society because poverty leads to illness and can consequently result in unemployment .

( HU ) Madam President , today , there have been two debates in Parliament the subjects of which were based on the reports of my fellow Members - on these I congratulate them - and in which it is truly difficult to say anything new , since the situation is almost unchanged and , in a certain sense , has even become worse over the past years .
In the debate on the wages of men and women , for example , we have been saying year after year that there is still a sizeable difference , even though the principle of ' equal pay for equal work ' was laid down in the Treaty of Rome already back in 1957 .
What is more , since 1975 , we also have secondary legislation in this respect , although it is true that if we had to make a list of laws that are in effect but are not working , this one would obviously have a good chance of coming out on top .
Indeed , as has already been mentioned here , the latest statistical data indicate that the current difference is 17.5 % , but some of us still remember that a couple of years ago , this percentage was as low as 15 % , while the variability is extremely high .
And this is not the issue of small and large enterprises , and not only an issue for women ; it is also an issue of social justice .
We cannot state often enough that the wage difference , as has been pointed out by my fellow Member more or less in the same sense , is the punishment of women for motherhood , and is created when young women return to the labour market .
And therein lies the true major problem : that small enterprises will never solve the problems of society .
What Parliament requested in this regard , that is , to ensure a transparent distribution of salaries between genders , and to make sure that those who continuously violate this principle at least do not receive support from European funds , is , in my opinion , not much .
True , there is some progress : the introduction of the ' equal pay day ' represents some measure of progress , but the truly great achievement would have been if that day were held on 1 or 2 January instead of 5 March .
( PT ) Madam President , women are in the majority in universities and are better qualified , but when it comes to decision-making positions , their rise is blocked by a glass ceiling .
That is why we need quotas .
It is a shame that Mr Bloom has already left .
In politics and in economics , it should be noted that there is only one female chair of a central bank .
Women were not responsible for the financial crisis , but they could have helped to prevent it .
Why is it that when we are talking about quotas , someone always brings up merit ?
Is it just the merit of women that is being questioned ?
Is it the case that men do not have merit ?
The quota is a necessary and temporary measure to promote the balanced representation of men and women in decision making and I would therefore congratulate the Commission on the efforts it has been making to ensure that decision making is shared in economic power as well .
( ET ) Madam President , a happy International Women 's Day to everyone !
When it comes to gender equality , it is not just differences and social justice that are the issue .
Gender equality is a prerequisite for sustainable economic growth , employment , competitiveness and social cohesion .
Investing in gender equality measures will pay off in terms of a higher level of women 's employment , women 's contribution to GDP , a higher tax yield and sustainable fertility rates .
Our understanding of gender equality is , for many , still at a medieval level today ; or , at least , this is what we have heard in some speeches .
There is a bogeyman in this subject , and this bogeyman is quotas .
People are forgetting , or perhaps do not want to see , that a quota is not being imposed on decision-making positions , and that a quota will not put incompetent women in positions of power .
In Europe , women are better educated , they are able to take responsibility , and they are able to work well and to get paid fairly for their work .
Those countries where quotas are applied , where they were already being used 20 years ago - I am thinking here of Northern European countries - have indeed shown that our objectives can be achieved through this measure and these days , people have reconsidered their behaviour - quotas are not necessary to the same extent as they were in the past .
It is considered the norm for women to participate in all areas of society .
I would , of course , like to say many things about poverty as well as single mothers , but unfortunately time does not allow me to do so .
Thank you to everyone who gave speeches - one day , we will be winning nonetheless !
( DE ) Madam President , the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day provides us with good reason to celebrate , give thanks and fight on .
We are dealing with a report into women and poverty ; one of the key reasons for this problem is wage inequality between women and men .
As we have already heard , wage equality has been enshrined in the Treaties of Rome since 1957 . However , the pay differential is still 17.5 % throughout Europe and as high as 23 % in Germany .
In 2008 , this House adopted a report on wage inequality thanks to the excellent work of Mrs Bauer .
This report called on the Commission to instigate legislative initiatives to combat wage inequality .
There has been no action since then .
Furthermore , Commissioner Reding , all you have done is to designate 5 March as European Equal Pay Day , an announcement you made on Friday , 4 March .
Lucky that you remembered to do this before the day had actually passed .
We have no more time for meaningless press releases .
We do not want to hear nice words from you .
We want you finally to take action so that the 100th anniversary of the Treaties of Rome will not be another day on which the pay differential between women and men is more than 0 % .
We want equal pay now .
I would like to turn now to the issue of women 's quotas and to my fellow Member from England : I would like to know whether he believes that only 3 % of women in England and throughout Europe ' know how to do their business ' .
Perhaps that explains why there are so few women on supervisory boards ?
I do not think that this is the case .
We need a quota .
Mrs Reding , you have said that businesses must commit to appoint women by next year .
Is it your wish that we should have these commitments by next year , or that women should have been appointed by next year ?
I hear that you want the second objective I mentioned .
( PL ) Madam President , the problem of female poverty , which is of the utmost importance , is raised in the resolution under discussion .
It is worth reminding ourselves that it is women who are bearing the heaviest burden as a result of the financial crisis .
It is primarily women who have felt the consequences of this crisis in terms of reduced employment levels , lower pay and restructuring measures .
Furthermore , it is women who shoulder parental and child-rearing responsibilities while , at the same time , participating in the very difficult and ever-changing labour market .
The situation of women in the EU Member States is very diverse , and it is therefore extremely important to show solidarity and understanding for women in regions where the problem of poverty is particularly acute .
The issue of unequal pay should force us to stop and think , since there are also pay differences in companies which are managed and owned by women .
This is a worrying fact , and it requires that we give thought to whether the causes lie deeper , and whether administrative rules and regulations - hard law - are sufficient in this instance , or whether it is necessary to alter people 's awareness and culture in general .
Nothing can replace respect and social culture , and legislation will not be enough either .
( PT ) Madam President , it is particularly significant that this year , on International Women 's Day , we are discussing these reports that seek to draw attention to the inequalities and discrimination that persist .
In some countries , society is even taking backward steps .
When we highlight an historic date linked to women 's struggle for recognition and the exercising of their rights , we are highlighting the worsening of unemployment and unstable jobs , along with low wages , and discrimination in terms of wages and on the basis of maternity that assail women workers ; these are taking on expressions that are particularly shocking and unacceptable in the younger generations .
Situations of loss of income are on the increase and women are getting poorer .
The situations of disabled , immigrant and retired women with small pensions , and of low paid women workers , are particularly critical .
The problems faced by women in the rural world and in family agriculture are increasing , as are those of women running micro- and small enterprises .
The impact of austerity measures in some countries , such as Portugal , Greece and Ireland , is having repercussions for the lives of women as workers , citizens and mothers .
That is the case with the deliberate reduction of wages , the freezing of admissions to university courses , and the blocking of collective bargaining ; and with the cuts to healthcare , education , social security and a variety of forms of social support .
Preventing the taking of measures , under the pretext of the crisis , which threaten women 's right to equality and to the necessary economic and social cohesion , is therefore a crucial issue .
Fine words and declarations of good intentions are not enough .
It is time to break with the neoliberal policies of the Stability and Growth Pact , with liberalisations and privatisations , and with free competition , which are always in the service of economic and financial interest groups .
It is time to prioritise women and their rights , equality , and economic and social cohesion , so that we can have a better society ; so that we can truly respect human rights and consolidate the progress that women have helped to build for our civilisation .
( ES ) Madam President , today is a very significant day to talk about equality between men and women because we are celebrating International Women 's Day , remembering those who fought for women 's working and economic rights and their right to vote 100 years ago .
We have made considerable progress in those 100 years , but much remains to be done .
True equality is still a dream and discrimination against women is a fact of life .
I believe that every one of us , both men and women , can do a lot more to achieve true emancipation for women .
There are many women in the world whose right to life is being threatened , whose dignity is being violated , and whose freedom is being denied .
Allow me , on this International Women 's Day , to demonstrate my support and hope to all women fighting for their democratic rights in the revolution in North Africa .
Women cannot be worth half what men are in Arab counties or anywhere in the world .
We are worth the same and deserve the same .
I will continue fighting to achieve that equality and International Women 's Day will continue to exist until it is achieved .
Even if there are many who do not want to see it , the reality is that there are women who earn half of what men do and that domestic violence mainly affects women and children .
I must repeat that these facts must continue to be reported in Parliament , and I promise to continue working toward that , of course .
( FR ) Madam President , I should like to begin by commending the work of my fellow Members , Mrs Nedelcheva and Mrs Plumb .
On this symbolic day marking 100 years of International Women 's Day , I could almost repeat word for word what was said last year as the fight is still ongoing .
It is true that women are more resilient to the current crisis in terms of job losses .
As for combating violence against women , we look to the Commission to indicate what its intentions are , to agree to our call for the creation of a European Year highlighting this issue , and to put forward a strategy .
I am told that this will happen soon , which I am delighted about .
Unfortunately , equal pay is not yet a reality despite the many efforts made by some Member States and by the European Commission , in particular .
Paternity leave has also regrettably been rejected by Member States despite the all-out efforts of this Parliament and the right to abortion is still not recognised in four Member States of the Union and challenged in others .
I welcome the new Belgian law on quotas for female representation in companies and on company boards , as well as the tremendously proactive approach displayed on this matter by Mrs Reding and President Buzek even in the press on the other side of the Atlantic .
Lastly , we should , however , celebrate the fact that after 100 years , we are half way down the path to gender equality thanks to European and national laws .
Let us stay on track so that it does not take another 100 years to achieve true gender equality .
Madam President , as many Members have pointed out , the progress of women 's rights has moved steadily forward over a number of years .
In the 30 years between the first elections to the European Parliament and 2009 , when I was elected , the representation of women has more than doubled .
We now see women in major roles in politics , business , industry and the media .
Perhaps most importantly , as a society , we have come to appreciate the necessity of the role of women and to recognise their contribution , winning equality along the way .
However , we need to be mindful of how far we push calls for more equality and in what areas .
Our concern should be to focus on what is still wrong today .
In the UK , women still account for under 20 % of the Members of Parliament , nearly half of the companies in the FTSE 250 have no females in the boardroom at all , and only a fifth of all engineering , science and IT graduates are women .
Given the diverse nature of our societies , this is clearly something that Member States need to address - without quotas and targets arbitrarily set at an EU level .
However , over and above representation , there are thousands of women across the EU , and indeed the world , who endure violence , exploitation and exclusion .
They are the ones without a voice .
It is those women - who suffer from discrimination , are deliberately discouraged from achievement , or are victims of repression - who surely deserve our absolute attention .
( DE ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to welcome the small number of men who have joined the small number of women in this plenary .
Naturally , I am in favour of equal treatment and equal opportunities for women and men .
I have been successfully campaigning for this at national and European level for over 50 years .
Unfortunately , the report on the equality of women and men in the EU 2010 once again contains exaggerated demands that are counterproductive for women in the final analysis .
I do not have the time to explain them all here .
It is through no fault of the rapporteur that the large number of amendments have made the report quite hard to digest .
In relation to the controversial question of whether the EU should impose a women 's quota in listed companies , I must warn against praising Norway as a shining example of such a measure .
You may ask why .
Since the introduction of the women 's quota between 2003 and 2009 the number of companies quoted on the stock market has decreased from 554 to 362 .
One in three companies gave the introduction of the women 's quota as the reason it withdrew from the stock market .
In Norway , 70 women , known as ' golden skirts ' , occupy about 300 seats on management boards .
This is warped , but very interesting .
Speaking for myself , I might be attracted to the career of a ' golden skirt ' as I have not been a member of a single management board so far .
The Commission needs to think carefully and weigh up the consequences before reacting too hastily to this problem .
I also regret that this report recommends in the same breath that women should be allowed easy access to contraception and abortion .
In other words , abortion is equated with contraception as a simple means of birth control .
This is an insult to women .
I cannot agree to this , quite apart from the fact that the EU has no powers in this area - subsidiarité oblige !
I regret the fact that some female Members consistently mix these two issues together .
That is not necessary .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to put a very simple question to Mrs Lulling : does she not believe that the move to equality between men and women is , even in 2011 , hindered precisely because of views such as hers , which are therefore the views of a woman , and which she is so eager to share with us even today ?
( FR ) Madam President , I do not know , I have said nothing before 2011 , why has the situation deteriorated ?
It will not deteriorate if we remain realistic , but it will deteriorate if we adopt a utopian and unrealistic approach .
( Applause )
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Lulling , whereas I could be very proud that you have thanked the few men present in this debate , being one of the rare male members of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , I could get really cross were you to tar me with the same brush as Mr Bloom .

I would like to know if you can distinguish between Mr Bloom and me or whether I am to regret that you associate us both in the same struggle because we clearly hold radically opposing positions .
( FR ) Madam President , Mr Tarabella , I made no mention of Mr Bloom !

You have done a great service to Mr Bloom because it was you who put the questions to him and gave him the opportunity to take the grandstand here .
I am grateful these questions were raised as I can therefore have the time to speak that I need .
However , I must tell you , Mr Tarabella , that you are a distinguished member of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
I can always count on you to put across the voice of reason , and I am sorry that you and I have not been listened to where some passages of these reports are concerned .
Madam President , on the anniversary of International Women 's Day , when we are debating the Plumb report on the face of female poverty and the Nedelcheva report on inequality between women and men in the European Union , and when the institutions are focusing on quotas for women on boards , the PS Women group is dedicating its 2011 campaign to the issue of pension systems and female poverty .
All European societies are facing ageing populations , and pension systems all over Europe are being reformed .
This is why the EU must send a signal that the lives of ordinary women are central to our concern .
On the fundamental issue of pensions , the European Commission should be leading the charge in closing the structural gaps between women and men .
Women should not be disadvantaged for reasons beyond their power : the pay gap , as my colleague mentioned , taking care of relatives and non-decent work .
Our first task is to raise awareness among women .
We need to underline that during the ongoing discussions on pensions , the female factor has come up very rarely .
We want policy makers to be aware of the effects of that and to make sure that precise data on women and pensions become available .
The Commission needs to conduct research on the gender effect in pension reforms in Europe and I am sure that Viviane Reding will do that .
We need to look at best practices at national level and look into a European approach .
It really is time to think about what we have achieved during the last 100 years .
We need a clear future for our children .
It is also important to remind ourselves of what Clara Zetkin did one hundred years ago , because bridging the gender pay gap was her idea .
It will be really important too that we make changes in the style of Ginger Rogers and Fred Astaire - remembering that Ginger Rogers had to do everything ' backwards in high heels ' .
( PL ) Madam President , the reports on inequalities affecting women and men in the European Union contain many suggestions for what should be done and what steps should be taken to reduce these inequalities .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to Commissioner Reding for the measures she is taking at European level to reduce differences between women and men .
However , the majority of these measures should be taken at national or Member State level .
This is where fierce opposition is frequently met from politicians , institutions and public opinion .
Women 's organisations therefore frequently call on the Commission for help .
Yet grass-roots actions are of key importance , as in the case of Poland , where it was possible to overcome opposition thanks to a women 's social movement known as the Congress of Women .
We collected over 100 000 signatures for a social and legal initiative and , as a result of a broad debate which mobilised public opinion , the Polish Parliament voted through 35 % parity for women on all electoral lists , including those for European elections .
I am very proud that Poland has joined the countries where parity is a legal requirement , and that it is the first of the new Member States to introduce this significant change .
We will now carefully monitor what influence this has on women 's political participation .
I would like to state clearly that we should set ourselves new goals straight away , and these goals should be equal pay for various groups of women and parity in other decision-making bodies . Thank you very much .

( IT ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the rapporteurs and I also dedicate this 8 March to the women of North Africa and the Middle East , such as the many women who , at this moment , are demonstrating in Cairo and Iran and fighting for democracy and liberty in their countries .
In this respect , I hope that firm measures will be taken , including in the external actions of the European Commission , to establish links with these women .
Even in Europe , there is a great reawakening of women 's participation , starting with demands to respect the dignity of women in the media and in the behaviour of men in institutions , as was said in town squares on 13 February by 1 million Italian women and many concerned men .
As for the reports under discussion , I would note that there is a strong link between growing insecurity at work and in the lives of young women , even though they are better educated and more skilled , the inadequate protection of atypical female workers - which most young women are - during maternity and parenthood , the shortcomings of current policies for achieving balance and the lower rates of female employment , the more frequent instances of poverty among women and children , and the lower level of their pensions and , hence , their exclusion from decision-making powers .
While I agree with Mrs Reding 's initiative concerning boards of directors , I am less supportive of the initiative on insurance which risks penalising women in particular .
Without this , there will be no Europe 2020 .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to say that , for me , the fight for equality between men and women has nothing to do with the Left or Right ; it is not a fight by men or by women ; it is a fight for society as a whole .


What kind of contemporary society would invest in training young girls , as we do , only to then deny itself of 50 % of the available intelligence in the workplace ?
That must not be the kind of society in which we live .
I call on you , the Commission , the Council and Parliament to mobilise so that we leave behind a more egalitarian , fairer society that does more to harness the training of young girls and their intelligence .
The second point , Commissioner , concerns equal access to positions of responsibility .
As you know , I am French and I was against quotas .
But after 10 years , I have realised that without quotas , we will not achieve anything .
Without quotas , there will never be as many women as there are men
( Applause )
in positions of responsibility .
I heard the President of Parliament support this view last week .
I think that we really do need to go down this road now .
You know that I was against quotas as I find it somewhat degrading having to protect women who should be able to progress on the basis of their skills .
I feel we now need to resort to that approach , however .
The third and final point is our need to fight for equal pay for men and women .
Thank you for your contributions .
( Applause )
( EL ) Madam President , today we are honouring the struggle by women through the ages and female achievements .
We are recording the persistent democratic deficits which are currently being exacerbated by the economic crisis : poverty , trafficking , violence , unemployment , sexual exploitation , the pay divide , denigration in the media , the perpetuation of stereotypical roles and under-representation in the centres of power - all of which are feminine nouns - do most damage to single mothers , elderly women , female immigrants and disabled women .
We need coordinated action at European and national level : more effective employment and social protection policies to combat poverty , more measures to reconcile home life and work to support working women and pro-active measures and quotas for balanced representation in the centres of power .
We need proper education and awareness-raising to stamp out violence and stereotypes .
The road is long , but we must travel it , because women deserve better opportunities without prejudice .
( PL ) Madam President , women are discriminated against in every area of life ; they are beaten and raped .
Half of all European women have experienced violence , and over one million suffer it on a daily basis .
Work continues on the directive on violence against women , yet at the same time , there are countries in the European Union , including Poland , unfortunately , which allow themselves to use legally-sanctioned violence against women in the field of sexual and reproductive health .
The lack of proper sex education and easy access to contraceptives mean that women who become pregnant , including those who are underage , are forced by law to give birth to the child .
A pregnant woman is treated like an incubator , deprived of the right to decide for herself and of the right to health and privacy to which every man is entitled .
The ban on abortion does not reduce the number of such procedures carried out .
Anti-abortion legislation must be condemned , since it is a form of state violence against women and institutional discrimination against women .
If men were the ones who became pregnant , abortion would be a sacrament .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to express my acknowledgement and gratitude to all the women , many of whom are well known and written about , but many others of whom are anonymous , who have worked and fought these last 100 years to achieve the standard of equality we now have .
However , there still remains much to be done , and these reports bring us to issues such as the reconciliation of family and work life , difficulties in accessing the labour market or the fight against gender-based violence , which is one of the main scourges that exists in Europe and worldwide .
Equality between men and women is still not a reality .
Therefore , we must now begin a new phase which sees commitments become realities .
From the European institutions and from the rest of European society we have to aim to make progress toward achieving true equality between men and women .
Such equality could provide the opportunity to achieve a more just and equal society and , on that road , men are essential .
Much remains to be done and we will see it through together .
( PL ) Madam President , today is an opportunity to remind ourselves of people 's right to equal treatment , regardless of their gender .
In spite of many measures undertaken to ensure equal rights , the issue of the pay difference between women and men is still unresolved .
Women are still in a more difficult situation ; employers frequently assess their suitability for a job not on the basis of their qualifications , but on the basis of whether they will have children or not , or , if they already have them , who will look after them when they are ill .
Nobody asks men or fathers such questions when they are being recruited .
I would therefore stress the need for changes to the system , and for measures to be taken which change the way in which society perceives this problem , and which ensure that women themselves are liberated from the internal belief that only they are responsible for raising children , thus allowing these inequalities to be eradicated .
Knowing the charisma and determination of Commissioner Reding , I believe that this will most certainly be achieved . Thank you .
( FI ) Madam President , on this International Women 's Day , it is worth examining how equality is actually implemented in Europe .
We share a new concern , and that is the feminisation of poverty .
Although women do more work than men , men earn higher levels of pay and still receive bigger pensions .
It is wrong that men are becoming richer and women poorer .
That is very true of older women in particular , and that is why they should be helped in every possible way .
Ageing and growing old , especially with regard to women , should not be a burden .
It should not be regarded as a liability , but something that enriches society and Europe and is a resource .
The future of the world and Europe will mainly depend on women , and mothers in particular .
Obviously , it is good that the sons and husbands of mothers , Mr Bloom and myself , have something meaningful to do other than go to war .
My congratulations .
( Applause )
( SL ) Madam President , the Vienna Philharmonic , probably the best classical music orchestra in the world , only permitted women members to join and perform with them a few years ago .
Just imagine what our orchestra here , this Parliament , would look and sound like if we did not have our women members livening it up with their character and informed debate .
It is obvious that a day like today , a day to remind us of the inequality of women , is more than necessary .
On pay day , on the day when roles are allocated at work , and on all days when it comes to caring for children and family , women are not equal .
Our responsibility in the European Parliament and the responsibility of our colleagues in national parliaments is to legislate appropriately in order to bring about that equality .
However , I think that we will also promote that equality by showing care and attention to women on a daily basis .
( SK ) Madam President , it is important that we are discussing female poverty today .
At the same time , it is a pity that , in seeking a solution , we remain beholden to a one-sided way of thinking .
Solving female poverty involves more than just forcible intervention in the family environment .
The most recent OECD research shows that such intervention has only limited success .
Women devote more time than men to household work and childcare .
This applies even when the man is on parental leave .
They do not do this because they have to , but because they want to .
They prefer to opt for part-time employment .
According to OECD figures , 30 to 50 % of all economic activity of women does not appear in current measures of affluence , such as per capita GDP , for example .
Solving female poverty therefore also involves recognising the work that women perform within the framework of intergenerational solidarity .
In recognising this work , we will take a fundamental step towards solving poverty .


( EL ) Madam President , I have something different to say : today is not a day of celebration , as far as I am concerned ; it is a day of remembrance of the women who died in the uprising in America not 100 , but 157 years ago .
We should not forget that either .
If we are to move forward , we need three basic things :
the first is support structures for working women : nurseries and crèches ;
the second , Commissioner Andor , is financial support for women ; and
the third is to change attitudes in schools and here , Commissioner Reding , I propose that there should be quotas , not only on governing boards , which is like trying to repair the house from the roof down , but also for nursery and school teachers , so that we can live equality of the sexes .
To close , I call on you Madam President , as a female president , to circumvent the rules and to give the floor to the remaining ten female speakers for this special ceremony for Women 's Day .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , both here in the Chamber and in the galleries , the campaign for women 's rights in the workplace , in the family , in democracy , for economic independence for women and against male violence , female poverty and discrimination against single mothers , lesbians and female migrants , is one that has already gone on for too long .
Today , we are celebrating the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day .
Happily , in the future , we shall also be able to celebrate what has been achieved , while not losing sight of the work still to be done .
Mrs Morin-Chartier has already said that she would not have put much faith in quotas ten years ago , but that she has changed her mind : quotas are essential .
Thank you for that .
Quotas are indeed something that women need if they are to get anywhere .
We have men 's quotas in all supervisory boards , in all statutory authorities , in politics and in business .
Male networks operate without any difficulty .
Men are not necessarily in influential positions because of their performance - some are , though it is by no means true of all - but simply because they belong to these boys ' networks .
That is why we need quotas and wage equality .

( EL ) Madam President , I think that today is a very important day ; we are celebrating Women 's Day , the day of the women we love , the women we respect , the women who are our mothers , wives , sisters and daughters , working women and housewives .
I wish to express my thanks to the entire female sex and to emphasise that I personally support the fight by women for equality in society and at work , for equal pay and for quotas in the centres of power , and deplore all forms of violence against and exploitation of women .
I shall say no more , it has all been said .
Thank you ladies , all of you , both present and absent from this meeting .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today , I would like to make a special dedication to all the women who fight every day for the respect of their rights in modern society , to all the women who choose to have a child knowing that this will make it difficult to reconcile their working lives with their new role as mothers , to all the women who , aware of their talents and abilities , decide to press ahead on their own way despite the many obstacles .
Precisely for this reason , I support the introduction of , at least initially , obligatory quotas for women as a means of breaking a culture that only helps men .
I am convinced this would offer the opportunity that many young women have been waiting for and that , armed with their professional skills and education , they will certainly not allow it to escape .
I have a baby who is only a few months old and I have a dream : I hope that my daughter , Vittoria , will not have to fight as we do to break these glass ceilings and that female talent will no longer have to be seen as an obligation but rather as a genuine added value .
Madam President , it was the Trotskyists who transformed Marxist class warfare into multi-grievance group warfare .
Society was to be segmented into groups , who might or might not have known that they had a grievance until that was explained to them by helpful young militants .
The groups might be defined by ethnicity , religion , sex , sexuality , age or disability .
They were all to be urged to engage in collective action against their oppressors .
The Trotskyists grew older , if not up .
In some cases , they moved into positions of power and influence .
Their ideas spread much faster and further than they did .
The word ' discrimination ' , when followed by the word ' against ' , became the ultimate evil .
In many cases , there is no identifiable perpetrator .
The discriminator is the rest of society .
We are all guilty .
People , whatever their real disadvantage , must realise when they are being manipulated and must shake off that manipulation .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioners , the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day should also be an occasion to reflect and take stock .
Today , I would like to express my thanks to the pioneering women who paved the way for us , making it possible for so many women now to play a role in political life and in business .
However , this day should also be a warning to us not to put at risk what has been achieved so far .
Many aspects of the programmes of the various Member States , which are now to be implemented under the cover of budgetary consolidation , are specifically against women , against women 's educational opportunities , against women 's opportunities to make a fair and living wage , against women 's opportunities to play a role in political development .
I am calling particularly on men - and I can see there are several among us now - to work with us in partnership to ensure that our ambitious goals can be achieved , so that International Women 's Day really will be a day to celebrate in the future .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I believe that one hundred years of struggle and one hundred years of progress have to be respected , but we also have to acknowledge that contemporary Europe is still far from full equality between men and women .
Many of these inequalities are reproduced through the imbalances in the labour markets and the bias against women in many segments and in many institutions within the labour market .
That is why I believe that European policies and European financial instruments will have to be used to improve the situation in this area , and to improve employment opportunities and employment conditions of women , in order to make progress .
Many concrete actions are possible .
For example , as regards European funds , wherever it is possible and reasonable , equal opportunities conditionality would be very important , and we want to pursue this .
However , direct job creation is also important .
One of the key directions in job creation in the coming decade will be towards so-called ' white jobs ' - jobs in healthcare and long-term care .
Here , we have to focus on creating opportunities , because much of this work is , in any case , being done by women , but without proper remuneration and without the opportunity to accumulate rights , including pension rights for their old age .
On the question of pensions , in the White Paper on Pensions to be published in the third quarter of this year , we will pay more attention to the gender dimension .
There is a group of Commissioners working on this Pensions White Paper , and with Vice-President Reding participating and contributing , we will manage to address the gender dimension of pensions more forcefully than in the previous Green Paper .
I agree with Mrs Zimmer .
This is also a question of regulating working time .
That is absolutely fundamental .
We need an EU working time regulation which allows for better accommodation of working needs and family responsibilities .
A better work-life balance is absolutely essential .
This is part of our decent work agenda .
I agree with those who highlighted that this is not only an issue that applies inside the EU : this is an international responsibility which we have to pursue .
To highlight one more connection - that between the labour market and education - we have to go deep in order to improve the quality of education , to raise awareness , to teach about rights , including women 's rights especially and - this is very important - rights for European minorities , whether they are immigrants or other ethnic minorities .
Finally , on the question of quotas on corporate boards , I had an opportunity last week to discuss this matter with the new head of the Confederation of British industry - I am sure Mr Bloom will be interested to hear that .
There are many aspects to this question .
Apart from tackling stereotypes and the organisational and cultural aspects , our discussion also highlighted the need to organise family life differently , because of the time demands of top-level jobs .
That is why we have to act on many fronts .
We must not extend this discussion solely to working life and public life .
I believe that if we continue the discussion , and the Commission 's efforts , with due responsibility , we can make progress in the future .
Madam President , Mrs Reding , Commissioner , I should like to thank all my fellow Members for their contributions and their speeches .
Once again , today 's debate proves how much the issue of gender equality matters to us .
We all share common values and principles : those of respecting human dignity , those of fighting inequality and discrimination .
I have a great deal of respect for the personal and often national connotations that each of us brings to these values and principles .
Therein lies the wealth of the European vision on these matters .
However , these different connotations must not make us lose sight of our common goals .
We need to continue working towards improving the conditions of women both in the workplace and on a personal and family level .
Their access to the job market should be further encouraged , especially to positions of responsibility , and national authorities , institutions , political bodies and companies should be held to account on this .
It falls to us all to show that these objectives are achievable .
It has indeed been said many times today that combating gender inequalities is a daily battle .
Strong political will needs to be backed up by concrete actions .
I welcome all the actions outlined by the Commission and my thanks also go out in advance to all my fellow Members for the support that we will give them .
One more point : during the debates , I was criticised for the length of the text which , it seems , gets longer every year .
This is obviously because the previous recommendations have not been fully implemented .
We need to make sure that they are implemented by everyone .
I also believe that it is because of the complex nature of the matter and its dynamic developments .
I stress that it is up to us to keep up with these developments , to avoid being locked into outdated ideas so that we are in a position to guide the former .
Lastly , I believe that gender equality remains an issue for us all .
Above all , I believe that each of us has the free will to recognise this and to work towards it becoming a reality .
2011 is the European Year of Volunteering , and our greatest joint initiative this year should be achieving genuine progress in gender equality .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I would like to thank Commissioners Reding and Andor for their strong commitments on these important issues .
I would also like to thank all my colleagues for their strong messages on this important debate today .
First of all , I would like to say that gender equality is not only a matter of social justice ; it is also a matter for progress and we need to build together a fair society for all of us .
Next , I would like to say that I strongly support quotas .
Yes , we need women in top positions , but let us not forget poverty .
We have to tackle and we have to prevent and reduce poverty and we need concrete measures .
Preventing and reducing poverty is an important component of social solidarity and I strongly believe in women 's solidarity .
We need support for all citizens ; we need support from the whole of society and I would like to thank the NGOs , the social partners and all women and men in society who are fighting year by year , day by day , to achieve gender equality .
We have to make this gender equality become a reality .
We can accelerate on the track today ; together , let us make things happen .
And once again , I wish all women happy days .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote on the two reports will take place at midday today , 8 March .
This will be followed by celebrations to mark the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day .
All the women in the Chamber , in Parliament , in the Commission and in the Council are cordially requested to attend a joint photo call after the ceremony .
I hope that this announcement will be heard by all the ladies and gentlemen in their offices and that they will attend the plenary directly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Following the celebration of the centenary of International Women 's Day , it would not be going too far to stress the enriching role that women play in the development of the family , of society and of the economy , although it is often underestimated and underpaid , which significantly increases the risk of poverty .
One of the main problems lies in limited access to work , in working conditions , or even in accessing roles compatible with their qualifications .
Moreover , the present economic crisis being experienced by the European Member States has been exacerbating the employment situation of women because of their susceptibility to finding unstable jobs .
The promotion of equality also involves the struggle against violence against women , whether physical , psychological or sexual , which must be combated and condemned .
As such , specific programmes have to be adopted to promote the active inclusion or reintegration of women in the labour market , whilst creating specific opportunities for lifelong learning with a view to providing them with skills and qualifications , as well as to reinforcing their confidence and developing the skills necessary in the light of the Europe 2020 strategy .
On the day when we are celebrating International Women 's Day , I support the principles set out in the report on ' Equality between women and men - 2010 ' .
However , I believe that in the period ahead , we must move from fair principles to adopting concrete measures to reduce the current gender inequalities .
Romania , the country which I come from , is in the middle of the Global Gender Gap Index 2010 rankings , in 64th place to be precise , in terms of discrimination between women and men .
In general , Romanian women are better educated than Romanian men , with a steady rise being seen in the proportion of women among the total number of graduates .
The current situation is that 60 % of graduates are women and only 40 % are men .
However , the incomes received by women continue to be lower than those received by men .
The gender risks which affect women 's opportunities on the labour market are still very powerful , ranging from the higher risk of poverty to blocking access to key positions .
In the hope that the labour market will treat women more fairly , I would like us , too , to help change this situation .
This report is an important step towards this .
The issue of gender equality deserves appropriate attention , particularly at the time of the hundredth anniversary of International Women 's Day .
I personally consider many of the issues from the submitted report to be exceptionally important .
One of the issues I would like to underline is the pension gap between men and women .
The gap is caused by the fact that working women interrupt their professional lives more often than men , in order to look after children and sick or older family members , and , because of their family commitments , are more willing than men to accept part-time work or non-permanent work arrangements .
It is this factor which leads to the pension gap .
I consider no less important the call for special attention to be paid to vulnerable groups of women , such as disabled or older women , immigrants , lesbian , bisexual and transsexual women , or members of minorities and women with low qualifications or no qualifications , who are caring for dependents .
Last but not least , I consider it important to secure access to support services aimed at preventing gender-based violence and protecting women against such violence , regardless of their legal status , race , age , sexual orientation , ethnic origin or religion , which the report also calls on the Commission and the Member States to do .
Gender equality is a fundamental principle of our times , but inequality between men and women still persists .
The percentage of women amongst scientists and engineers has increased significantly .
In the EU , women constitute 59 % of graduates and 41 % of those with doctorates .
However , there are paradoxical figures worthy of consideration .
Women are under-represented in science when we are talking about leadership roles .
Only 19 % of university professors in the EU are women .
These figures lead one to believe that there are problems with women 's access to the upper reaches of academia .
It is essential to find solutions that make a successful career in science compatible with a stable family life .
I am referring , for example , to the use of new technologies that will enable women scientists to carry out their work from home .
Only in this way will we manage to resolve the imbalance between men and women in science and research , which continues to be an obstacle to the European objective of increasing competitiveness and maximising potential for innovation .
The current economic and social crisis is having a very negative effect on the living conditions of men and women in the EU .
It seriously threatens the female part of the population , particularly in the areas of gender equality , employment conditions and access to employment .
In the area of employment conditions or income levels , women have been seriously affected , and unless appropriate measures are taken immediately , there is a risk that the situation will deteriorate even further .
It is also important to take account of the position of women within the framework of the fight against poverty .
At the global level - in comparison with the male population - up to 17 % more women live in poverty , according to statistics .
The contribution that women make to developing the family and society is also underrated .
The inequalities between men and women , especially regarding access to education or the sharing out of family responsibilities , are factors which exacerbate female poverty .
Serious consequences also result from the pay gap between men and women , or the so-called glass ceiling , which prevents women from securing managerial or leading roles .
The promotion of gender equality is a way of combating violence against women .
It is absolutely imperative to combat the various forms of violence , regardless of the level of seriousness of physical , mental or sexual violence .
In respect of this factor , too , it is desirable for EU Member State governments and European institutions to support mechanisms aimed at achieving gender equality in the various aspects of social , economic and political life .
It is , of course , appropriate that we should be discussing gender equality on International Women 's Day , but it is not enough .
The issue 's importance must also be made apparent on all other days when we are taking decisions .
An essential ingredient in equality , furthermore , is everyone 's inviolable right to his or her own body .
That then extends to the right to contraception , abortion and good sexual health .
All these issues have been and will obviously long continue to be visible in the way Parliament votes .
Regrettably , all too often , the quarrels still reflect attitudes that sustain the subjugation of women .
Equality is one of Europe 's fundamental values , and it is an unambiguously positive value .
The only problem is that equality is interpreted in a great many different ways , some of which are extreme interpretations which do not take into account the real differences that exist between people .
The various interpretations which are possible have resulted in the emergence of ideologies associated with equality and directly linked to this term .
There have been instances in the past when crimes were carried out , including even genocide , in the name of equality understood in a specific and doctrinal sense .
There is less risk of dogmatism when it comes to equality between women and men , but overly radical positions are still held .
The equality of women and men cannot be limited to political declarations and legal regulations .
The implementation of standards based on the principle of equality is very important , and changes in mentality are necessary in order for this to be possible .
We must encourage and support education and information measures and promote good practices .
We must ensure that awareness of equality is the rule , rather than the exception to the rule .
True equality must be something which is found within people , in their attitudes , and in their everyday , spontaneous behaviour .
Equality is not an isolated value , either .
We should not accept any affirmation of equality which is worded in such a way that it excludes other key values , such as freedom , dignity and justice .
I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteurs on their reports , which raise the important issue of equal rights .
As one of the reports reveals , over 20 million Europeans , mostly women , have limited access to the labour market because they care for dependent adults .
We also know how difficult the challenges are facing parents who wish to combine raising children with professional work .
I believe that taking concrete steps to reconcile professional and family life is a matter of the utmost importance for both social and economic development in Europe .
We need to take measures promoting the creation of local support systems for families caring for children and dependent adults , and to review legislation and make wider use of new technologies in order to remove barriers to flexible forms of employment .
I believe that the European Union should make every effort to ensure that the huge potential of its capable and well-educated female citizens is fully unlocked .
I would like to welcome the host of issues raised by this report , which has enabled us , regardless of the committee we are working in , to find a series of correlations which need to be achieved so that we make a greater contribution to achieving the EU 2020 targets .
As you have seen , calls are being made for measures to be taken at national and European level to promote entrepreneurship among women by creating training , professional and legal advice structures , and by facilitating access to public and private finance .
I welcome , in particular , the need to develop entrepreneurship at local and regional level as a main source of job creation and economic development .
The potential women offer in terms of running businesses is used to a very small extent .
This is why I think that both the European Social Fund and the European Fund for Regional Development must support actions which will allow entrepreneurship to develop among women .
There may certainly be cultural , material or economic differences preventing us from doing this .
However , these are factors which we need to bear in mind and for which we need to produce the framework required to overcome them .
One hundred years after the first public demonstrations by women in the fight for their rights , it has still not brought the desired outcome .
On the contrary , the current crisis pushes the wheel of history back a few metres , in terms of establishing equality between women and men .
Women the world over are again coming out onto the streets , just like 100 years ago .
They are standing at the head of demonstrations in Greece , Spain , the Czech Republic and Belgium , and also in North African countries .
The EU has , until recently , been boasting of the improving situation of women on the labour market , and in securing education , decent living standards , access to women 's healthcare or greater representation in constitutional bodies , but the deepening crisis seems to have consigned this to the margins of Community interest .
The counter-crisis measures are directed mainly towards the male population .
The needs of women are perceived as second-level issues .
The past 100 years have shown what women have given to the world and to progress , and how many of them gave their lives in the struggle for peace , and also how many new lives they have brought into the world .
This is no small matter .
However , the world still owes a debt to women .
It is not a matter of doing them a favour , but of declaring clearly their equal status in society .
After all , these women are not fighting for themselves , but for a better and more humane world .
I should firstly like to pay tribute to the bold and enormous task undertaken by my colleague , Mrs Nedelcheva , the rapporteur on this matter .
The fight for gender equality is a daily battle across all our States .
My generation was one of the first to see women gain access to senior positions of responsibility , in particular , to elected office .
I am therefore delighted to see that women are now present in many fields that were still closed to them not so long ago .
Nevertheless , inequalities still prevail and there are many battles yet to be fought , not least of which is a persistent wage gap and the place of women on the boards of large companies .
Lastly , I would like to emphasise the importance of ensuring all women have access to quality reproductive healthcare .
Ever since I started my political career , I have campaigned for women 's access to abortion in a safe medical setting .
Contraceptives must also be made readily available to them .
I therefore advocate that contraceptives should be free , particularly for minors .
in writing . - ( DE ) Trying to sell women 's quotas as a milestone is simply populism .
What women really need is a genuine freedom of choice in life : They must have the certainty that none of their decisions will be given a lesser value .
An important step in this direction would be to introduce family tax splitting in all Member States so that the establishment of a family does not become a poverty trap .
Support for women 's quotas in supervisory boards only comes from women who are already top earners , if at all .
Since Norway introduced the women 's quota requirement for the management boards of listed companies , these posts are simply accumulated by a small number of women , who occupy several seats on different management boards .
These women are often disparagingly referred to within business as ' golden skirts ' , something that is not exactly favourable to the working atmosphere .
We need to begin in the areas where women suffer genuine disadvantage : we need to look at the position of unpaid carers , at part-time employment and at the plight of the many women who work hard to cope with the demands of family and career .
Social solidarity and the European social model are values which distinguish Europe from societies in other parts of the world .
There is a question mark over the extent to which these values are sustainable in the context of the call for global competitiveness based on reduced labour costs , the loosening of labour law , reductions in social protection for workers and the weakening role of the state .
We will probably not fundamentally enhance global competitiveness in this way , and it is much more likely that we will irreversibly undermine social cohesion and open up divisions in society .
Make no mistake .
Women are fundamentally at risk through these measures .
Pay differences have a significant impact , just like the budget cuts in the public sector .
From this perspective , pension and health reforms at the national level must be fair to both sexes .
It is no accident that the issue of European poverty applies more often to older women .
The fight against inequality is not virtual reality .
It concerns real people .
As we discuss the report by Mrs Nedelcheva today , the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day , it is high time for us finally to follow up our words with deeds .
The disadvantage suffered by women in Europe can only be combated effectively if we introduce binding rules instead of voluntary commitments .
These include mandatory women 's quotas on corporate boards , as well as all other levels , the consistent combating of precarious employment conditions , which affect women far more than men , the improvement of career prospects for women during education by systematically expanding the range of careers open to them , a ban on financial disadvantage to women in taxation and income , statutory equality plans in business and industry in order to promote women , and regular checks and reports on the progress achieved in Europe , if any .
Let me conclude by saying this : After 100 years of International Women 's Day , we women will no longer be satisfied with simple lip-service .
We want binding statutory regulations and we want final recognition that the work of women makes a decisive contribution to our prosperity .
( The sitting was suspended for a few moments )
100th anniversary of International Women 's Day
I am extremely pleased to be able to preside over our Parliament together with my female fellow Members .
Six of them are Vice-Presidents of Parliament , two are Quaestors , and the Vice-Chair of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality is sitting next to me .
This is a particular honour and privilege for me .
I am resuming the sitting .
The next item is the debate on the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day .
We shall begin with a short film summarising the history of this notable day .
Please start the projection .
( Projection of a film )
Dear guests , ladies and gentlemen , a film lasting two minutes cannot show everything that has happened over the past 100 years .
We have , in fact , changed Europe in this time , and we Europeans can be proud when we compare Europe to many places in the world , but at the same time , we know that our journey is not over .
There are still too few women in politics , and here in the European Parliament , our female Members account for only 35 % of all Members .
This figure is admittedly somewhat higher than in the national parliaments , but it is still not enough .
Fortunately , the figure in our Parliament 's main decision-making bodies is well over 40 % , and we are very pleased about this .
This is also the case for the chairs of the committees .
Yet the European Parliament 's formation in three years ' time , after the next elections , essentially depends on the national parliaments and the way in which representatives are appointed to the European Parliament .
It is our national parliaments that must ensure that the number of women in the European Parliament increases .
We are calling on them today to do so , and we are calling on our counterparts in the national parliaments to ensure that appropriate legal solutions are found and the appropriate decisions are taken to facilitate an increase in the number of women in the European Parliament .
We can also set an example when it comes to the employment of women .
Of those employed in the European Parliament , 59 % are women and , at the same time , over 50 % of these women deal with matters of substance .
I have extensive experience in this area and can pride myself on the fact that while I was responsible for the government in my country , around 50 women occupied the highest ministerial positions and served as directors of the most important state offices .
This record has never been broken , neither before nor in the dozen or so years since .
As President of the European Parliament , I have also called for there to be more women in the European Commission and in high-level positions in the European Union .
We can be pleased that the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy is a woman .
The situation in European businesses has also changed , which is very beneficial not only for women , but , above all , for the way in which these businesses operate .
We should also ensure that women and men employed in the same jobs with the same skills receive the same pay .
We still have a lot to do in this respect .
We are very well aware that women are also capable of fighting for democracy and human rights .
I would like to pay tribute to all of our female fellow Members in the European Parliament , and to think at this point about the women in North Africa and in the Middle East who are showing true courage in their fight for democracy .
Let us also remember that the past winners of the Sakharov Prize include magnificent women such as Aung San Suu Kyi , Leyla Zana and the Ladies in White .
I should therefore like once again to repeat that we will not agree to depriving women of their dignity in the name of any legal system , religion or culture .
We will not agree to women having fewer rights than men , in Europe or elsewhere in the world .
We will protest if women are unfairly treated .
Ladies and gentlemen , on 3 November 1793 , 218 years ago , Olympia de Gouges was beheaded in Europe because she drafted a declaration of the rights of women and female citizens .
That was the only reason .
One hundred years later , in 1906 , women were given the right to vote .
The first country where this happened was Finland .
Let us remember this .
Over the following century , we made enormous progress in achieving equality between women and men .
I would like to stress something which is very important for me personally , namely , that 8 March is a holiday for women .
This is true .
Yet this holiday primarily serves to remind us that we should remember the most important issue in Europe today , namely , equality of rights for women and men , during the remaining 364 days of the year .
The principles we wish to reinforce on 8 March should also apply on the other 364 days in the year .
This is the main challenge facing us .
It is not enough merely to commemorate 8 March ; we need to think about this matter on all the other days in the year as well .
Thank you very much .
Mr President , when the International Women 's Day was launched , the equality of women was a brand new and revolutionary idea .
Since then , gender equality has become one of the basic principles of modern society .
Its source lies in inalienable human dignity shared by men and women in equal measure .
However , as with all achievements , it is not enough to simply declare this .
Human dignity , including the characteristic dignity of women , has been subject to different violations in different ages and places .
Our focus and our responses must be in line with this .
It speaks volumes that this commemoration is taking place after the debate on the report entitled ' The face of female poverty in the European Union ' .
Poverty and the European Union .
Some time ago , this would have seemed an unlikely association .
The economic crisis hit the less protected groups particularly hard .
The over-representation of women in this category in itself sets out certain tasks , to say nothing of the typical fates afflicting masses of women , which give poverty a female face outside of Europe , at a global scale .
Borrowing the words of Saint Francis of Assisi : Lady Poverty .
Women with small children fleeing war or famine , broken families without fathers living in slums , women and young girls forced into prostitution , even within the European Union .
There are a number of matters among the priorities of the Hungarian Presidency , the successful promotion of which could have an impact on increased employment among women .
Foremost among these is the Europe 2020 strategy with its own employment policy targets for recovery from the economic crisis and for the reduction of poverty .
The employment of women strengthens women 's dignity .
It helps enable them to take their decisions and shape their lives freely .
The flagship initiative ' Platform against Poverty ' stresses that steps taken with a view to reducing poverty must also take into account the differences between the situation of women and men .
The Hungarian Presidency considers the decision adopted yesterday by the EPSCO Council on the renewal of the Pact for equality between women and men by 2020 an important achievement .
Besides economic policy measures , we must not forget about the special role of women in society either .
We must give women the possibility to harmonise their careers and family lives , and the possibility to choose .
To this end , we are working on the review of the directive on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding ; the relevant progress report will be prepared for the June EPSCO .
The priorities of the Hungarian Presidency include raising awareness of the role of families in the context of responding to social , economic and demographic problems .
For this purpose , we will be organising a demographics week with the involvement of NGOs and with an informal meeting of ministers for family affairs .
The aim will be to discuss the means to be used to increase birth rates .
In all this , women , and women 's choices of course , have an exceptional role .
Special focus must be given to the situation of women belonging to disadvantaged groups in the European framework for the Member States ' Roma strategies , which we expect to be approved by the June European Council , and to which Mrs Járóka and others , the rapporteurs and helpers , have provided very valuable input in the European Parliament .
We expect that in the Council , too , we will declare that we intend to emphasise the role of Roma women in holding their families together , which would be a good basis to build upon when seeking answers to the issues of the Roma population .
Lastly , ladies and gentlemen , please allow me a brief digression .
Historic experience has shown that there cannot be a strong civil society without the active social involvement of women .
As Mr Buzek also mentioned , there were female protesters among those who demanded freedom in Tahrir Square , Cairo .
They , too , wish to become shapers of the changes that are taking place .
The European Union must encourage their efforts : generously , free of ideological stereotypes , openly and with sympathy .
Mr President , Mrs Győri , honourable Members , today , we remember the voices of those women who , on 19 March 1911 , set off from Germany , Austria , Denmark and Switzerland , gathering in numbers along the way , and going ever further to defend the rights of women to universal suffrage and to better working conditions .
Today , we pay homage to a century of struggle and of success that has benefited us all .
Where would our democracies be and , in particular , the European democracy represented here in the European Parliament , without the full participation of women in public life ?
Where would our societies and our economies be without the talent of women ?
In many ways , European women serve as role models for the rest of the world .
The place held by European women in our societies is a source of inspiration for women worldwide .
In this respect , I would like to mention the courageous struggle of women in North Africa who , shoulder to shoulder with men , are doing everything they can to resist dictatorships and establish democracies .
The active role that European women now have in the economic and political life of the European Union is the result of their determined commitment .
We welcome European integration , one of the founding principles of which is equality between men and women , a principle that is fully recognised in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Over the years , important legislation on equal treatment and gender mainstreaming in European policies has allowed us to move towards a more egalitarian society and labour market .
But we should also be outraged at what remains disappointing , unacceptable , or even intolerable .
I refer to an average rate of female employment at 62.5 % as opposed to 80 % for men , increasing academic success amongst women which contrasts with their career prospects : this is still disappointing and has to change .
Women are over-represented in lower paid and less secure jobs , and under-represented in positions of responsibility .
Disparity between the pay received by women and men stands at 18 % , which results in the risk of 22 % of women over the age of 65 falling below the poverty threshold as they have no adequate pension : this is unacceptable and has to change .
According to estimates , 20 to 25 % of women in the European Union have been subjected to physical violence at least once in their life .
This is intolerable and has to change .
Today , we must renew our commitment to continue working together so that gender equality really does become a reality .
We all stand to gain , whether in terms of social and economic cohesion , sustainable growth or competitiveness .
In September 2010 , the Commission adopted a strategy which set out five priority areas for action for the period 2010-2015 : equality in the labour market , equal economic independence for men and women , equal pay , equality in senior positions and promoting equality beyond the EU .
The Commission will continue to stand side by side with women from all corners of the earth who fight the daily battle for access to education and to the right to work , with those fighting for democratisation and for the exercise of freedoms and political and civil rights .
The Commission will do everything within its power to ensure that these goals become a reality .
However , we must not forget that legislation - however well implemented - is not the answer to everything .
Behaviour and attitudes must also change .
Honourable Members , today , we commemorate women 's fight for equality .
In Europe today , we can say that the EU would not be possible without European women , all European women !
They provide key inputs to our project based on values , including the values of gender equality .
Mr President , ' one is not born a woman , one becomes one ' .
This quotation shows that our concepts of what women and men are form the basis for all of our choices in life - choices dependent on our gender , not our interests , skills , commitment , etc .
Gender stereotypes place men and women in different pigeonholes , and a hundred years of fighting for equality has not succeeded in shattering these gender stereotypes .
However , we refuse to wait another hundred years , because it is these gender stereotypes , these norms that result , among other things , in 97 % of large companies being managed by men , in women suffering pay discrimination and having precarious jobs - when they have a job at all - and in the fact that it is women who are responsible for the unpaid work in the home .
It is women who shoulder the main responsibility for the children .
Women are subjected to violence , including within close relationships and in the form of sexual violence , and women are sold as commodities in the sex trade .
We are seeing the feminisation of poverty .
This has its origin in the various norms that society is composed of .
A great deal of progress has been made during the hundred years of fighting .
If I compare the opportunities that I have in terms of different life choices with those of my mother and my grandmother , I can see how much progress has been made , but there still remains a great deal to do .
Therefore , the fight will continue every day of the year , not just on 8 March .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today , we are celebrating the one hundredth International Women 's Day , commemorating the demonstration of worker women who protested for equal wages in New York in the mid-19th century .
The goal they set more than 150 years ago in 1857 , to ensure equal pay for equal work , is still relevant today .
In the European Union , women earn 15 % less than men ; this number is 16.5 % in my home country , Hungary , and even though more than half of the world 's total population comprises women , they only receive a 10 % share of global income .
Besides eliminating the gender gap in wages , the appropriate reinforcement of the role of women in the family and the assertion of the principle of equal treatment still remain to be solved .
We must not allow having children to represent a poverty risk in Europe , and being a woman or a mother to represent a disadvantage .
Whether we are looking at the initiatives launched within the UN or those within the European Union , true equality between men and women has still not been implemented in most places .
We lay little emphasis on the situation of women living close to the poverty line , on the phenomenon of multiple discrimination , and on combating domestic violence and violence committed against women .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today marks 100 years since we first celebrated International Women 's Day .
One hundred years ago , the fight was about women 's right to vote , among other things - something that we take for granted today .
However , there is still a long way to go to achieve full equality , and I would like to emphasise the importance of women being represented in the decision-making processes at all levels .
Women must be involved in politics , but they must also be involved in the world of business .
We must also have women in the banks .
We must not exclude half of the population from being involved in making the important economic decisions .
That is not democracy .
We need to use the whole of our talent base .
Quite simply , our competitiveness is also at stake .
I therefore welcome Commissioner Reding 's ' Women on the Board Pledge for Europe ' initiative .
It is very good that the EU will once again be leading the way when it comes to equality , but we need to have binding legislation if quotas for board members are to be anything other than symbolic politics , and I hope that you have the courage to do that .
Thank you .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the equality of all human beings is enshrined in the first two articles of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
This states : ' All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights .
They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood ' .
What a wonderful sentence .
However , even one hundred years after the first International Women 's Day , we still have not achieved this : there is still no sign of true equality between men and women .
Granted , we have achieved at great deal in Europe .
Today , our primary concern is no longer the legal freedom of women .
We have largely achieved this freedom .
I would like to express my gratitude to the feminists , both male and female , for their work in the past .
Today , our main concern is freedom in action , that men should take ownership of the issue of the compatibility of work and family life , and that seeing women at the top in business or politics is something that should become commonplace .
It is fantastic to see how the liberation movements in North Africa look to us , the women of Europe .
They look to us to play a pioneering role .
It is vitally important that we do not lose sight of our goal : the freedom to live our lives according to our own conceptions .
That is when equality will become something we take for granted and when International Women 's Day will be transformed from a day of remembrance to a day to celebrate freedom .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in which we now find ourselves does not really warrant a holiday , but should encourage us to agree once again on the implementation of genuine equality .
This 100th anniversary should be an occasion for us , as women , to look back and take stock .
For me , the results are as follows : equality must be enshrined in constitutions and declarations of human rights as a grand principle .
However , we need laws and regulations to make these principles a reality .
I believe that this also requires the use of quotas .
If we look at the European institutions , we can see that things are no better than at the top in the business world .
There are hardly any women right at the top in management positions .
If we are to achieve this , Mrs Reding , Mr Barroso , then we need genuine tough quota regulations .
I would have welcomed an honest appraisal from you of the lack of equality for women in the European institutions , because then you would have realised the importance of these quotas .
( Applause )
I believe that it is a shame that there is still no place at the table for women , however well qualified they may be , when managerial decisions are made and when strategic policies are planned .
The quota is the instrument whereby we can achieve this .
Mrs Reding , on this , the occasion of the 100th International Women 's Day , we call on you : make a genuine commitment to do all you can to promote a real quota for women in management positions - as is already the position in Norway , Spain and France .
I am at a loss to know why this issue has not already been addressed in Mr Barroso 's speech .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , last week in the United Kingdom , Lord Davies delivered his speech to the government on how to increase women 's participation in the boardroom .
His report consisted of voluntary targets for businesses .
No one can disagree that we need more women in the boardroom .
What I cannot accept is that we need quotas to get there .
How patronising is that ?
Almost as patronising as giving the women in this room a rose when they came in .
Well , I gave my rose to a man .
On a positive note , the UK is making real headway in the elimination of the gender pay gap .
The latest figures show that the pay gap between men and women in full-time employment is down to 10 % , the lowest since records began .
Finally , on International Women 's Day , I must pay tribute to motherhood .
True equality is having the right to choose and not be judged for these choices .
Whether a director in the boardroom , surgeon in the hospital , part-time care assistant , car mechanic or housewife and mother , a woman has the right to make her own choice .
( Applause )
Mr President , we welcome women 's struggle for freedom , social progress and peace at a time when we are celebrating 100 years of commemorations of International Women 's Day .
Women have struggled and achieved a great deal during those 100 years , but that has still not been enough to eliminate the existing inequalities , the discrimination that persists in accessing jobs with rights , the wage inequality which is reflected in pensions , the difficulty of career progression and professional achievement , and the obstacles to accessing management and decision-making positions in economic , social and political activity ; the tendency is for this situation to get worse at times of economic and social crisis .
Although motherhood is a social function indispensable to society 's development , discrimination against women for being mothers and workers continues , which , well into the 21st century , is scandalous .
We would reaffirm our group 's solidarity with the struggles of women here .
We continue to demand an end to inequality and discrimination , an end to all violence against women , and an end to gender stereotypes .
This requires not just a break with neoliberal policies , but also a serious commitment to alternative policies that put the issue of human rights and gender equality at the centre of decision making and EU policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , many goals have been reached but some battles have not yet even begun .
Today , the urgent issue is that of women of other cultures living in Europe and around the world in conditions where they struggle to demand even the minimum standards of dignity and humanity .
We cannot celebrate this holiday without bringing the issue of women in the Arab-Muslim world to the fore , otherwise we will continue to ignore a problem which is theirs today but will soon become ours as well .
We cannot ignore the numbers involved in a crisis that grows year by year in Europe , in our cities , and in the schools where our children grow up .
There has , for a long time , been an increase in cases of violence of all kinds suffered by Muslim women within their own families .
Hence , I have been asking for some time - and I ask for it again today - for Europe to put in place targeted policies against the spread of Islamic radicalism , against forced marriages , honour-rights , female genital mutilation and domestic violence .
We European men and women must fight for those women who live in Europe and beyond , who have no voice , and who are oppressed by the monster of Islamic fundamentalism .
Mr President , I , too , would like to pay tribute to all the women around the world and all the women in the last 100-plus years who have fought for equality .
It was in 1893 that New Zealand gave women the vote .
If I may pay tribute to my own country , it was in 1970 that a certain Labour politician , Barbara Castle , pushed forward the first equal pay act in the Western world .
Of course , it was the United Kingdom that had the first woman Prime Minister in Europe .
However , I think that the European Parliament has lost touch with reality .
I am against discrimination of any kind , even positive , as it inevitably leads to the creation of victims .
Women do not need to be patronised by quotas , and instead need barriers to their progress to be removed .
Member States would do better to focus on issues such as the need for improved childcare .
We have had a recent Court of Justice decision on car insurance that boycotts traditional , tried and tested , sensible methods of risk assessment .
Despite the EU 's stance on positively discriminating in favour of women , this case exemplifies politically correct Euro-babble , with a potty decision which actually makes life more difficult and expensive for women .
Common sense is a stranger to the European Union .
The debate is closed .
1 .
Request for the waiver of Mr Elmar Brok 's parliamentary immunity (
( FR ) Madam President , you know this since you yourself were disavowed by the European Court of Justice in an immunity case concerning me .
I am hopeful that the leniency we are showing towards Mr Brok for a financial affair will also apply to the freedom of expression of those Members of the House who belong to the minority .
The equality that prevailed 20 years ago in this House was a credit to it and to its Committee on Legal Affairs .
Unfortunately , the immunity system has turned into a party political issue .
I personally deplore this and hope that our institution will pull itself together .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I only have to clarify one statistic .
Due to a misunderstanding , the figure of EUR 2 900 was mentioned in the explanatory statements of the reports , whereas the correct figure is EUR 2 356.41 .
2 .
General product safety and market surveillance (
3 .
Management of H1N1 influenza (
4 .
Appointment of a Member of the European Court of Auditors ( Mr Harald Wögerbauer - AT ) (
5 .
General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean Agreement Area (
6 .
Innovative financing at a global and European level (
( FR ) Madam President , I regret that there is some confusion in this report by Mrs Podimata , which raises a number of important issues with regard to innovative financing .
I would like to ask the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament to withdraw the alternative motion it has tabled so that the joint drafting work that has been carried out can be concluded .
Secondly , I regret that a slightly artificial opposition has emerged on the issue of a tax on financial transactions and that there are two very similar amendments .
I regret that , as a result , Parliament cannot express its overwhelming support for this tax in conditions that are reasonable with regard to Europe 's competitiveness .

( DE ) Madam President , I can tell Mr Gauzès this : yes , we intend withdrawing this draft for an alternative resolution .
I recommended this to my group for a very simple reason : The following amendment , which has been signed by 120 Members from all groups , shows that proposals regarding a financial transaction tax are not the preserve of any one group , whether the socialists , conservatives , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) or the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
The point is that we are making an institutional proposal and issuing an institutional signal that this House is capable of saying on a cross-party basis : ' We want the private sector to pay its share in dealing with the burden of the crisis ' .
This is not a socialist demand , or a PPE Group demand ; it is our common wish .
If we manage to express this today on an institutional basis , then this will be a major success for the European Parliament .
This is why we are withdrawing this motion .
( Applause )
( EL ) Madam President , yesterday in plenary , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) put forward another proposal which could constitute a compromise .
It was : could it be made clear that resources will be channelled to the EU budget and the support mechanism ?
We tabled the subject for debate yesterday and we are waiting for a reply , so that we can reach a compromise and send a positive message to the EU institutions .
7 .
Reducing health inequalities (
( DA ) Madam President , I would like to address the Danes in particular .
In the Danish translation , the word ' equitable ' has been translated as ' ligelig ' .
This is not a good translation because people will then think that it means ' uniform ' .
Thus , in the final report , the word ' retfærdig ' , meaning ' equitable ' , will be used .
It has a different meaning , and I will , of course , recommend that all of our colleagues in the Danish delegation - and perhaps the Swedes have the same problem - vote in favour of the word being corrected in the report .
8 .
Cooperating with developing countries on promoting good governance in tax matters (
9 .
Agriculture and international trade (
10 .
EU protein deficit (
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this report examines how the 80 % protein deficit in the European Union can be reduced by promoting the cultivation of protein crops in Europe .
The point of the report is not to instigate a debate on the question of zero tolerance , Nor does it aim to make it easier to import genetically modified soya .
I would therefore implore you to vote against paragraphs 3 and 9 .
These amendments would lend the report a completely different character .
If these two items are accepted , I shall have to withdraw my name .
( DE ) Madam President , because the outcome of the vote has been to alter the report , I would ask you to have my name removed from the document .
I wish to hand back the report .
( Applause )
11 .
Equality between women and men - 2010 (
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in paragraph 66 , after the phrase ' stresses that women should have control over their sexual and reproductive rights , particularly through easy access to contraception and abortion ' , through this oral amendment , I propose that the following text should be added after the word ' abortion ' : ' whilst also recognising the right to life of the unborn child , calls on Member States and the Commission to implement measures and actions to support the continuation of the pregnancy by bringing in specific social and welfare policies which help women to overcome , wherever possible , the causes that lead them to choose abortion ' .
This oral amendment is to ensure the freedom of women to have safe access to the termination of a pregnancy , but also to affirm the principle that abortion is not a delayed method of contraception nor a means of birth control .
12 .
Female poverty (
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mrs Schaldemose for her report which , above all , must be praised for proposing concrete measures to strengthen the surveillance systems for movement within the common European market of products that are safe for European consumers .
It is an own-initiative report but it has the merit of going in the right direction to complete the single market and the protection of European consumers .
Ensuring safety means providing traceability systems that are reliable throughout the products ' life cycle .
In this respect , the report puts forward effective proposals : the creation of an information database on product safety ; the strengthening of the Community Rapid Information System ( RAPEX ) regarding unsafe products from third countries ; and greater resources to allow the surveillance authorities to withdraw products with serious risks from the market .
I will conclude by emphasising that it is our job to ensure that the products circulating on the European market are safe for the most vulnerable consumers , especially children , the elderly and the disabled .
( PL ) Madam President , there has been much discussion of the safety of consumers in relation to food products , yet we sometimes forget that normal items of everyday use can pose an equally serious threat to health , and sometimes even to life , particularly in the case of small children .
The basic tool used to monitor goods placed on the market is continuous market surveillance , and appropriate legislation is essential , particularly with regard to the monitoring of e-commerce .
It goes without saying that appropriate cooperation between consumer organisations , national authorities , manufacturers and sellers is essential .
Let us not be overzealous , however , and let us instead give calm consideration to a definition of a hazardous product .
Let us not forget that it is not only important that functional items be appropriately designed and that safe materials be used for their manufacture ; it is equally important that common sense be applied while using them , and that children who have access to them be properly supervised .
Thank you very much .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today , Parliament has adopted a report on the subject of general product safety , which is another important step towards strengthening the protection of European consumers .
In fact , the report stresses the importance of traceability throughout the lifecycle of the product and asks the Commission to undertake actions to assess and evaluate new technologies , ensuring consumer safety at optimised costs .
Giving European consumers the ability to know all aspects of a product increases awareness and strengthens their protection .
I believe that new technologies can help combat counterfeiting , especially in the textile sector .
The objective of this report is to protect consumers but also to protect all companies operating in Europe that have not decided to outsource their business .
Through this report , we can certainly find an excellent solution to the continuing dispute over the designation of non-European origin having full traceability .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the adoption of the report by Mrs Rivasi is the result of an assessment of the management of H1N1 influenza in 2009-2010 which aims to set general standards of conduct that would apply in any future global health emergency .
Following a long and successful revision phase , the report makes cooperation , independence and transparency its core principles .
It calls for greater and improved cooperation between the health authorities of the Member States and European institutions , in order to address harmonised and commensurate risk management .
Its objectives are a change in the strategy of Member States regarding their national plans for the management of influenza , including stocks of vaccine , the publication of the names of all the experts consulted by the European health authorities , and an efficient relationship of trust with the media responsible for disseminating public health messages .
That is why we voted in favour of it .
( PT ) Madam President , we know very well what happened with influenza A and it should serve as a lesson for us all .
I do not know whether you remember how all this started , but the truth is that it started one way and the subsequent response was completely disproportionate to the scale of the problem .
That is why the report voted on here today is so important : because we must learn from what was done so that it is not repeated .
We have a right to know who took the decisions , how everything happened and who it was that decided that it would happen that way .
We also have the right to know which countries responded in a certain way , and why it is that they responded in a non-transparent way without leaving us a minimum of doubt , because we still have our doubts whether there was any business .
We need a guarantee that no trace remains , whether or not any business was done in connection with this influenza .
That is why I believe , Madam President , that all public health risks must be tackled , but not irrespective of how this is done or who pays for them .
( PL ) Madam President , one of the key conclusions drawn in the report we have voted through on evaluation of the management of H1N1 influenza is the lack of an independent evaluation carried out by national and European healthcare bodies .
This results in ill-advised public health decisions .
It is alarming that , in the opinion of the former ECDC director , Zsuzsanna Jakab , never before had a vaccine been granted a marketing authorisation with so few data available on its effects .
She said this in response to a question on the safety of adjuvants in the vaccine against the H1N1 pandemic .
Greater transparency is needed for decisions which affect human health .
In Poland , the health minister decided not to purchase vaccines or implement a vaccination programme , in spite of pressure from the media and many other groups .
One could be forgiven for wondering how stressful it was for the citizens bombarded with information on a daily basis telling them that they should be vaccinated .
One could also be forgiven for wondering whether it is ethical to be focused exclusively on profit , and to neglect the health of citizens and , as a result , also undermine trust in official recommendations on vaccinations , which are intended to protect us against epidemics . Thank you very much .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , to date , the recommendations adopted by the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean ( GFCM ) have been transposed into European Union legislation on a provisional basis , by means of annual regulations on fishing opportunities .
These relate to measures for the conservation , management , exploitation , monitoring and marketing of fishery and aquaculture products in the Mediterranean .
The permanent character of these recommendations , however , requires a more stable legal instrument for their transposition into EU law .
It is therefore appropriate to transpose the recommendations in question via a single legislative act to which future recommendations may be added .
This is what we have done today and this will give greater certainty to the law while , at the same time , representing an important step towards simplification .
At this point , the parties to the GFCM are obliged to ensure full implementation of the measures agreed , starting from the established date .
Timely transposition was therefore necessary in order to make these international measures directly applicable to natural or legal persons across the EU and to ensure legal certainty in this regard .
( PL ) Madam President , our group endorsed this report , since it is an absolutely essential component of plans for a future common fisheries policy .
Given the changes that await us , regionalisation is extremely important , as is ensuring that this policy is built on the basis of this very regionalisation .
A debate awaits us on the subject of discards , a disgraceful debate on ill-conceived legislation .
Legislation should be based on measures of this kind , or , in other words , on regionalisation , and we should create a common fisheries policy that takes this into account . Thank you very much .
Madam President , if we look at the history of our common agreements , the common fisheries policy , the common agricultural policy , the result is , quite clearly , there for people to see .
While , in some areas , this has led us to increase production at artificial prices , we have also seen the depletion of our fishing stocks and we have seen problems with discards .
It is quite clear that that system has failed .
It is time for us to recognise that the best way forward is a system based on property rights and transferable property rights for future generations who have an interest in securing the resources for their generation and for future generations .
If only we could learn the rule of law , and if only we could apply property rights to fisheries policies , we would have sustainable fisheries policy not just for the common fisheries policy of the EU but globally , and we would have no need for these agreements .
Madam President , every day , thousands of tonnes of dead fish are tipped over the sides of vessels into the sea .
They sink - the scales and the bones are clogging the sea beds , suffering - as the UK 's national poet puts it - a sea change into something rich and strange .
For once , the metaphor is entirely apposite .
Now , the European Commission has belatedly woken up , years after this problem of discards first arose , and has attempted to do something about it .
However , every solution proposed by the Commission would bring perverse incentives of its own - one can limit the days a boat spends at sea , one can restrict the size of the mesh of the net , one can force skippers to land every last sprat they catch .
All of these things are based on the existential problem of the common fisheries policy , which is precisely that it is a common policy : it defines fisheries as a common resource to which all nations have equal access .
No one has ownership and therefore , no one has an incentive to treat fisheries as a renewable resource .
We need to copy what Iceland , New Zealand and the Falklands and other places have done , in giving skippers an incentive in conservation and giving them property rights .
The only way to do this is by re-establishing national control over territorial waters .

( DA ) Mr President , a large majority in Parliament has once again decided that we here in this House are to support a financial transaction tax .
Of all the taxes that we could possibly adopt , the so-called Tobin tax is the most stupid of all .
The only positive thing that can be said about this tax is that it has never come to anything , because if it was the Beast of the Apocalypse , why was it not implemented many years ago ?
The first time it came up for consideration was right back at the beginning of the 1970s .
However , every time there is a crisis , this old chestnut is reeled out , and after a little while , we come to the conclusion that it is not a good idea .
It is simply not a good idea to introduce a tax in Europe alone because we have safe havens , and so the capital can move to somewhere else in Europe .
It is a tax on trade rather than on profits .
The Tobin tax does not provide a solution to anything at all , and Mr Tobin himself acknowledged that a few years ago .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the current economic and financial crisis has revealed serious shortcomings in the regulatory and supervisory framework of the global financial system .
In the European Union , the financial crisis was followed by a significant fiscal crisis , an important factor of which was the excessive and , on several occasions , unjustified pressures of the markets against national bonds .
It was once more short-term and highly speculative transactions that were in the middle of that crisis and have underlined the clear connection between inefficient financial regulation on the one hand , and supervision and the sustainability of public finances , on the other .
The economic costs of the crisis are still to be fully assessed .
However , what is clear by now is that the world and the EU cannot afford and should not allow for another crisis of a similar magnitude .
In order to provide comprehensive and integrated responses to the crisis , we need new and innovative financing mechanisms which are capable of curbing speculation and re-establishing the primary role of the financial sector .
It is therefore necessary to change , and in an extremely positive way .
( FI ) Mr President , I am in favour of the introduction of a global transaction charge .
The Commission should not delay in carrying out an impact assessment as to whether such a charge could be initiated at European level in the first phase , and , following this study , the decisions should be taken by the EU .
Every year in London , tax revenue worth EUR 7 billion is collected by means of an additional stock exchange tax .
It is not quite the same as the transaction charge being discussed here , but the results from London and their impact are encouraging , so the Commission should carry out an impact assessment promptly , and then we should take the decisions at EU level .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the economic and financial crisis that has taken hold of Europe in recent years has revealed serious shortcomings in the regulatory framework .
We need to prepare new instruments capable of curbing speculation and restoring the role of the financial sector .
We need to meet the needs of the real economy and support long-term investments , while ensuring a fair distribution of the burden among the main financial players .
In this way , we will succeed in creating new additional resources in order to address global and European challenges , such as climate change and the objectives established in the Europe 2020 strategy .
I hope , however , that more attention will be paid to the measures for public supervision and transparency of innovative financing systems , since these are a sine qua non for their introduction .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the adoption of the report by Mrs Podimata represents a significant step forward for a more balanced , more progressive and stronger economic and fiscal policy in Europe .
It is now clear to everyone that Europe , as the coordinating authority of the 27 countries , urgently needs to equip itself with economic and financial instruments that are capable of controlling the economy and not just submitting to it .
For this reason , the proposed taxation of financial transactions has caused quite a stir and generated a large amount of attention and discussion .
The fact that the majority of this Parliament has voted for this regulation is important and significant because , for the first time , things were not just left to ride and instead , we have achieved a step forward .
I do hope that the Commission and the Council will continue on this path .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the current economic crisis has revealed serious shortcomings in the framework for monitoring the financial sector and the need to respond with new instruments and new fiscal policies .
The financial system has started to generate profits from speculative transactions and it is absurd that this sector is not subject to any taxation .
We need a cure , a financial transaction tax , which is why I voted in favour .
For other policies such as energy or the environment , Europe has managed to be the world leader , becoming an example and a stimulus for other countries outside the European Union .
I believe we should do the same for the financial system .
I hope that the Commission will respond soon , presenting a legislative proposal that can meet the expectations of citizens , on whom the burden of the crisis has fallen .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , introducing a new tax is always a measure to be considered with great care .
If , on the one hand , it allows the introduction of a system of incentives that reduces risk and negative externalities , on the other hand , it certainly creates distortions that could penalise European financial markets .
I am convinced that the income from speculative activities and financial transactions should be taxed , just as I also feel that it is appropriate that the pros and cons should be assessed carefully and that a tax of this kind should be thoroughly investigated so that it produces the desired effects without ceasing to generate wealth .
However , I must point out that , logically , if the Union was to act in isolation , it might lose competitiveness and would not have any practical means of inducing other global economic players to follow suit .
This is precisely why I favour taxation , provided it is introduced globally and after discussion amongst the G20 .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today , we were delighted to adopt the measures proposed by Mrs Podimata .
For those of us in the Italian delegation of the Italia dei Valori party within the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , this was a moment of great satisfaction , because it shows that Parliament knows how to follow up its statements of principle .
In fact , as early as the debate on the report by Mrs Berès on the financial , economic and social crisis , we had argued in favour of a tax on financial transactions .
This was done today , so we are delighted to declare that we voted in favour because this tax will shift financial resources from the financial economy - and therefore away from financial speculation - to the real economy .
The tax will also respond to the Millennium Development Goals and contribute to large European projects in infrastructure , research , ecological restructuring and in our system of production .
Mr President , when we look back at this financial crisis , we have to make sure that we learn some lessons .
For example , we have to learn the lesson that inappropriate regulation can sometimes cause a problem , as the Community Investment Act in the United States did .
It encouraged banks to lend to customers who were not creditworthy .
When one in ten of those customers defaulted , that started a subprime crisis and we have been seeing the consequences ever since .
We have to understand the consequences of printing money too cheaply and of holding interest rates down so that people make investments based on bad decisions , and of not recognising that money itself has a value .
As the Austrian economist , Ludwig von Mises said , if you make those bad decisions and create malinvestment , when the market corrects itself , everyone loses out and the credit cycle bursts .
This is exactly what we saw .
We also have to learn the lesson that banks should never again be allowed to be too big to fail .
If we put in place this tax to raise money , what message will it give to banks ?
Banks will say to themselves that they can continue to operate as they did before , without due care , and that they can collapse and the taxpayer will bail them out .
It is time we learned the lessons of the financial crisis .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the clear proof that the right to European citizenship is still not guaranteed lies in the serious inequalities that still exist between Member States .
Compared with other places , there is no right to health that can be exercised to the same extent in Bulgaria or Romania , so it is evident that this resolution , with all its complications , can be a useful point of reference .
Today , we celebrate International Women 's Day and there is no doubt that access to treatment and support is still much more complicated for women .
Therefore , we need more information , more prevention , treatment and rehabilitation , and healthier lifestyles .
Appropriate lifestyle choices are what is required , so we must say no to addiction , no to obesity , to alcohol , to smoking and to infectious diseases .
To do this , we need a real cohesion policy that looks at the issue of the right to health as a truly European goal .
( DE ) Mr President , our primary concern must always be to maintain health and secondly , to restore health .
Education is the key in all Member States .
Healthy nutrition and exercise and a good level of general education are particularly important .
In essence , this is a matter for the Member States .
Europe should promote the sharing of experience in relation to health education in the various areas .
I voted against this report despite its many good ideas .
I am completely opposed to paragraphs 25 , 26 and 29 .
The important ethical and moral decisions of the Member States , such as reproduction techniques and abortion , have no place here .
To mention abortion in the same sentence as contraception without even considering the right to life does not reflect the will of Christian Europe .
( FI ) Mr President , it is quite true that health inequalities vary quite a lot within the European Union .
The Member States are very different , as are their practices and traditions .
It is obvious that if we look ahead and want to narrow this difference between health services at European Union level , we will need more training , education and awareness of what things affect health .
Obviously , socio-economic status has received a good deal of attention in this report , but I myself believe that a focus on the very basic issues , including access to health services , exercise , diet , and these sorts of things are important .
These are what we need to highlight and stress the importance of if we look ahead and want to build a better and healthier Europe .
In my opinion , we need an exchange of best practices .
I myself abstained from voting on this report because I believe that it contained a lot that is irrelevant .
I hope that we can concentrate on narrowing health inequalities universally in the European Union .
Mr President , I think one of my major concerns over the last few years , when we have been discussing the idea of taxation at international level , has been the attack on countries such as the Cayman Islands , when all they have done is heed the advice we have given them when it comes to development issues .
For many years , we have been telling the islands of the Caribbean and other developing countries that they should diversify away from sugar and bananas , start to go up the value chain , and start to get expertise when it comes to services .
The Cayman Islands have done that , and now about 40 to 50 % of their economy is in financial services , thanks to their system of tax neutrality .
Not tax evasion , but tax neutrality .
They do not double- and treble-tax the funds that decide to locate there .
But what do the hypocritical imperialists of the European Union do when the Cayman Islands decide to compete with them on taxation ?
They decide to act like the imperialists of old , and try to attack the Cayman Islands for wanting to compete with the EU .
Shame on this EU imperialism !
Mr President , I found it very difficult to support my friend Ms Joly 's report , because she started talking about a European and global tax .
USD 880 billion worth of funds leave developing countries through various legal and illegal means and are deposited in European and western banks .
We , in return , put 60 to 70 billion of European taxpayers ' money into developing countries for poverty elimination programmes .
Had that money - that USD 880 billion that escapes out of developing countries and is deposited in our banks - been left in those developing countries to develop those countries , how much better would it be that they would grow faster , have capital formation abilities , have property rights and commercial practices ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at a time when the European Union is called on to reform its common agricultural policy , ensuring consistency between agricultural and external trade policy becomes all the more crucial .
Agriculture and trade are , in fact , two intersecting policy agendas .
Their dynamics influence and , to an increasing extent , are influenced by regulatory settings at the multilateral , inter-regional , regional and bilateral level .
These regulatory settings are not static , however ; they create hierarchies and evolve through negotiations .
Regulative diversity , divergent commercial interests , trade tensions and disputes reflect the complexity of domestic agricultural policies and international trade .
Since agriculture is not simply an economic activity , but agricultural and food policies are to serve fundamental objectives , such as food and consumer safety , the principal challenge now consists of effectively accommodating trade and non-trade concerns .
Our trade policy will therefore have a crucial role in deciding whether agriculture will continue to make a positive and full contribution to these objectives without affecting its dynamics .
( PL ) Mr President , food security is a priority for the common agricultural policy .
In order to achieve genuine food security , we should maintain proper proportions in international trade .
Fair competition should be recognised as playing a key role in this respect .
European farmers and food producers have to meet exorbitant EU standards and spend a great deal of money adapting their products to meet restrictive standards and rules .
Yet the EU does not , in practice , have any control over producers and farmers from third countries , from which we import huge quantities of food products .
Firstly , such agreements are unfair to our native producers , and secondly , such a policy is also hazardous as far as the health of European consumers is concerned , since the EU has no real control over the quality of these products , and this must be changed immediately .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to say that I voted in favour of this report because I believe that it outlines very clearly the problems faced by the European Union 's agricultural sector and farmers , especially in terms of trade policy .
Let me be very clear , the European Union 's agricultural sector should not be sacrificed in any way in order to secure trade arrangements such as with Mercosur .
Unfortunately , however , I feel that that is precisely the direction in which things are going .
There seems to be a perception that European agriculture can be used as an easy bargaining chip .
If this is indeed the case , I foresee major problems in many sectors of agriculture , and especially in the livestock sector .
With regard to equivalent standards , no one should be threatened by what we demand , which is that imports into the EU should meet the same standards as required of our own producers .
Surely we have a responsibility to our consumers to ensure that this is the case .
I am also very unhappy with the Commission 's attitude to Parliament in this regard .
It is unacceptable that it should try and keep us in the dark .
As negotiations continue , I want the view of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to be taken on board .
( PL ) Mr President , the Papastamkos report makes some very good proposals .
The EU is engaged in numerous multilateral and bilateral trade negotiations with various groups such as the World Trade Organisation .
Trade in agricultural products plays a key role in this area , particularly with regard to access to the European Union 's markets .
The EU is a net importer of agricultural products .
In the four years following the reform of the sugar market , we went from being a net exporter to being a net importer .
We import 70 % of agricultural products ; products which are exported by developing countries .
We have a trade deficit with the Mercosur countries .
As Mr Kalinowski said , agricultural products which are produced in line with other standards are imported to EU markets , while European farmers incur huge costs associated with animal welfare or environmental protection .
We cannot destroy the achievements of the common agricultural policy , which is funded from the EU budget , by means of decisions which reduce the effectiveness of this policy .
We must be sure that the necessary synergy exists between the common agricultural policy and the trade policy conducted by the EU .
( FI ) Mr President , I also wish to say a few words about this report by Mr Papastamkos , which is very thorough .
I might also say that it gives a good and broad picture of how the European Union 's agricultural policy and trade policy are interrelated and the sort of policymaking tool agricultural policy functions as in the EU .
It is obviously true that , when we look at our budget too , agriculture is an important part of it .
That is why the subject of agriculture always comes up when there is talk of EU policy .
On this point , it is worth remembering that , as we also import a lot of food into the European Union from various places , especially from third countries , we need to adhere to these ethical standards .
Purity is a very important issue in this respect .
It is also important to remember that we need to attend to the matter of agricultural production on our own continent , in different parts , including the peripheral countries , Finland too , where there are very high levels of expertise , pure products , and so forth .
When we speak of agricultural policy , and if , in the future , we continue to invest in it , we have to maintain these high ethical standards .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the Papastamkos report .
I would like to express my admiration for this report , and I am glad that the European Parliament has declared itself firmly in favour of defending Europe 's food security , which is under threat as a result of excessive concessions in international trade negotiations on food .
There is a strong lobby group in the European Union working to reduce food production in Europe and increase food imports from third countries , since they make profits on these exports .
This was apparent during the reform of the sugar market , for example .
The European Union should not give in to this lobby group , but oppose it out of concern for its own food security .
A policy of giving in to this lobby group at a time of increased food demand is a suicidal policy in the long term .
( LV ) Mr President , fair trade in agricultural products is one of the most important driving forces in the economic development of developing countries .
It is also essential to help reduce poverty and prevent food crises .
Many regions and countries in Europe are dependent on agriculture , especially the newest Member States , in which agriculture receives significantly smaller direct payments than representatives of the older Member States .
What is more , these regions also have to compete with Latin American producers , who do not have to comply with equally strict quality standards , and who enjoy reduced customs tariffs .
This type of situation markedly reduces our farmers ' competitiveness and profits .
That is why I supported this report , because it calls for a review of European Union trade policy , a regular evaluation , the application of uniform standards to agricultural products from third countries , and the opening of the market to third-country agricultural produce only if our farmers receive compensation for the losses that they would suffer from the increased volume of imports of third-country agricultural products . Thank you .
Mr President , when I speak to my friends in many of the poorer countries of the world and ask them what is the best way in which we can help them to alleviate and tackle poverty in their country , they often say that aid is not the answer .
What would help them would be for us to help the entrepreneurs in their country to create wealth locally , and for them to be able to trade with us in the European Union .
We can help by opening up our markets .
One of the big problems with that statement is the fact that we have the common agricultural policy .
The United States has all sorts of subsidies as well .
While we preach open trade , we are being hypocritical when we close our markets to the very good produce from developing countries .
On top of that , we use something called sanitary and phytosanitary standards .
Of course we all want safer food , but quite often , these standards are used as a non-tariff barrier against imports from developing countries .
It is time to trust the consumers .
As long as food is safe , let the consumers decide whether they want food grown in Europe or grown elsewhere .
Let us stop subsidising unprofitable and unfeasible industries in Europe .
Mr President , the European Union 's common agricultural policy is unmatched in its wastefulness , in its corruption , in its Byzantine bureaucracy , in its selfishness , in its hypocrisy and in its immorality .
At the end of the 1950s , the Argentinean Ambassador to the EU was the appointed spokesman of the developing countries .
He said that if Europe had to subsidise its farmers , then they understood that and that they did not like our keeping out their products but they understood it , but he asked us not to land them the double blow of then dumping our surpluses on their markets .
The EU did not listen then and it has not listened since .
The last World Trade talks were given the optimistic title ' Everything but Arms ' .
Of course , these quickly descended into everything but farms , because the EU is determined to retain this protected and subsidised position for this one niche sector .
Infer from what has happened .
The common agricultural policy has existed since 1960 .
This is what the EU has been doing for longest .
If this is what we have come up with - the ecological calamity , the poverty , the inflationary consequences of higher food prices - what are we thinking of if we want to give these same institutions additional powers ?
Mr President , normally I agree one hundred percent with what my friend , Mr Kamall , says , but today I beg to differ .
I have come to the view , having thought about it long and hard , that food security is a very important aspect of our global population growth .
The European Union should be secure in its own food security .
This means self-sufficiency .
Not over-production , where we dump on developing countries , or under-production , where we take food from the mouths of hungry people .
So we should go for self-sufficiency in Europe , self-sufficiency in Asia , and self-sufficiency in Africa and the United States .
If we have self-sufficiency as our target in our programmes , then everything else can come into play on international trade .
Food is something that we cannot play with .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the Häusling report .
Protein is essential for healthy animal nutrition .
Europe needs to take action in order to assure a reliable supply of protein .
We must pursue all avenues here , from support for research and cultivation to information and training for farmers in relation to the advantages of established practices and crop rotation .
Let us not lose sight of the proven principle of a circular economy .
The Commission must review the ban on the feeding of animal protein to non-ruminants , while still respecting the ban on cannibalism .
Specifically , it needs to consider the possible use of animal protein for bone meal for pigs and poultry .
These materials must be prepared according to the current stringent regulations for protecting human health and the environment .
Valuable sources of protein are currently being destroyed here simply because we are not able to organise ourselves to deal with these products correctly .
( PL ) Mr President , I regret the fact that the Häusling report , which is a good report , could not gain the support of its own author due to ill-advised amendments .
I , too , voted against its adoption .
I believe that there are no grounds for using the amendments to this report to promote concessions on GMOs in the European Union , and that we should not promote GMOs .
Europe should defend traditional and natural agriculture .
Genetically modified crops pose a threat to agriculture in Europe and to food security , and for these reasons , I agree with the rapporteur .
I followed his example on this matter . Thank you very much .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Nedelcheva , for her contribution .
Talking about equality between men and women in the world of work today is not , and must not be , merely an exercise in rhetoric .
On the contrary , female employment is a strategic issue for Europe , in both cultural and economic terms .
As is evident from the available data , if the employment rates for women were similar to those of men , gross domestic product would increase by 30 % .
The current crisis must not , therefore , force us to take backward steps but , on the contrary , must make us move forward towards active policies on female employment .
We therefore need targeted employment policies that allow the impact of the crisis on women to be assessed and counter-cyclical solutions to be considered .
The report has the merit , moreover , of focusing on positive policies to promote the employment of women , the issue of vocational training and female entrepreneurship .
I will conclude by saying that there is another phenomenon to face : the serious problem of violence against women .
Europe now needs to have a comprehensive directive on preventing and combating all forms of violence against women .
( DA ) Mr President , listening to the debate on quotas for women on the boards of listed companies , it is clear that here in this Chamber , trench warfare is being waged again and again , and that is indeed a shame .
I will not make a secret of the fact that I am very much opposed to statutory quotas , partly because I think that it is bad for the companies , but also because it is bad for those qualified women who will automatically be marginalised on the boards . I therefore say ' no ' to quotas .
However , we could take the pragmatic approach and discuss whether we could not require listed companies to draw up an equality policy and some objectives of their own , where they decide themselves what these objectives are to be .
That would be good for the women who manage to get onto the board with this approach , but also for the companies , because they will have ownership of the objectives that they are to implement .
I believe that we should try a little pragmatism for the sake of the companies and the women concerned .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the reports on equality between women and men and female poverty in Europe and I am delighted that this has been debated on the very day that we celebrate the hundredth anniversary of International Women 's Day .
Notwithstanding Directive 2002 / 73 / EC on equal treatment between men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training , promotion and working conditions , further efforts still need to be made to achieve proper transposition .
Suffice it to say that , although the level of female education has increased significantly in recent years and the number of female graduates is now higher than that of male graduates , women remain concentrated in traditionally female sectors and are frequently paid less and occupy fewer positions of responsibility in all spheres of society .
The lack of access to support services for their dependents , such as children , the disabled and the elderly , to adequate leave schemes and to flexible working arrangements , all impede women from working .
I would like to close by remembering the women of the world who are fighting for the most basic of rights and I would like this House to express its solidarity with the Iranian feminist associations that are today taking to the streets , inviting women to demonstrate without the hijab .
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to explain briefly why I did not support the resolution assessing 2010 from the perspective of equality .
The text of the resolution supports equality between women and men in many areas , while , at the same time , supporting abortion - the termination of a new life .
The text is in conflict with United Nations resolutions stating that abortion should never be used as a form of birth control .
In adopting this resolution , the European Parliament is not only meddling in the affairs of nation states , but more than anything ignoring the right to life enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Human Rights .
I am sorry that a majority of Parliament has supported this text .
It is an alarming signal , and I call on national organisations and associations to protest to the MEPs who represent them in the European Parliament .
( FI ) Mr President , I think that it is very important that we speak about equality between women and men in the European Parliament , and not just today , when we are celebrating a special day : we need to talk about it all the time .
It is truly important to remember that we were created as men and women .
That is a source of wealth , but it does not mean that if you are a man or a woman , you are somehow worse or weaker : we were also created equal .
That is why it is very important to ensure that now at last in the 2010s , we can be equal in Europe , which would mean that men and women would also be treated in the same way in the labour market .
Of course , the situation now is that women have continually been worse off with regard to pay and so on , and that cannot be the case in a civilised society .
Instead , we need to ensure that equality can be implemented in the true meaning of the word .
As far as quotas are concerned , they will be needed as long as we adopt a way of thinking where everyone is equal , and then it is ultimately competence in the labour market that will be the decisive factor .
( ES ) Mr President , today we have passed one more initiative but we must , as the Commissioner said , move from words to deeds .
Despite measures , inequality persists .
Women are well educated .
According to the most recent data from universities , they are the achieving better results , but we continue to be discriminated against .
This is especially the case for women who are disabled , elderly women and immigrant women , who suffer double discrimination .
Today , in addition to this initiative , we have heard many statements but we are not prepared to set an example .
It is sufficient to look at what gender the President of the Commission is or to examine the members of the Council , the rotating presidencies , the President of the Council , the President of Parliament and the President of the Court of Auditors ; at the members of the European Central Bank , among whom , for the first time , there will be no women ; at the chairs of this institution 's parliamentary groups ; or at the lack of women in the delegations of some countries .


The image of European politics remains male .
We have a very long way to go .
That is why I voted for this initiative .
I believe in quotas as the way to make progress along this difficult path and , above all , in the motto I started with : from words to deeds .
( LV ) Mr President , although the situation with women 's rights has improved , I should nevertheless like to draw attention to at least three aspects .
First , differences in rates of pay are still significant , and during the crisis , these differences have increased , because we have opted to support the banks , and not schools and nurseries , which predominantly employ women .
Second , support for women , mothers-to-be and new mothers is insufficient , especially in the new Member States .
There is also discrimination in the labour market .
Third , in politics , where the ideal male-female ratio would be 50 : 50 , women 's participation is still considerably smaller .
The same phenomenon can be seen in management roles .
I believe that this report of ours will not be capable of giving a new impetus to the resolution of these problems .
( FI ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report , and also in favour of quotas .
I wish , with regard to this , to thank Commissioner Reding , for having proposed - or perhaps I should say that she has issued an ultimatum - that she would take action unless there were more women in listed companies a year from now .
In fact , in doing this , the Commissioner is only implementing the EU treaties and directives that say that men and women are equal .
I know that quotas arouse conflicting feelings , and that they do not represent proper democracy , but neither does this situation that we are in now .
In Finland , quotas were introduced at local government level 10 to 15 years ago .
They were opposed and seen as something that would cheapen women and it was thought that there were not enough women to fill these positions .
The women were found , however , and practice has shown that , in Finland at least , these quotas at local government level work very well .
Mr President , thank you for stepping in and chairing this session , and may I thank your staff and the interpreters .
The recent ruling that insurers may not discriminate on the basis of sex in order to factor in differences in driving ability or differences in longevity is flawed on so many levels that it is difficult to know where to begin .
Take , first , the expense .
This will cost an extra billion pounds .
Premiums will rise and fewer people will take up insurance .
Secondly , take the poor jurisprudence , the way in which the European Court of Justice is ruling on the basis of European Court of Human Rights precedent .
Thirdly , take the bad faith .
When the equality and non-discrimination directives were passed , it was clearly understood that actuarially justified distinctions would still be justifiable .
Take , fourth , the judicial activism , the way in which our judges have disregarded what the law says in favour of what they think the law ought to say .
Take , fifth , the attack on free contract .
If you want to insure me and I am happy to accept the terms you offer , it is not for the State to come between us and declare our transaction illegal .
Then take , sixth , the knock-down argument : what has any of this to do with the European Union ?
Surely each country could work out its own rules on sex equality in accordance with its own proper democratic mechanisms and procedures .
Mr President , a court with a mission is a menace .
A supreme court with a mission is a tyranny .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , female poverty is a long-standing issue that has historic causes and is certainly not the product of an economic crisis .
I therefore voted in favour of the report by Mrs Plumb since I am convinced of the need to maintain a strong commitment , both in Europe and at a national level , to supporting further progress towards gender equality .
I believe that the measures contained in this report will provide useful support - perhaps not exhaustive , but it is a step forward - to the strategies for implementing the European Pact for Gender Equality adopted by the European Council and to the framework of action on gender equality .
The promotion by Member States of specific programmes to promote the active inclusion or reintegration of women into the labour market is the best decision in that respect .
However , it is essential that these programmes are not only coordinated at local , national and European level , but also find ways of coordinating with partners outside the European Union .
( ES ) Mr President , women have always done the unseen work : doing the housework and providing emotional support ; things that you cannot buy and for which you cannot hire somebody in .
However , we have not valued it .
Women are now entering the labour market .
However , we continue to be at risk of poverty , a situation which is worsening in the context of the economic crisis .
I voted for this initiative as it is our obligation to eradicate poverty among women .
This can be done by strengthening legislative instruments and measures so as to be able to reduce the pay gap between men and women .
We must implement active employment policies in women 's favour and revise social protection systems , with special consideration for older women and those with disabilities .
Let us promote the entry of women into the labour market , as they bring increased profits , and let us reduce the gender pay gap , because that will increase gross domestic product by 13 % , as a number of studies are showing .
It is a matter of justice , but it is , above all , an opportunity for competitiveness in Europe .
Written explanations of vote
Under the German Criminal Code and Tax Code , the offence of tax evasion can only be punished if the taxpayer is aware that it is a case of tax evasion and does it intentionally .
In this case , there was clearly no intention of tax evasion , since the sum in question was paid transparently , credited to a Member 's current account , after he had invoiced the company Speakers Agency for it .
Moreover , it is fairly common for accidental failure to declare small sums , as in this case , to generally be treated exclusively within the scope of administrative proceedings .
The fact that this failure was treated in this way and that Mr Brok was not even directly informed that he had been accused is completely out of the ordinary .
The fact that the Public Prosecutor has not even quantified the precise amount of tax owed - also by way of non-payment of interest - makes the case for fumus persecutionis even stronger .
Under these conditions , it is inappropriate to waive the Member 's immunity .
I agree with the report when it finds it inappropriate to waive the Member 's immunity .
In truth , criminal charges have been brought against a well-known political figure in respect of a sum and in circumstances which would , in the case of an ordinary citizen , have attracted merely administrative proceedings .
The case is one of fumus persecutionis in that it appears that the proceedings were brought with the sole aim of damaging the reputation of the Member concerned .
I voted against waiving the immunity of Elmar Brok , because criminal charges have been brought against this well-known political figure in respect of a sum and in circumstances which would , in the case of an ordinary citizen , have attracted merely administrative proceedings .
Moreover , the public prosecutor not only sought to withhold knowledge of the charge from Mr Brok on spurious and highly derogatory grounds for no due cause , but made sure that the case received great publicity in the media , thus inflicting the maximum amount of damage on the Member concerned .
The case is one of fumus persecutionis in that it appears that the proceedings were brought with the sole aim of damaging the reputation of the Member concerned , and therefore in these circumstances , it would be completely inappropriate to waive the Member 's immunity .
in writing . - I abstained on this report .
While , on the one hand , I have the highest admiration for the work done by Mr Brok , on the other , I have serious doubts about using parliamentary immunity to prevent due legal process on a tax avoidance case .
Paying tax is a duty that no citizen should be able to shirk .
This has been pointed out to Mr Brok .
The purpose of immunity is not to offer protection from criminal offences but to protect freedom of expression .
I am therefore pleased that he has rectified his mistake .
The report is nonetheless unpleasant on more than one account .
Mr Speroni , EUR 5 000 is not a negligible amount , and no one forced Mr Brok into this situation .
Therefore , the accusations of persecution for ' the accidental omission of a minor sum ' are , to my mind , completely uncalled-for .
I shall vote against .
Defending the independence of the mandate of Members of this House is the responsibility of Parliament , and that independence cannot be jeopardised .
With respect to the allegations , the Member is the target of fumus persecutionis , in other words , the proceedings were brought with the sole aim of damaging the reputation of the Member concerned .
I am therefore not in favour of waiving his immunity .
in writing . - Despite the fact that , personally , I dislike Elmar Brok because of his inappropriate behaviour and anti-Ukrainian rhetoric , I think that there should be compelling reasons for the waiver of the immunity .
It is well known that the request for waiver was set out in a letter from the Public Prosecutor of Bielefeld in which he claimed that Mr Brok failed to include in his income tax declaration for 2005 a fee of EUR 5 000 for a speech he had given in Munich on 28 October 2005 at the ' Europa Forum ' held by the HypoVereinsbank Group , for which tax was due on an amount of EUR 2 900 .
It is also known that Mr Brok did not pay this money and was caught for that mistake .
Nowadays , immunity is used as a kind of ' cudgel ' for settling one 's account or as ' loose change ' for manipulation of Members of Parliament .
The German Public Prosecutor has requested the waiver of the parliamentary immunity of a Member , Mr Brok .
These proceedings relate to a failure to disclose on his income tax return fees relating to a talk given in Munich , for receipt of which he owed EUR 2 900 in tax , but which has now been paid .
However , it refers to the legal opinion that the proceedings in question would not have been handled in the same way if he had been a normal citizen and that there are strong indications of political persecution .
Under these specific circumstances , and as this is fumus persecutionis , I voted in favour of not waiving Mr Brok 's parliamentary immunity .
in writing . - With this report , the EP decided not to waive the immunity of Elmar Brok .
I am voting in favour of this report .
The proper functioning of the internal market requires safe products and confident consumers .
The central concern being to make it safer , this should not be an obstacle to its enlargement .
Following the adoption of a common approach for defining product specifications , with progress reflected in the strengthening of the general safety of products within the internal market , improvements can still be made , as too many accidents with tragic consequences still occur in this area , particularly involving children .
Directive 2001 / 95 / EC on general product safety ( GPSD ) , which regulates general requirements relating to product safety , was adopted around ten years ago , and so revision of it is a priority , in order to bring to an end the existence of two levels of divergent rules relating to the market oversight that is imposed on and applied to harmonised goods , depending on whether consumer goods are involved or not .
The relevant legislative framework consists of three elements : a new legislative framework , the GPSD and harmonisation directives by sector .
It is therefore important to harmonise this complex situation .
The inhabitants of the EU must be able to have confidence in the safety of all goods being sold on the EU market , and high standards of health and safety must always apply .
This is a timely and important report and I welcome its contents , especially as regards sharing information on studies relating to the safety of products , in order to cut down on duplication of services to save time and resources .
European consumers must be certain that the products being imported into the EU are of the same standard as those made there and that the expansion of trade would not affect product safety .
I support the request to the Commission in the report to do more within the International Consumer Product Safety Caucus to ensure that dangerous materials are not introduced into the single market .
It is vital that the single market is able to deal with the online market and the impact which that has on product safety and market surveillance .
It is reported that there is an increase in the number of products which are being purchased online from third countries and which contravene EU standards , putting EU consumers at risk .
I voted in favour of this important document .
The General Product Safety Directive 2001 / 95 / EC ( GPSD ) , which regulates the general safety requirements for products , was adopted almost 10 years ago and has yet to be revised , although there have been many changes globally and within the EU over the last decade .
There are still many issues in this field that need to be addressed for EU consumers to feel safe .
Products for children demand particularly careful regulation .
Every year , there are accidents in the EU when children use unsafe products , and sometimes this even results in death .
Strengthening market surveillance must be a key feature of the revision of the General Product Safety Directive , ensuring the traceability of products and manufacturers and laying down and applying standardisation principles , which would facilitate better protection of our consumers and would provide them with clearer and more accurate information about products they have bought .
The revision of Directive 2001 / 95 / EC aims to ensure a high level of health and safety protection for consumers , paying special attention to the most vulnerable consumers , namely , children and the elderly .
It seeks to institute transparency and more active oversight of the markets , as well as more rapid means of intervention enabling products considered dangerous to be withdrawn from the market .
The proper functioning of the internal market requires safe products and informed consumers with the ability to choose .
For these reasons , I supported this report .
In my opinion , the good functioning of the single European market also involves product safety and consumer confidence .
The drive towards the free movement of goods and a further expansion of product diversity must not , in fact , deflect attention from consumer protection .
In the context of the globalisation of markets , in which more and more products come from abroad - and especially from China - international cooperation on matters related to product safety becomes a priority .
Directive 2001 / 95 / EC governs the general safety requirements applicable to goods .
However , the transposition of this directive by Member States has not happened in a uniform manner and has raised a number of issues concerning both its scope of application and the actual dangers associated with the products .
I therefore believe that it is crucial to review it so that we can detect and block products that are unsafe , thus ensuring complete protection of the interests of European citizens .
Finally , I fully support Mrs Schaldemose 's proposal to adopt concrete measures in the field of product traceability .
It is my belief that these measures will allow authorities , businesses and consumers to identify those products which , after entering the European market , do not prove to be safe .
Today , more than ever , the European single market needs regulatory instruments that will establish uniform controls on the safety of goods sold in our countries .
We urgently need this because we have to protect our consumers from the wave of products , especially those from countries such as China , that very often are designed and packaged without taking the least account of end-user safety .
We must monitor the goods that enter our markets for their quality and for their compatibility with our consumer safety standards and we must , above all , combine national practices in the area of market surveillance - which are sometimes very different from each other - into one instrument .
Putting the proposals of this report into practice will therefore mean obtaining a text as soon as possible to resolve the current problems of European legislation , where several directives overlap , sometimes without covering all fields of application and all possible case studies on the safety of the marketed goods .
Good results can also be expected from the exchange of best practices among Member States , as strongly recommended by the report , in the final overview of the proposals of Mrs Schaldemose 's text .
For these reasons , I will vote in favour of the report by Mrs Schaldemose .
The products available on the internal market have steadily expanded and multiplied over the last 10 years .
This is roughly when the General Product Safety Directive came into force , which regulates the general requirements ensuring that products do not endanger a person 's safety .
This is why the motion for revising this directive is more than timely .
We currently have a directive which only partially overlaps with the new legislative framework adopted in the middle of 2008 .
Correlating the regulations would provide us with more chances of achieving the aim of a coherent internal market for both harmonised and non-harmonised products , as well as offer comprehensive protection for consumer interests .
At the same time , these regulations need to be totally transparent so that they are accessible to manufacturers .
Consequently , it is important for us to get rid of the two overlapping layers of diverging market surveillance rules applying to harmonised goods , depending on whether they are consumer products or not .
Market surveillance is closely linked to product safety as it is a key element in ensuring that products comply with the requirements stipulated in the relevant EU harmonisation legislation and that they are not dangerous .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of this report , which proposes to review the General Product Safety Directive .
In fact , I am strongly convinced that the single market can only function well if it strengthens consumer confidence and provides them with safe products .
In fact , European Directive 2001 / 95 / EC , which governs general safety standards applicable to goods , was approved 10 years ago : now is the time to update it in light of the arrival of new products on the market .
Consumer safety and protection have always been priorities for our political action and hence it is essential to review this directive by updating the rules on safety requirements for products and aligning the legislation of the new regulatory framework .
I agree with the need to implement certain measures .
I am referring , for example , to the need to strengthen market surveillance , to take concrete steps on product traceability , including the use of modern technological tools to create a Consumer Product Safety Information Database , and to pay more attention to products for children .
In short , if these measures are implemented soon , they will make consumers more confident when they buy in the European market .
I support the initiative for improving and strengthening European measures to ensure safe products on the market , the main concern being the wellbeing and protection of consumers .
I believe the measures proposed at a local level ( producers and companies ) , in particular , those relating to traceability , product safety and the transparency of e-commerce , to be relevant and essential points with regard to the elimination of gaps in the European approach to this matter , and consequently , to the proper functioning of the internal market .
I would also like to point out the importance of cooperation between Member States , which will serve to harmonise safety levels and strengthen market oversight .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe it to be essential for guaranteeing that all products placed on the single market are safe , ensuring a high level of consumer protection .
Member States , in cooperation with the European Commission , need to introduce in a coordinated manner penalties , including heavy fines , for economic operators that deliberately place dangerous or non-compliant products onto the internal market .
In order to ensure consumer confidence , it is essential to have strict rules on the quality of products that are placed on the market , and EU rules have been directed towards this objective , with some success .
However , in my opinion , these rules must necessarily be subject to two conditions , which are no more than two sides of the same coin : ( i ) on the one hand , they cannot be more restrictive for European producers than for their international competitors , which place their products on the same market without complying with the same rules ; and ( ii ) they cannot be so exacting that they jeopardise economic competitiveness .
While bearing these two constraints in mind , the Commission therefore needs to revise the directive on general product safety and market surveillance , paying particular attention to the most vulnerable consumers , and most especially to children .
We know that , of the many accidents that occur because products placed on the market are unsafe , the majority involve children , which requires concrete measures relating not only to the safety of the end product , but also to its suitability for the public for which it is intended .
This report deals with the need to review the directive on general product safety and market surveillance adopted nearly 10 years ago .
Throughout the last decade , significant progress has been made on this issue within the European Union , and so it is universally recognised that it is both possible and desirable to make improvements within a legislative framework that guarantees product safety , while benefiting consumers and companies at the same time .
First of all , the directive needs to be brought into line with the new legislative framework ( NLF ) .
Then , the legislative overlap in some areas and non-coverage in other areas by the General Product Safety Directive ( GPSD ) and the NLF need to be eliminated .
I agree with the rapporteur 's position that product safety rules should be updated and harmonised with the NLF in order to optimise consumer protection - through the provision of a quality product - and to ensure full transparency for producers .
This report contains a set of guidelines for the future review of the directive on general product safety and market surveillance .
The emphasis is on the objective of achieving a higher level of product safety , progress towards which requires greater surveillance , and for which sufficient resources need to be allocated to supervisory authorities , in order to ensure , among other aspects , traceability along the entire supply chain .
The important question of the country of origin of a product and of the manufacturer responsible is also tackled .
In addition to defending the consumer 's right to information , this also protects industries within EU countries .
We have criticised the consequences of the development and deepening of the single market for economic and social divergence within the EU .
However , the concrete proposals put forward in this report - which focus on the interests of consumers - merit our agreement .
Despite our opposition to the development of the European internal market , on which the premise of this report is based , the concrete proposals that it sets out and the pivotal question that it analyses involve the improvement of conditions and safety for consumers .
Its concrete objective is to set out guidelines for the future review of the directive on general product safety and market surveillance .
The rapporteur has placed great emphasis on the need for increased supervision , with the aim of achieving a higher level of product safety .
It is also emphasised that sufficient resources need to be allocated to supervisory authorities in order to ensure traceability along the entire supply chain , given its importance for determining the country of origin of the product and the manufacturer responsible , which , in the case of imported products , also protects European Union industries .
That is why we voted in favour .
Considering the good work done by my Danish fellow Member , Mrs Schaldemose , I am voting in favour of the report concerning the directive on general product safety and market surveillance .
This report has my support because it includes measures on traceability that are useful for halting the movement of products that might be harmful to consumers , and also because it emphasises strict control of products from third countries , and China in particular .
All commodities and products sold on the EU market must be of a high standard of safety to protect European Union consumers .
Product safety is one of the main concerns of consumers , who do not want the goods they purchase to pose a threat to their health .
It goes without saying that product safety depends mainly on the manufacturers and importers who place products on the market .
Market surveillance also plays a huge role in ensuring that only products which meet the required standards reach the market .
The European Parliament is sending out a strong message with the report that has been voted through , calling for directives on product safety to be consistent with other legislative acts , which will guarantee a better-functioning market surveillance system and clear and transparent regulations for entrepreneurs , and will provide consumers with a guarantee that the product they have in their hands meets legal requirements .
There have , however , been an alarming number of notifications made via the RAPEX system , with the overwhelming majority of them relating to products originating from China .
In the opinion I drafted on this report for the Committee on International Trade , one of my demands was for cooperation on product safety to be stepped up with our main trading partners , and for further work to be carried out to improve the operation of the RAPEX-CHINA system .
I hope that stepping up cooperation with China will result in an improvement in the quality of products imported to EU markets from China .
The General Product Safety Directive 2001 / 95 / EC ( GPSD ) , which establishes at Community level general safety requirements for consumer products , has to be reviewed and brought into conformity with the new legislative framework ( NLF ) , adopted in 2008 , through integration , in particular , with the regulation on market surveillance .
The product safety and market surveillance legislative framework consists of three layers of legal acts ( GPSD , NLF and sector-specific harmonisation directives ) , which leads to uncertainties and confusion in the internal market .
The level of market surveillance differs considerably among Member States and a number of them fail to designate necessary resources for efficient market surveillance and interpret products posing serious risk differently , which can create barriers to the free movement of goods , disturb competition and jeopardise consumers ' safety within the internal market .
The current legislative framework for market surveillance does not provide enough coherence and should therefore be reviewed and further coordinated .
I resisted voting in favour of this document because I believe that by only considering consumer safety , we would reduce the free circulation and broad variety of products .
The measures adopted must be adequate but , at the same time , we must also consider consumer safety , as well as the free circulation and variety of products .
It is also clear that market surveillance is a challenging activity for a number of Members States , as they are unable to designate necessary resources for efficient market surveillance .
I support the final form of the report on a revision of the directive on general product safety and market surveillance .
I applaud the fact that the final version does not include proposals to set up further agencies , and that it will therefore not lead to further demands on the budget .
I would like to highlight how the report emphasises the issue of standardisation as a regulatory instrument which , in its essence , comprises an example of ' smart regulation ' , and therefore regulation which is not top down , but which comes from below , from the interested parties .
It is precisely for this reason that I would like to call for the greater involvement of market supervision bodies in the process of creating safety standards , as this is an opportunity to ensure in an adequate way that their expertise is brought to bear in the standardisation process .
In connection with the greater scope for action in the area of creating product safety standards , I consider it essential to focus on the stability of the European standardisation system , simplifying European standards and reducing the time it takes to create standards .
Firstly , I should like to congratulate Mrs Schaldemose on the work she has done .
The report adopted today by Parliament concerns the important issue of product safety and , consequently , of the protection of citizens .
The substantial European commitment to protecting consumers from defective and dangerous products has already meant that good standards have been reached , but I think there is still room for improvement , especially in relation to so-called vulnerable consumers , such as children , the elderly and the disabled .
In this area , I believe the strengthening of the market surveillance system through a measure to improve the effectiveness of border controls is crucial , together with the complete traceability of products through the entire supply chain .
I will conclude by reiterating the need to review the regulatory framework currently in force , represented by the General Product Safety Directive , according to the guidelines set out today by the vote of Parliament .
in writing . - There are still too many unsafe products available on the market .
I welcome this report , which says that RAPEX ( EU rapid alert system for dangerous consumer products ) needs further improvements .
Specifically , Member States need to improve the effectiveness and visibility of custom rules and authorities in tackling poor product safety .
Although unquestionable progress has been made in the last 10 years in terms of product requirements in the internal market of the European Union - partly thanks to a common approach - much still remains to be done .
Indeed , it would be important to review the current European legislation on this subject .
It is clear that the General Product Safety Directive ( GPSD ) , which was approved more than 10 years ago , now needs to be reviewed .
This would also allow the prerogatives of the new legislative framework ( NLF ) on products , which was approved in 2008 , to be respected .
Closer monitoring of the market then needs to be put into practice , which goes hand in hand with product safety .
However , the real problem to solve - and the true priority of the report - is to pay attention to products intended for children and to products that appeal to them .
It would also be advisable for the Commission to propose a proper regulation on general product safety and market surveillance .
This should include essential elements such as the adoption of concrete measures in the field of traceability , the obligation for manufacturers to provide a detailed risk analysis during the design phase or , again , strict regulations for the sale of products online .
Consolidation of the internal market is essential for the satisfactory economic development of the EU .
However , this aspiration is only possible if the products on the market are safe and if there is consumer confidence .
Our existing objective of securing free circulation and an increased variety of products available on the market cannot be dissociated from the related safety of consumers .
Great progress has been made over the last few years with regard to product safety .
However , there is a need to continue improving , especially in connection with products aimed at children , who are more susceptible to being affected when safety rules are not observed .
in writing . - This report , adopted unanimously in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , is some kind of contribution by Parliament to the revision of Directive 2001 / 95 / EC on general product safety .
What is important is that the report underlines the significance of the revision of current European legislation , so that products which are unsafe can be located and stopped .
This and other measures are intended to provide the EU population with protection from the appearance of dangerous products on the market , and that is why I voted ' for ' .
Around 60 % of the products reported in the RAPEX system come from China .
The majority of dangerous products thus come from a market that is almost impossible for the EU to control .
I hope that the new RAPEX China system will help remedy this .
The EU must take a strong position in order to protect consumers and their health .
The recall of hazardous products must take place more quickly and more efficiently and there must be improvements in traceability back through the production chain .
This report is moving in this direction , which is why I have voted in favour of it .
The huge size of the European market requires effective and specific regulations to ensure consumer product safety and therefore , I think the EU needs to update its own regulations in order to ensure market surveillance .
The report by Mrs Schaldemose - which I voted in favour of - confirms the need to review the directive of 2001 , given the difficulties Member States faced in transposing it .
By not applying the directive since 2004 , the Member States have caused problems to emerge over the surveillance of products and have not guaranteed certification to the extent they might have done .
I agree with the emphasis that the report places on combating counterfeiting through better identification of products in respect of consumer safety through the use of new technologies .
This report relates to the review of the directive on general product safety and market surveillance .
In a context of free movement and a constant increase in the variety of products available on the market , it is essential that we do not lose sight of consumer safety .
It is a duty of both governments and companies to ensure greater product safety .
Legislation at a European level has already been successful , strengthening the general safety of products within the internal market .
However , improvements can still be made , as there are gaps in this area that compromise consumer safety and which could have harmful consequences .
I voted in favour of this report as I had to agree with the rapporteur 's proposals , which consisted of emphasising the importance of reviewing current European legislation on product safety so that dangerous products can be identified and withdrawn from the market , for the benefit of the end consumer .
I would point , in particular , to amendments to safety rules for products aimed at the most vulnerable consumers within the single market , namely children , the elderly and people with disabilities .
I should like to offer my congratulations on the excellent work carried out by Mrs Schaldemose .
Consumers must be guaranteed greater protection from defective and potentially dangerous products .
Through this report , we are telling the Commission that we need to review the directive and that we need to strengthen the market surveillance system and have market surveillance which is consistent across the single market .
In order to effectively combat the presence of defective products in the common market , I believe it is vital to improve border controls , especially in ports .
I ask the Commission and our national governments to introduce tougher sanctions on imports from third countries that violate safety standards .
Full traceability of products throughout the supply chain is another key point for guaranteeing the ability to withdraw defective products from the market , even as they are being produced .
To this end , we must ensure that the border authorities have sufficient resources .
Also , I would ask for greater attention to online sales , which are on the increase , particularly sales of those products that can cause direct damage to the consumer , such as pharmaceutical products and food .
I voted in favour of the report on the revision of the General Product Safety Directive .
Indeed , I am in favour of a clarification of the current product safety legislative framework , which consists of three layers of legal acts .
In order to ensure that market surveillance authorities do not face any uncertainty , we should establish a common European framework applicable to all products present in the internal market or entering it .
Moreover , let us not forget that , in order to dissuade economic operators from acting illegally , it is important to take action both in terms of penalties against those who deliberately put dangerous or non-compliant products on the market , and in terms of transparency : any ban on products should be published .
Another crucial element is dealt with in this report : that of product safety from a global perspective .
In this context , the European Union must set itself the goal of improving exchanges of information on dangerous products originating from third countries , such as China and India , in order to tackle the issue of product safety and traceability before products enter the European market .
in writing . - A well-functioning single market would also mean safe products and consumer confidence .
While aiming for free circulation and an even broader variety of products on the market , we should not lose focus on consumer safety .
A general look at the area of product safety shows that , during the last decade , we have seen progress when it comes to product safety in the EU .
Governments as well as enterprises take responsibility to ensure safer products and , due to legislation at EU level , there has been a common approach to product requirements , which has improved the general safety of products within the internal market .
Although progress is seen , there is still room for improvement in this field .
This needs to be addressed , as it could jeopardise the safety of the consumer or sometimes even be fatal .
With the adoption of this resolution , the European Parliament stresses how vital it is to improve border controls , especially in ports , in order to effectively combat the presence of defective products in the common market .
The text adopted asks the Commission and our national governments to introduce tougher sanctions on imports from third countries that violate safety standards .
Also , greater attention should be paid to online sales , a phenomenon which is constantly on the increase and , in particular , sales of those products that can cause direct harm to the consumer , such as pharmaceutical products and food .
Full traceability of products throughout the supply chain is another key point for guaranteeing the ability to withdraw defective products from the market , even as they are being produced .
To this end , we must ensure that the border authorities have sufficient resources to carry out the checks .
It is important to stress the requirement that manufacturing companies verify the possibility of risks to safety and health even at the product design stage and for the creation of a public database about product safety .
The review of the directive is intended to unify and harmonise standards which apply to consumer goods , and which currently overlap and differ on the subject of market surveillance .
In a globalised world where we are witnessing the movement of goods and people , there is a growing need to implement systematic checks on saleable products .
Particular attention should be paid to products arriving from third countries , where hygiene and health standards , production processes , and the use of materials not permitted in Europe , carry the risk of contaminating items that end up on our tables or in our hands .
In particular , we need to test children 's toys for toxic substances as they often put them in their mouths ; all the more now because in virtually all cases , the toys are made in China , a country unfortunately renowned for its low production costs and poor quality control .
Of particular interest is traceability , which is useful for stopping the movement of products that might not be safe for consumers .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which suggests further improvements to the rapid alert system for dangerous consumer products in the EU .
Improving effectiveness and visibility of customs rules will help to tackle poor product safety , ultimately benefiting consumers .
in writing . - A safe internal market is a priority for our citizens and this report highlights inadequacies in the legislation on product safety and market surveillance and in the way these are implemented at both EU and national levels .
The current lack of legal certainty , whereby various legal instruments apply to different categories of products , while loopholes exist in other areas , is an obstacle to market safety and to the proper functioning of the single market .
The General Product Safety Directive and rules governing market surveillance should be replaced by a single regulation , as the legal instrument guaranteeing the greatest level of clarity and uniformity .
For this reason , I have identified this as one of the key priorities for inclusion in the Correia De Campos Report on the Single Market Act for Europeans , for which I am shadow rapporteur .
Furthermore , in light of the fact that more and more people shop online , legislation on product safety and market surveillance must now be brought up-to-date to include measures covering online selling so as to strengthen consumer confidence in this area .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution by Mrs Schaldemose , because this is a serious and topical issue .
The existing mechanisms relating to general product safety must be improved , as this will help to safeguard a high standard of protection for consumers ' health and safety .
Coming from a country which is at a geographical crossroads , I consider this proposal to be especially constructive , as many products imported from third countries do not meet the health and quality specifications clearly set out in EU legislation .
We shall only be able to be truly effective and help to clean up the market and really benefit consumers if these products are subject to such prevention and supervision mechanisms .
I voted in favour of the report on the revision of the General Product Safety Directive and market surveillance because I generally support the strengthening of market surveillance in the interests of efficient consumer protection .
I believe it is important to protect children , older people and people with disabilities because the Community has a special responsibility to these groups .
After a ten year gap , it was about time for the directive to be thoroughly revised in order to include new commercial channels , such as online shopping .
I am voting in favour of this report as I agree that better cooperation in response to pandemics is needed , and I agree that a review of the prevention plans drawn up by the EU and its Member States is necessary .
The World Health Organisation urgently needs to reassess its definition of a pandemic , taking into account not only its geographical spread , but also its severity .
I believe that this issue should be better managed by assessing recommended vaccination strategies , and that this can only be achieved if the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control exercises its powers more effectively as an independent agency , with adequate resources for this purpose .
I welcome this initiative which wants to ensure better vigilance and complete transparency with regard to the evaluation of medicinal products recommended in the event of health emergencies , and to improve vaccination and communication strategies to prepare for and prevent pandemics .
I think that the European Union must allocate more resources to research and development regarding public health prevention measures in order to achieve an increase in the investments dedicated to a better evaluation and anticipation of the impact of an influenza virus , both between pandemics and at the beginning of a pandemic .
This is why I voted for this report .
The European Union was obliged to learn from the controversial management , in 2009-2010 , of H1N1 influenza in Europe , and to adopt the measures necessary to prevent further disproportionate reactions .
That is why I voted in favour of this text , which makes provision for more cooperation , more independence and more transparency in order to deal effectively with any future pandemics .
More cooperation , in the sense that this text envisages a review of the prevention plans put in place by the European Union , a review of the roles and responsibilities of key actors , and the introduction of a procedure enabling Member States to make group purchases of vaccines and medicinal products .
This text also calls on the WHO to include the criterion of severity in its definition of a pandemic .
More independence , in the sense that the text stipulates that the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control should exercise its powers as an independent agency so as to have scientific studies that are not influenced by pharmaceutical companies .
More transparency , lastly , in the sense that the text calls for an assessment of the effectiveness of vaccination strategies .
Consequently , this text will allow for more consistent communication between Member States .
I voted in favour of this report .
According to the figures provided by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) at the end of April 2010 , influenza A ( H1N1 ) caused 2 900 deaths in Europe in 2009 .
These figures are low in comparison to the official mortality estimates for seasonal influenza , which the Commission put at 40 000 deaths in a moderate year and 220 000 in a particularly severe season .
They are also significantly less than the most optimistic forecasts suggested by the health services of the EU Member States .
A maximum-level alert was issued over this virus , triggering in some Member States a raft of measures that were very costly ( e.g. the costs are put at EUR 1.3 billion in Great Britain and EUR 990 million in France - compared to EUR 90 million against seasonal influenza ) , and in those cases , disproportionate to the actual level of danger of the virus .

I agree that the World Heath Organisation should revise the definition of a pandemic , not basing this solely on the spread of the virus , but also including the possible severity of a disease to allow for more adequate responses and protect EU citizens from real dangers .
I believe that in this area , there is a need for better cooperation between the Member States and the responsible institutions and organisations , as well as a more transparent distribution of responsibility among the key actors .
Influenza A ( H1N1 ) , caused by the influenza A H1N1 virus , was initially detected in Mexico at the end of March 2009 , and subsequently spread to various countries .
In May 2009 , the World Health Organisation ( WHO ) attributed moderate severity to influenza A ( H1N1 ) , and in June of the same year , the WHO declared a level 6 alert , corresponding to a pandemic phase .
This maximum-level alert declared by the WHO set in train a series of measures in Europe .
In some cases , these were very costly measures ( for example , the costs were estimated at EUR 1.3 billion in Great Britain and EUR 990 million in France , compared to EUR 87 million against seasonal influenza ) .
The response was disproportionate .
Each Member State reacted in its own right , without much coherence or solidarity .
This report , which I supported , reaches the correct conclusions in recommending greater coordination between Member States and European health institutions , as well as clarification and a review of the roles and responsibilities of the key players and management structures , and threats to health at a European level .
Finally , it recognises the need for studies on vaccines and anti-viral medications that are independent of the pharmaceutical industry , including with regard to the monitoring of vaccination coverage .
In the light of the reaction of several European Union countries with regard to combating a possible pandemic of the H1N1 virus , I agree that improvements are needed in the formulation of responses based on the scientific information available in this type of situation .
I therefore support a review of response and prevention plans in the event of a pandemic risk .
Any review needs to aim for greater cooperation and coordination between the Member States ' health authorities and the European institutions .
Another aspect that I believe to be extremely important is the requisite transparency , with regard to both the medical products used and the scientific reports provided by health authorities , in order to prevent conflicts of interest and to ensure the safety of , and provision of information to , citizens .
The EU was the region of the world that was best prepared and had the best reactive capacity for dealing with this outbreak , although the considerable differences in the Member States ' preparedness and the lack of any real cooperation between them weakened this .
Preparation and reaction with regard to health risks within the EU is the responsibility of the Member States , and so it is essential that cooperation and coordination between them , the institutions and international and regional organisations are improved , particularly during the initial phases of a viral outbreak , in order to gauge its severity and to be able to make relevant management decisions and adopt a coherent approach .
The differing recommendations made within the EU and Member States with regard to priority target groups for vaccination indicate the enormous uncertainty and divergent points of view that persist with regard to an appropriate response .
The costs , which were quite significant , could also have been reduced through greater cooperation between the Member States , and between these and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control .
I support the need to draw up a European code of conduct relating to the exercise of the role of scientific expert in any European authority in charge of safety and of risk management and forecasting , in order to avoid further cases of corruption .
The management of the H1N1 influenza epidemic , for which there had been prior warning , was a failure .
We should therefore learn from that crisis so that we can deal with any future pandemic threats more effectively .
Clearly , Member States will have to cooperate more with each other , but also with the European institutions , in order to provide a more effective response in the event of a pandemic .
Similarly , we need to clarify the role of the structures at EU level that manage medical threats , and to ensure that the WHO revises the definition of the criteria for raising a global pandemic alert .
Finally , it would seem appropriate to devise a system of joint public procurement of vaccines by Member States .
Last but not least : there needs to be total transparency in relation to the experts who advise European public health authorities , in order to put an end to potential conflicts of interest .
I welcome the vote on this report , for which I was appointed shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
For the sake of the 500 or so million citizens that we represent , we need to learn from this crisis so that we can deal with any new pandemic threats more effectively .
The text adopted yesterday is a very good compromise in terms of health cooperation , independence and transparency .
Given the proven failure of genuine health cooperation between Member States , it was necessary to adopt a constructive and practical approach involving the following actions :
Reinforced cooperation between Member States and better coordination between Member States and European institutions to ensure a more effective response in the event of a future pandemic ;
Clarification of the roles of the structures at EU level for the management of medical threats ;
The call on the WHO to revise the definition of the criteria for raising a global pandemic alert ;
The assessment of the vaccination and communication strategies applied in Member States to regain citizens ' trust ;
The creation of a system of joint public procurement of vaccines by Member States , to prevent disparities ;
The publication of the declarations of interest of the experts who advise the European public health authorities , to prevent any conflicts of interest .
I voted for this report because I think that better coordination is required at EU level in terms of responding to epidemiological risks .
The case of H1N1 influenza highlighted flawed risk management at a global level , mainly due to the inadequate correlation between the levels of alert and the actual dangers , the consequences of which entailed a large wastage of funds .
In this context , I think that the European Union needs to implement an independent system for assessing pandemic risks , as well as better coordination in terms of managing these risks .
In this context , the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control must be equipped with the capabilities required to be able to play as active a role as possible in this area .
I voted in favour of the report on the management of H1N1 influenza because it highlights the importance of strengthening cooperation , independence and transparency in the management of future pandemic crises , specifically through improved application of the powers of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control as an independent agency .
In 2009 , the world was gripped by fear of a virus with great pandemic and possibly deadly potential : influenza A. Fortunately , the worst fears with regard to the morbidity and mortality associated with the H1N1 virus were not confirmed .
In Europe , this virus was responsible for 2 900 deaths , well below the number of deaths caused by seasonal influenza .
However , as a result of World Health Organisation alerts and fear , exceptional measures were taken by Member States , such as mass vaccination , which represented a substantial cost to health systems .
It is important to draw conclusions from the management of influenza A that took place , rather than point out errors .
The most salient of these , in my opinion , is that , even so , it is better to err through excess than through omission .
Secondly , we should learn lessons for the management of future pandemics , which could be more aggressive , and understand how and when to act and what measures to take .
Fortunately , according to data provided by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) , the H1N1 influenza virus caused fewer deaths than initially predicted , and is currently considered a disease of low severity in the EU .
It created a certain amount of alarm at the beginning of its spread , which led several Member States to make substantial investments in vaccination programmes that turned out to be excessive , because in countries such as Poland , which did not take any exceptional measures , the mortality rate remained at the level of those countries that embarked on national vaccination campaigns , with costs estimated at many millions of euro .
According to this report , ' the policies on the purchasing of vaccines had already been laid down in advance purchase agreements signed back in 2007 with pharmaceutical companies ' .
This reveals a lack of transparency in this procedure due to the Member States ' unacceptable dependence on pharmaceutical companies .
Thus , I have to agree with the rapporteur , and hope that her recommendations , particularly with regard to certainty of information and the precautionary principle - which needs to benefit patients rather than companies - are taken into account by the Commission and by all Member States .
In the light of the troubled process of managing the declared influenza A ( H1N1 ) pandemic and the acknowledged numbers ( 2 900 deaths resulting from H1N1 influenza , whereas 40 000 were caused by seasonal influenza during the same year ) , the report calls for transparency , which seems laudable to us .
This relates both to what happened - with the complete clarification of procedures adopted and responsibilities - and to the approach to future situations .
The following issues are mentioned in particular : the question of the procurement of vaccines and anti-viral treatments ; information on recorded cases and their severity ; the granting of access to documents relating to clinical trials , research protocols and adverse effects of medicines ( by the European Medicines Agency ) ; and conflicts of interest among specialists who advise European public health authorities .
The report ' calls for the prevention plans established in the EU and its Member States for future influenza pandemics to be revised in order to gain in effectiveness and coherence , independence and flexibility ' .
It also recommends a strengthening of cooperation between Member States in this area , with regard to both the definition of the severity of viral outbreaks , and decision making .
Overall , we consider it to be positive , and we voted in favour for this reason .
During this phase of assessing what happened during the management of the H1N1 influenza issue , lessons need to be learned , and it should be recognised that countries need to have public health systems and extension services in the area of public health that are able to operate in different areas , specifically :
The drawing up and assessment of scientific studies , independent of the pharmaceutical industry , on the efficacy , safety and risk-benefit ratio of anti-viral vaccines and medicinal products , and on recommended target groups ;
In the assessment of information on the medication recommended in the event of a health emergency , especially in pandemic situations ;
In the strengthening of capacity in terms of managing and anticipating risks , and in relation to research and development in these areas , as well as with regard to preventative public health measures .
There is also a need to improve cooperation between the various national services , and between these and the relevant international and regional institutions and organisations .
I endorse the report by Mrs Rivasi on evaluation of the management of H1N1 influenza in 2009-2010 in the EU because it highlights the European Union 's excessively alarmist attitude when evaluating the problem .
I am in favour of devoting an appreciable level of attention to matters concerning EU citizens ' health , but not of adopting excessively alarmist attitudes , which then result in exorbitant public health spending .
That is why I voted in favour of the report .
The motion for a resolution that we have adopted has laid the foundations for much-needed reflection on the European Union 's response to the spread of swine flu .
As everyone will remember , instead of finding joint solutions at that time , the Member States entrenched themselves in individualistic positions .
The various national governments ' reactions were highly varied , ranging from large-scale vaccination to no vaccination at all , as in Poland .
That experience should motivate us to improve coordination between the national health authorities and the European institutions , review prevention and vaccination strategies and redefine the criteria for a pandemic alert .
I would like to point out that more effective cooperation can not only lead to cost reductions in the management of such crises , not least through possible group purchasing of vaccines by the Member States , but , above all , it can ensure that people are afforded better protection , since , of course , the virus is not stopped by borders .
Lastly , I hope the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control will be given the support it deserves so that it can continue to do its job of evaluating and controlling health emergencies with complete independence .
I voted for the report on evaluation of the management of H1N1 influenza .
Nevertheless , I should like to point out that this ' management ' was , in fact , yet another capitulation to the ' precautionary principle ' , which requires action before any proper reflection .
The fact that the WHO Director-General declared a threatening pandemic , but chose not to have the inoculation herself , is a potent illustration of the discrepancy between personal judgment of the severity of that outbreak and the public discourse of those in charge .
Since the contaminated blood affair , no public health official has been willing to take any responsibility whatsoever .
The H1N1 influenza was extremely instructive .
First , it taught us how to throw money down the drain .
The cost of this ' swine ' influenza ( EUR 900 million according to the Court of Auditors ! ) is not due to the number of victims .
There were 10 times fewer H1N1 influenza victims than victims of ordinary seasonal influenza .
Yet it is true that those 2 000 annual victims , most of whom were elderly or already ill , are of no interest to anyone .
They are much less exotic .
Next , it taught us how to completely disguise a lack of judgment with alarmist speeches and arm waving .
Tens of millions of doses were ordered unnecessarily .
We had what was meant to be a mass vaccination programme organised without any regard for common sense .
The communication was so exaggerated and contradictory that the people of France turned their backs with suspicion , and rightly so , on the orders that were given to them .
There was a suspicion of common interest between those who took the political decisions and those who benefited from them financially .
Finally , the H1NI influenza taught us that , in France , however error-prone , negligent or incompetent a minister , nothing would force him or her to resign .
And the daily events within the French Government are proof that , on this matter , nothing , absolutely nothing , has changed !
There was a lack of transparency in 2009 and 2010 in the way in which we dealt with the H1N1 strain of influenza , designated by the World Health Organisation as a pandemic .
This is dealt with in the ' Report on evaluation of the management of H1N1 influenza in 2009-2010 in the EU ' .
I welcome this report particularly because it provides for complete transparency in relation to the medicines used in the event of urgent medical intervention and a pandemic .
The Member States acted unilaterally in ordering and deploying vaccines .
The important issue in this context is to evaluate the strategy for stockpiling vaccines and to work towards the joint procurement of the vaccines by the Member States in future .
Improved coordination between the responsible authorities in the Member States and the European agencies is also important .
Thanks to the amendments tabled by my political group ( the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) ) , this report contains constructive proposals to help us learn from the health crisis caused by the H1N1 virus , notably , by enhancing European coordination .
Indeed , the initial report contained a number of inaccuracies and could have discouraged people from having the inoculation .
However , the report as adopted today seeks to restore the confidence of our fellow citizens in health crisis management .
Health professionals will need to be more involved in drawing up and implementing a strategy for preventing and combating a pandemic .
We can no longer allow such confusion and suspicion to surround immunisation campaigns .
It will be essential to improve communication by taking into account how easy it is for rumours with no scientific basis to circulate on new media and the Internet .
Fortunately , the influenza was less serious than anticipated , but it would be dangerous to underestimate the degree of unpredictability and potential severity of future pandemics .
I voted in favour of this report because the World Heath Organisation should urgently revise its definition to include the severity of a disease in its definitions on the stages of a pandemic to allow for more appropriate responses .
Better cooperation is needed in the response to pandemics .
There must be a review of prevention plans , a clarification and , if necessary , review of the roles and responsibilities of key actors , and reinforced cooperation between Member States in order to ensure coherent risk management in response to a pandemic in compliance with the International Health Regulation , as well as more serious coordination on the part of Member States with the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control .
A procedure must be introduced enabling the Member States to make group purchases on a voluntary basis .
Manufacturers have to bear full liability for the authorised indications of their products , and this should be fully applied by Member States in all contracts for the procurement of vaccines .
The prevention plans established in the EU and its Member States for future influenza pandemics must be revised in order to be more effective , coherent and sufficiently autonomous and flexible to be adapted as swiftly as possible , and on a case-by-case basis , to the actual risk , based on up-to date relevant information .
I agree with the opinion that vaccination strategies should rely on three conditions to be successful : efficacy of the vaccine , a positive benefit-risk balance for the vaccine , and targeting of risk groups .
I believe the resolution on evaluation of the management of H1N1 influenza in 2009-2010 in the EU clearly reveals the mistakes made and , at the same time , lays the foundations for fresh , effective management of influenza pandemics .
It is well known that the reaction to the spread of H1N1 influenza was exaggerated in comparison to the real scale of the problem .
Precisely for that reason , I believe that Europe 's influenza pandemic prevention plans need to be reviewed in order to provide rapid , consistent and effective responses .
In that respect , it is essential , in my view , to strengthen cooperation and coordination among the Member States in order to arrive at a truly European strategic approach to the problem .
Furthermore , I believe it would be useful , as mentioned in the text of the resolution , for independent scientific experts not linked to the pharmaceutical industry by any kind of interest to be involved in that process , alongside operators from the pharmaceutical sector .
Being aware of the severity of H1N1 influenza and the importance of our citizens ' health , I think that this report is particularly significant , as it also highlights the correct way to manage these situations .
The moderate severity of this disease was confirmed back in 2009 by the World Health Organisation , and the different approaches adopted by Member States resulted in huge costs , the sale of vaccines produced urgently and a revision of the definition of a pandemic , taking into account as a criterion not only its geographical spread but also its severity .
These factors highlight the fact that a different approach is an absolute must .
The European Union requires more cooperation , transparency and independence with regard to resolving these situations .
The subject of influenza appears every year on the agenda not only of the European Parliament , but also of many national parliaments .
I believe that the Rivasi report takes a very broad approach to the problem of H1N1 influenza , discussing it under several headings such as cooperation , independence and transparency , which will be absolutely vital in the event of a future pandemic .
I believe that the European Union must take active and speedy measures , and so I voted in favour of adopting the report on the management of H1N1 influenza .
in writing . - I voted for this report because there was nothing in it to object to .
However , given the limited impact of H1N1 influenza , I am not sure why Parliament decided to allocate time and resources to it .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for a very detailed and frank report , which contains many alarming messages .
It is beyond doubt that the joint approach of the EU during the pandemic verified the potential of joint action , while also revealing dramatic weaknesses , particularly in the areas of prevention , objective statistics and the purchasing of safe and effective medicines .
The EU has twice recently faced the problem of a dangerous viral infection .
Not enough has been learned from the experience .
I welcome the proposals relating to more stringent testing of the effectiveness of medicines and pressing for objective data collection , and also the interest in protecting all EU citizens regardless of healthcare system .
I consider the demand for research and development funding to be of fundamental importance , as well as the rule that pharmaceutical companies will have a consultative role , and not a deciding role .
The same applies to studies and tests on vaccination materials and other medicines , which must be drawn up independently of pharmaceutical firms .
I also support the demand for more stringent rules for professionals and advisers working for European institutions .
The public must be clearly and transparently informed , although in a way which will not cause panic , but will provide qualified and comprehensible information .
As the Quaestor jointly responsible for protecting the health of MEPs and European Parliament ( EP ) employees , I would like to say that our measures in the EP have been effective , but not cheap .
On the basis of statistical data presented in this report , the reaction to the spread of H1N1 was actually disproportionate to the actual nature of the phenomenon , generating , in fact , very costly vaccination campaigns in many Member States .
The rapporteur therefore considered it appropriate to raise extremely important issues , first of all , concerning the overwhelming influence of pharmaceutical companies .
She urged that studies on antiviral medications should be independent of pharmaceutical companies .
The accelerated authorisation procedures have demonstrated their limitations , because no scientific evidence is available and data released by the industry are therefore still used .
There is also need for better cooperation , to request a review of prevention plans and the roles of key actors , and also to enable Member States to make group purchases on a voluntary basis .
The World Health Organisation ( WHO ) should revise its definition of a pandemic as soon as possible so as to include the virulence of the virus in its classification .
In this regard , it is necessary that the vaccine should be effective , have a positive relationship between risks and benefits , and be genuinely targeted at risk groups .
Finally , we must avoid any conflicts of interest because they may immediately generate suspicion of undue pressure in public opinion .
This report has the virtue of condemning the lack of transparency of the European Medicines Agency as well as the links between pharmaceutical companies and experts on vaccines and antivirals .
It is therefore a shame that the report does not call for the activities of that agency to be suspended until a real , comprehensive reform has taken place .
I am voting to encourage the rapporteur to go further next time .
The management of H1N1 influenza within the EU has revealed a variety of difficulties , particularly with regard to its actual severity and scale ; the response by the Member States was disproportionate in size and extremely costly , when compared to the deaths that occur every year due to normal influenza and the amounts spent by Member States in combating this .
An analysis of the management of H1N1 influenza in Europe highlights a basic problem : an absence of independent assessment by national and / or European health authorities , and the resulting inability to adapt public health measures in the best possible way and in real time to the actual clinical and epidemiological statistics available .
Thus , changes in the management of future cases of pandemics are needed in order to avoid generalised panic among people as well as unnecessary costs .
in writing . - This report evaluates the management of H1N1 influenza in 2009-2010 in the EU and highlights elements that should be improved : cooperation , independence and transparency in the management of future pandemic crises , namely through better application of the ECDC 's competence .
However , one assessment is not enough and I have not noticed any further developments in the area of fast and efficient reaction to outbreaks of diseases and not a word about preventive measures .
As always , the report is vague and unspecific .
I voted in favour since there is no other report .
There were fewer fatalities from type A / H1N1 influenza in 2009 than from seasonal influenza .
Even though the WHO classified the H1N1 influenza as a minor illness , at the same time , it issued a pandemic warning of level 6 , the highest possible level .
In order to meet their obligations to the population , the EU Member States consequently spent billions to combat an influenza outbreak whose potential threat is much less than that of normal influenza .
The media also contributed to the panic .
When a pandemic is announced as dangerous but turns out to be a storm in a teacup , then worryingly , future warnings will no longer be taken seriously .
This clearly demonstrates that the WHO needs to revise its pandemic criteria .
Naturally , good cooperation and joint procurement are advantageous in the event of a pandemic , helping to achieve price reductions .
However , if the authorisation of new medicines is rushed through in order to deal with illusory pandemics , then we are faced with an enormous problem .
The role of the media and the pharmaceuticals companies in fanning the flames of panic has not been considered here .
For this reason , I abstained from voting .
I voted in favour of this resolution , because it is difficult to predict the severity of a pandemic and how it will unfold , and often when a pandemic occurs , many decisions are taken that are disproportionate .
Therefore , it is necessary to pay significant attention to ensuring cooperation , independence and transparency .
Above all , the prevention plans established both in the EU and its Member States for future influenza pandemics must be revised consistently , so that they are flexible and adapted effectively every time there is a risk of a flu pandemic .
Furthermore , we must encourage cooperation and coordination of action at international and regional levels in order to properly ensure risk management and react promptly to the risk of a pandemic .
I believe that more financial resources need to be allocated to research and development , and to that end we need to increase investment to evaluate and anticipate the impact of an influenza virus .
It is important to ensure that the prior purchase agreement and delivery process takes place transparently , reducing corruption in this area .
We must limit the influence of pharmaceutical companies , not just as regards distribution , but also the carrying out of studies into vaccines and antiviral medications .
Scientific experts should declare publicly that they have no financial or other interests in the pharmaceutical industry .
I voted in favour of the report on evaluation of the management of H1N1 influenza in 2009-2010 in the EU .
In numerous cases , including in Greece , attention on the part of the institutions and the State decreased as publicity in the issue decreased .
Debate on the influenza has stopped , but the virus not only continues to exist ; it is proving to be even more deadly than before .
For example , in Greece , there was an increase recently both in the illness and in the number of deaths caused by it , with losses exceeding 100 human lives .
The main cause given was the lack of information : vulnerable groups , like chronic sufferers who should have asked to be vaccinated , did not do so , considering that the danger had passed .
The report on the management of H1N1 influenza in the EU during 2009-2010 highlights the low level of severity , in statistical terms , that the illness had within the European area ( in human terms , each person who died is an irreplaceable loss ) .
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control reported 2 900 deaths in Europe resulting from infection with H1N1 during 2009 .
This number is lower than the European Commission 's official estimates for the number of deaths due exclusively to seasonal influenza .
The number of deaths is also markedly lower than the most optimistic forecasts of health services within EU Member States .
The fact that the Member States and the European institutions accepted the maximum-level alert declared by the World Health Organisation ( WHO ) resulted in a set of costly and disproportionate measures in the light of the severity of H1N1 influenza .
However , given the WHO 's recommendation , I do not believe that any other course of action could have been taken .
However , this case still needs to be reflected upon , and I agree with the rapporteur 's view that the EU requires greater cooperation between its Member States , greater independence and greater transparency , specifically with regard to the cost-benefit assessment of these measures with a major financial impact .
in writing . - The report considers that better cooperation is needed in response to pandemics and calls for a review of the prevention plans established in the EU and its Member States ( MSs ) .
It also calls for reinforced cooperation between MSs and coordination of MSs with the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) .
It also urges the WHO to revise the definition of a pandemic , based on its geographical spread and severity .
The ECDC is invited to apply its competences as an independent agency to assess and communicate the severity of infection risks within the EU , making recommendations on best practices in areas such as crisis management techniques , vaccination and communication strategies .
Moreover , the report calls for an assessment of the influenza vaccination strategies recommended in the EU and applied in MSs , covering the efficacy of the vaccines , their risk-benefit balance and the different target groups recommended , with regard to a safe and effective use and MSs ' reports on relevant information to the Commission ( i.e. the number of doses of vaccines purchased and actually used , the number of H1N1 infections and people that died due to the infection , etc . ) .
The EU needs to improve cooperation , independence and transparency in the management of future pandemic crises .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Rivasi for her excellent work .
This report is an important attempt to highlight the doubts that have been raised over the disproportionate response to swine flu in Europe , as well as the potential influence of pharmaceutical companies on the actions taken .
I am critical of the EU 's response in 2009-2010 to ' swine flu ' , the H1N1 virus .
I suggest , for the future , group purchasing of vaccines to save money and more effective rules to prevent conflicts of interest , for example , by publishing the declaration of interests of experts who advise European health authorities .
In this regard , I note that according to European legislation , liability for vaccines lies with manufacturers and not national governments .
I also call on the World Health Organisation ( WHO ) to revise the definition of ' pandemic ' and also take into account the virulence of the disease and not only the geographical spread of the virus .
In order to provide the Union with its own capacity to prevent risks of a pandemic , the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) must be guaranteed the support it needs to perform this task entirely independently .
in writing . - The EP has today thrown a spotlight on the disproportionate response to the swine flu outbreak in Europe .
Member States spent billions of euro on vaccines , which were authorised in a rush despite the moderate nature of the virus .
Health budgets are notoriously overstretched , and there are far more important health issues to tackle than giving subsidies to big pharmaceutical firms .
MEPs have today called for a revision of the EU 's health response mechanisms .
Preparedness plans should become sufficiently autonomous and flexible to be adapted as swiftly as possible to the actual risks .
The evaluation of medicines needs to be fully transparent , and all declarations of interest should be published to allow for public scrutiny of possible conflicts of interests .
The EU blindly followed the WHO in its response to the swine flu outbreak , and this clearly needs to change .
The EP has called for meaningful EU risk evaluation and for the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control to be given adequate means to carry out all its tasks , not least , to assess the severity of infection risk .
Even through the virulence of H1N1 influenza in Europe has not been particularly aggressive , this virus has so far caused no fewer than 4 700 deaths .
The report published by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) notes that , in the management of the virus , the EU has been unable to adapt quickly to the medical measures necessary to limit infection .
This is largely attributable to prevention strategies adopted in the various Member States , planned in consultation with the World Health Organisation ( WHO ) years ago without ever having received substantial updates .
To prevent such situations recurring , in view of the harsh criticism received over the manner of distribution of vaccines , we must concentrate our efforts specifically in this direction in the future , optimising authorisation procedures for the marketing of medicinal products used when reacting to health crises .
We support the own-initiative report , as we are all aware that the excessive alarmism linked to the so-called bird flu pandemic cost the EU about 10 times more than the normal flu campaign .
The fact that the World Health Organisation ( WHO ) accepted the alarm without acting independently through analyses of costs and risks undertaken by the European agencies , the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) and the European Medicines Agency ( EMA ) , led to costly and unnecessary vaccination campaigns and , in particular , encouraged the population to buy disproportionate quantities of sterile disposable material and disinfectants .
The end result in terms of deaths , which is what must be considered by the law maker , was even lower than that of a normal seasonal influenza .
It is therefore essential that the Commission should report to Parliament with a detailed cost-benefit analysis within six months , stating how it intends to react to similar situations in the future .
The WHO should revise its definition of a pandemic in order to take into account both the geographic extent and the virulence of the infection .
in writing . - I supported this report which evaluates the management of H1N1 influenza and calls for a joint procurement mechanism for vaccinations .
It is important that we learn from previous outbreaks so that we can protect ourselves better in the future .
I voted in favour of the report after the Committee succeeded in ironing out the accusations and misjudgments to a certain degree .
The report is critical and indicates ways in which the EU can organise itself better in future with more joint action to prevent a pandemic .
in writing . - Whilst the ECR Group is in favour of improving lines of communication and cooperation between Member States in relation to health threats like epidemics , the report on H1N1 ill advises Member States on the facts surrounding H1N1 and on the precautions they should take in the event of another epidemic .
There are several disputable facts within the report and explanatory statement which may lead to a false understanding of H1N1 , its impact on European societies and government response plans .
We believe the recommended steps which a Member State should take when faced with future epidemics ( from the buying of vaccinations through to the reporting of facts to EU bodies ) are unwise and would not solve any major issues associated with H1N1 or future pandemics .
The report also places liability for vaccines with manufacturers , which may hinder the supply of vaccines and blurs lines of accountability .
Furthermore , the dossier tries to broaden ECDC 's mandate and their working relationship with Member States , which is undesirable as it may lead to an increase in their budgetary allowance .
The ECR Group has therefore voted against this report .
I support the favourable outcome of the vote in committee on the appointment of Harald Wögerbauer as a new Member of the Court of Auditors , on the basis of a positive assessment of his curriculum vitae and the written responses he provided to the questionnaire given out to candidates for the post in question .
Today being the centenary of International Women 's Day , I voted against the nomination of Mr Harald Wögerbauer because there are not enough women at the European Court of Auditors .
I agreed with this proposal , because Mr Harald Wögerbauer fulfils the conditions laid down in Article 286 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU and a favourable opinion has been delivered on the nomination of Mr Harald Wögerbauer as a Member of the Court of Auditors .
in writing . - I abstained on the appointment of Mr Harald Wögerbauer as a Member of the Court of Auditors .
I did so because of reports from colleagues of his unclear performance regarding his experience in the Austrian Court of Audit .
The Court of Auditors is a supervisory institution that verifies the legality and regularity of the European Union 's income and expenditure , as well as overseeing its good financial management , operating with complete independence .
In this spirit , the appointment of its members must be governed by criteria of capability and independence .
Therefore , on the Council 's initiative , Harald Wögerbauer was put forward for the Court of Auditors .
He submitted his curriculum vitae , completed a written questionnaire and was interviewed by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
He argued his case well enough to justify his appointment to the Court of Auditors , to perform his duties capably and independently .
As a result of the constitutional reforms necessitated by the Treaty of Lisbon in 2010 , the ruling parties in Austria introduced a kind of standardised nomination procedure for some EU posts .
It would seem that a number of important positions are missing from the list in Article 23c of the Austrian Federal Constitution , according to which decisions on senior appointments should be made known at least to the Austrian President or that the Federal Government should seek consensus with the National Council on the appointments .
Harald Wögerbauer , political director of the Austrian People 's Party parliamentary club , is to become a new member of the Executive Committee of the European Court of Auditors .
It would seem that Mr Wögerbauer meets the technical criteria .
However , because the Austrian People 's Party would appear to be taking a kind of autonomous line in relation to pending personnel decisions at EU level and this contravenes democratic principles and the continuous calls for greater transparency in EU appointments , I have abstained on this vote .
I voted in favour of the report relating to the appointment of Harald Wögerbauer to the post of member of the Court of Auditors .
All of the data presented , on which my decision was based , indicates that the criteria laid down in Article 286 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , specifically , the guarantees of independence , were met , and so I welcome the appointment of Harald Wögerbauer to the post of member of the Court of Auditors .
I am voting in favour of this report as several recommendations adopted by the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean ( GFCM ) , and which are already in place in the GFCM contracting states , need to be transposed into a single EU legislative instrument .
This simplification is required in order to avoid the drawing-up of annual regulations to update legislation , as has occurred in the past .
I voted in favour of this document .
The objectives of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) are to ensure the sustainable exploitation of living aquatic resources and a high level of protection for the ecosystem .
The General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean ( GFCM ) was set up by an international agreement in 1949 , and the European Community is a member of the Commission .
The GFCM plays an important role in implementing the fundamental objectives of the fisheries policy , to promote the development , conservation , and rational management of living aquatic resources , to formulate and recommend conservation measures and to promote cooperative projects in the area of training .
As the recommendations adopted by the GFCM are binding on its contracting parties , and the Community is one of these , the provisions of the agreement should therefore be transposed into Community law , ensuring the consistency and application of this policy .
I voted in favour of this document , which aims to merge certain measures adopted by the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean ( GFCM ) into a single piece of EU legislation .
Until today , the European Community has adopted annual regulations for the purposes of bringing the regulation into line , while this report marks a step towards the bureaucratic and administrative simplification that is one of the objectives of the European Union .
The document also has the merit of bringing clarity even to purely technical aspects : For example , it establishes clear measures to restrict fishing in the Gulf of Lions , and sets the minimum mesh size of nets in the Mediterranean and Black Sea , while prohibiting the use of towed dredges and trawl nets to a depth of more than 1 000 metres .
I also support Amendment 27 establishing a requirement to draw up an annual list of vessels with an overall length over 15 metres authorised to fish in the GFCM area as a result of a fishing permit being issued .
I voted in favour of this report because I think it is a positive step in an economic sector that is crucial for Europe , in other words , fisheries .
I believe that any intervention by the EU should always start from an analysis of the needs that emerge from local businesses depending on this activity , often characterised by the presence of the small and medium-sized enterprises so fundamental to the economy and society .
Very many areas in the Mediterranean regions have such characteristics , so it is very important that legislative proposals that set out to deal with the fishing in this area are clearly inspired by the principle of subsidiarity , so as not to risk compromising the entire system .
I am also firmly convinced that it is , above all , essential to offer special protection to small and medium-sized enterprises working in the field , involving them in decision making and giving them as much support as possible , because they are actually very difficult to redevelop .
Regulations that take no account of these features may cause irreparable damage to smaller markets , forcing a conversion into another area that would be very complex to achieve .
in writing . - ( PT ) I agree with the draft legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on certain provisions for fishing in the GFCM ( General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean ) Agreement Area .
In order to prevent the powers of Parliament being usurped , Article 28 should be removed from this proposal ; this stipulates that the provisions of the regulation should be amended in line with a comitology procedure reducing the role of Parliament to simply receiving information from the Commission relating to management committee procedures .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report on the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean ( GFCM ) Agreement Area , as it transposes recommendations adopted by the GFCM , and which are already in operation within member countries of the GFCM , into a single EU legislative instrument .
in writing . - ( PT ) The General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean ( GFCM ) has been adopting recommendations at its annual sessions .
The aim of this proposal for a regulation is simply to transpose some of the recommendations adopted into a single EU legislative instrument , to which future recommendations may also be added .
The content of the recommendations adopted by the GFCM and the obligations pertaining thereto are frequently entirely or partially covered by EU legislation adopted previously , with only the aspects that differ needing to be transposed .
The regulation voted on will apply to all commercial fishing and aquaculture activities carried out by EU fishing boats and by nationals of Member States within the GFCM area .
It does not apply to fishing operations carried out exclusively for the purposes of scientific research that take place with the authorisation and under the authority of a Member State .
In this case , just the European Commission and the Member States in whose waters the activity is being carried out need to be informed beforehand .
I believe that the Commission 's proposal could run counter to Parliament 's powers with regard to the matter in question , in particular , Article 28 , which needs to be replaced so that both the effective participation of this Chamber in future amendments to the regulation and respect for its prerogatives are ensured .
The aim of this proposal for a European Parliament and Council Regulation is the transposition of certain recommendations adopted by the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean ( GFCM ) .
The conversion of this agreement into a single EU legislative instrument represents a significant advance , making it possible to improve the control of catches of fish species within the waters covered , as well as cooperation , information and communication between the European Commission , the Member States and the Executive Secretariat of the GFCM .
Given that this represents a simplification of procedures - putting an end to annual regulations - and that these recommendations are already in operation within countries that are members of the GFCM , I applaud this initiative , with which I am fully in agreement , and I look forward to the satisfactory implementation of this regulation .
We recognise and acknowledge the importance of multilateral cooperation for the promotion of the proper conservation and management of marine biological resources - the subject of this agreement .
However , the proposal for a regulation that was approved contains a provision that we consider to be unacceptable and which we sought to amend , proposing the removal of a paragraph from Article 28 .
This having been rejected by the majority , we voted against the final proposal for a regulation .
It aims to confer on the Commission the power to adopt delegated acts that could affect an area forming part of the Exclusive Economic Zone ( EEZ ) of a Member State .
The area is known as Eratosthenes Seamount and is part of the EEZ of the Republic of Cyprus .
This possibility clashes with the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus , particularly as this is an area that is highly sensitive from a political point of view , given that the area in question is disputed , illegally , by a third country that is a candidate for EU membership .
The seabed in this area contains natural resources that the Republic of Cyprus has a legitimate right to exploit , in line with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea .
In this context , the EU 's remit should not go beyond questions relating to the common fisheries policy .
We have always attached the greatest importance to multilateral cooperation at the level of the promotion of the proper conservation and management of marine biological resources , which is the subject of this agreement .
However , the proposal for a regulation that was approved contains a provision that we consider to be unacceptable and which we sought to amend , by proposing the removal of a paragraph from Article 28 .
This having been rejected by the majority , we voted against the final draft regulation .
The sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus is called into question , even more so as this is an area that is highly sensitive from a political point of view , given that the area in question is disputed , illegally , by a third country that is a candidate for EU membership .
The seabed in this area contains natural resources that the Republic of Cyprus has a legitimate right to exploit , in line with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea .
In this context , the EU 's remit should not go beyond questions relating to the common fisheries policy .
I agreed with this document , as the main tasks of the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean ( GFCM ) are to promote the development , conservation and rational management of living aquatic resources , to formulate and recommend conservation measures , and to promote cooperative projects in the area of training .
The present proposal for a regulation is simply intended to transpose various recommendations adopted by the GFCM , and already in effect in the GFCM 's contracting States , in a single Community legislative act .
This would mark an important step towards simplification , given that hitherto , the European Community has just adopted annual regulations for the purpose of adapting and updating the existing rules .
The proposal features a series of smart solutions .
For example , with regard to fishing gear , the proposal for a regulation specifies in detail the minimum mesh size to be used in the Mediterranean Sea ( Article 15 ) and the Black Sea ( Article 16 ) and prohibits the use of towed dredgers and trawl nets at depths below 1 000 metres ( Article 17 ) .
It also tackles issues surrounding vessels engaged in illegal , unregulated and unreported ( IUU ) fishing , etc .
in writing . - I voted for the report on the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean ( GFCM ) Agreement Area .
The present proposal for a regulation is simply intended to transpose various recommendations adopted by the GFCM , and already in effect in the GFCM 's contracting States , into a single Community legislative act into which future recommendations can be incorporated by way of amendments to that act .
This would mark an important step towards simplification , given that up to now , the European Community has only adopted annual regulations for the purpose of adapting and updating the existing rules .
European Union membership of the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean ( GFCM ) faces a major turning point with this proposal for a regulation .
It is , in fact , proving to be extremely interesting in providing for the implementation of certain recommendations adopted by the GFCM in a single piece of EU legislation .
Such an act constitutes a legal instrument that is certainly more stable than the present one and allows future recommendations to be added only by an amendment of the law itself .
It represents a major step towards improving legal certainty and also contributes to the simplification of regulations .
Over and above the relevance of provisions in respect of a minimum mesh size for fishing nets , Article 28 of this proposed regulation also questions the powers of Parliament .
In fact , it states that the provisions contained in the regulation can be changed under the ' comitology procedure ' whereby the Commission is assisted by management committees , chaired by a representative of the Commission and composed of representatives of Member States .
This would effectively deprive Parliament of its powers , and it therefore appears desirable that the Commission should operate through delegated acts , with the possibility of Parliament or the Council withdrawing the delegated powers .
I agree with the rapporteur over the need to simplify fishing rules by coming up with a regulation that can implement the recommendations adopted by the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean in a single piece of legislation .
I also agree with the objectives and principles applied in the common fisheries policy , but I think all coastal Member States must guarantee the right balance between protection and the socio-economic value of ecosystems .
In other words , I believe we should call for the protection of the interests of local communities in accordance with a general principle .
Regulation No 1967 / 2006 meticulously determines the gear authorised for fishing in the waters of the GFCM area , in the Mediterranean in our particular case .
I call on this House to take note that the objective of safeguarding our natural habitats sometimes results , as the regulations stand at the moment , in serious consequences for some fishing communities .
In this regard , Italy is waiting for the Commission to order an exemption to the ban on fishing two particular species that are the main product of an extensive fishing industry .
I would therefore like to make all representatives of the 27 Member States and , through them , the Commission aware of the need to consider making these instruments more flexible to give the local fishing industry what it needs to survive .
The General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean ( GFCM ) was created in 1949 by international agreement .
Its remit covers the Mediterranean , the Black Sea and adjacent waters , the encouragement of development , conservation and management of marine biological resources , the formulation and recommendation of conservation measures and the promotion of cooperation projects in the field of training .
The aim of this draft regulation is simply to transpose certain recommendations adopted by the GFCM , and which are already in force in member countries of the GFCM , into a single EU legislative instrument , to which future recommendations may be added through the introduction of amendments .
in writing . - The report is intended to transpose various recommendations adopted by the GFCM .
These recommendations deal with technical measures .
One of them is a matter of concern for the Committee on Fisheries , which considers Article 28 ( procedure for amendment ) of the proposal to be a very dubious provision , insofar as it could threaten Parliament 's prerogatives and the current institutional balance by inflating the Commission 's implementing powers to the point that all future amendments to the regulation would be covered by the Commission 's powers .
The Committee on Fisheries therefore proposes that Article 28 be deleted .
It seems that the Commission has not completely familiarised itself with the Lisbon Treaty , and it looks as though some officials have decided to take decisions that should , in fact , be made by Parliament .
That must not be allowed in any case .
I voted in favour since I think this impudence on the part of the Commission is simply going too far .
I voted in favour of this resolution , because fishing , particularly in the Mediterranean , is more than simply an economic activity ; it is part of the culture and way of life .
Entire regions are based around fishing .
It is therefore necessary to pay particular attention to fishing in this region , because fishing in the Mediterranean has more specificities than elsewhere and it should be subject to specific measures .
In my opinion , it is advisable to transpose various recommendations adopted by the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean in a single Community legislative act , given the fact that the recommendations mentioned are already in effect .
Furthermore , it would be advisable to set out technical measures , strengthening restrictions on fishing in the Gulf of Lions , tightening requirements regarding nets , and the issuing of authorisation to engage in fishing .
I agree that vessels authorised to fish for common dolphinfish should be subject to more stringent regulation and should be prohibited from using towed dredgers and trawl nets at depths below 1 000 metres .
Furthermore , it would be advisable to regulate control measures , providing for opportunities to inspect the landings and trans-shipment operations of third-country fishing vessels and occasions when Member States may not allow a third-country vessel to use their ports .
I am pleased with the proposals to cooperate actively and exchange information with the GFCM .
I voted for Mr Rivellini 's report because I fully agree with the importance of simplifying Union regulations .
The report offers the opportunity to channel all the recommendations of the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean into a single piece of European legislation , making it easier for the public to access documents and helping the relevant agencies to make any future amendments .
I believe that the activity of regulatory simplification for citizens and stakeholders is a duty that we , as legislators , need to carry out quickly and carefully to enable them to understand the opportunities that the EU provides , but , above all , to eliminate the administrative burden that brings so many additional costs .
in writing . - The General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean ( GFCM ) was set up by an international agreement in 1949 .
The area covered by the agreement comprises the Mediterranean , the Black Sea and connecting waters .
The main tasks of the GFCM are to promote the development , conservation and rational management of living aquatic resources , to formulate and recommend conservation measures , and to promote cooperative projects in the area of training .
The present proposal for a regulation is simply intended to transpose various recommendations adopted by the GFCM , and already in effect in the GFCM 's contracting States , into a single Community legislative act into which future recommendations can be incorporated by way of amendments to that act .
The provisions of the regulation are the usual types of things that such organisations regulate .
Title II deals with restrictions on fishing gear and activities ( ' technical measures ' ) .
Title III consists of ' control measures ' such as reporting requirements , inspections , etc .
Title IV deals with cooperation , information and reporting requirements for the Commission and the Member States to cooperate and exchange information with the Executive Secretary of the GFCM .
I voted for this resolution because I believe that the regulatory activity carried out by the General Commission for Fisheries in the Mediterranean has been essential with the aim of achieving a sustainable level of fishing in the Mediterranean .
The latest statistics on fish stocks in the Mediterranean reveal that more than 54 per cent of stocks examined are overfished .
It is therefore a priority to take legislative action to protect the marine environment , returning the use of fish stocks to sustainable levels .
Full cooperation between Member States will now be important because they must incorporate the new standards as soon as possible , imposing appropriate sanctions against those who fail to comply with them .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which seeks to simplify the existing arrangements relating to fishing practice within the Mediterranean Agreement Area .
The European Community and Greece are parties to the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean Agreement Area .
The proposal for a regulation relating to certain provisions governing fisheries in the GFCM Agreement Area are designed to translate certain proposals adopted by the GFCM and already being applied by countries party to it into a single Community legislative act .
I voted in favour of this particular motion for a resolution because I consider that the control measures proposed will protect the natural environment and will therefore benefit the parties to the GFCM .
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on certain provisions for fishing in the GFCM Agreement Area .
The combining of the agreed recommendations into a future single Community legislative act will simplify administration and increase efficiency , which is something to be welcomed .
The individual technical adjustments proposed reflect the modern requirements for a responsible fishery policy .
I fully approve this report as it aims to initiate a new form of taxation of the financial sector , an urgent measure in itself , and also as an addition to recently approved regulatory and supervisory instruments .
In this respect , I would stress that ' the introduction of a tax on financial transactions ought to be as broadly based as possible ' , as the document suggests , in a way that includes all types of transactions .
Among other benefits , a financial transaction tax makes the market fairer and more transparent , reduces speculation and levels of fiscal fraud , and distributes the burden of the crisis among the financial operators .
The additional resources resulting from this measure should help with combating poverty , encouraging job creation , funding the welfare state , achieving climate and environmental targets and financing other elements arising from the Europe 2020 strategy .
I support the need , in turn , for the Commission to study a future system of Eurobonds and the projected issuing of common European project bonds as measures for stimulating investment .
I also support the ' polluter pays ' principle .
Finally , we cannot overlook support for development , as it is important to maintain the commitment to set aside 0.7 % of the gross national income of each Member State for developing countries .
in writing . - I voted against the Podimata report on innovative financing because it wants to introduce a financial transfer tax which , while it is claimed that it is needed to protect the economy from risky trading and to provide a fund to use in the event of another crisis , and will only be placed on wholesale and professional industry , it will inevitably be passed on to the consumer and citizen taxpayer who is already struggling in this crisis .
The tax will have a terrible impact on the City of London , the financial service industry which is Britain 's largest and greatest contributor to the Treasury .
It will cause companies to leave the UK with a loss of jobs and a loss of tax revenue .
In the current context of budgetary cuts , the discussion of innovative financing is not only necessary , it is vital .
Personally , I am particularly in favour of the introduction of a tax on financial transactions , ideally at international level , or , failing that , at European level .
I am pleased that this measure was adopted by a majority of my fellow Members .
The global economic and financial crisis has exposed severe weaknesses in the regulatory and supervisory framework of the global financial system .
Today , it is clear that we need new tools which can curb speculation and restore the financial sector 's main role , guaranteeing a fair and proportionate distribution of the burden amongst the key financial players .
We must begin to discuss taxation of the financial sector , which hitherto , unlike other sectors , is largely untaxed .
There is also a VAT exemption approach for all basic financial activities .
I agree with the introduction of a tax on financial transactions which could help to tackle the highly damaging trading patterns in financial markets , improve the efficiency of the market itself , reduce price volatility and create incentives for the financial sector to make long-term investments with added value for the real economy .
With this vote , Parliament has reached another milestone on the road towards global financial regulation .
We have sent a strong message in favour of the projects of the French Presidency of the G20 .
When the economy shows its first signs of recovery , we will have to work together to promote a well thought-out , balanced model of liberalism .
The European left tried to take sole credit for the idea of taxing financial transactions .
It was misguided , however .
Europeans know when to be pragmatic .
Today 's vote shows that this notion extends beyond all political differences .
I cannot support the Podimata report , because it is Member States that are responsible for tax policy .
The report does not do justice to that situation .
What it aims to do is to prescribe a number of taxes at EU level , including a tax on financial transactions and an energy tax .
If a tax on the financial sector is necessary , the revenues it generates should go to Member States ' treasuries .
After all , they are the ones who have had to bail out the banks .
Member States would do well to use these revenues to reduce the public debt , which has increased during the crisis .
However , the report assumes without question that such revenues could benefit global and EU policy objectives .
That would then include climate change and development cooperation .
Furthermore , the report includes an argument for a solidarity levy on air tickets , so that we can combat public health problems and reduce charges in the transport sector .
I accept that we could pursue these useful policy objectives and that it would be advisable to consider allocating more resources for that purpose .
However , as this would affect our tax measures , it is Member States who should be taking such initiatives , not Europe dictating them top-down .
I fear that such an approach may be standing in the way of fruitful cooperation with the Council .
More than three years after the crisis , elements for regulating the financial markets are rather thin on the ground .
In this respect , a new tax would allow for new sources of finance to be released and for the most questionable financial practices to be regulated .
Let us be clear : it is , at present , impossible to say that what happened three years ago will not happen again in the future .
It is enough to drive one to despair .
The challenge is therefore to know whether Europe has the critical mass to take specific action .
I believe that it does and that the sooner it takes action on this matter , the better !
The adoption of this report in plenary indicates a path which the European Union seems to want to go down .
Although the idea of introducing a tax on financial transactions seems to support the general public , even if the G20 leaders failed to agree on setting such a contribution at global level , I feel obliged to mention that this could have an adverse impact in the medium and long term .
The impact of such a tax , imposed only on capital established in the EU , will certainly be to make this capital migrate to developed or emerging countries outside the EU .
The other scenario , at least in an initial phase , will be that this tax will be passed on in the form of costs to the credit consumer or other financial services .
Whatever the situation , the perverse effect of this is that the EU will move even closer to the dangerous situation where it will lose its competitiveness against other states such as the US , Japan or the BRIC countries .
This will slow down economic growth and create problems , including for the real economy , which is dependent on the cheapest possible sources of financing .
I voted for this report because I agree with the need for the European Union to seek new innovative financing instruments .
Such instruments would , in fact , allow the EU to address the current challenges , because they would play both a regulatory role and a role for the production of revenue .
It has often been pointed out in this House that the economic crisis has highlighted the lack of regulation and supervision of the global financial system .
We also know that the taxpayers are currently the first to bear the cost of the crisis , not only through direct taxation , but also in terms of rising unemployment , dwindling incomes , reduced access to social services and increasing inequalities .
New instruments are needed if we are to come up with holistic and integrated responses to the crisis .
I agree , therefore , to the introduction of the long-discussed Eurobonds , which can lead to joint management of debt by aggregating part of the sovereign debt .
The rapporteur also proposes other funding instruments designed to curb speculation : for example , coherent and effective taxation of the energy sector and the drawing up of proposals for a tax on development that will lead to increased resources for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals .
We are constantly confronted in the EU with the consequences of the financial crisis , which , in 2009 , overflowed into a budgetary crisis , a significant aspect of which was the excessive issuing of government bonds .
In contrast to the approved report , however , I do not see market pressures in this , but rather the irresponsible budgetary policy of many national governments that are unwilling to reform their pension , health and employment systems .
In my opinion , putting the blame on market failure is misguided and shows a lack of courage to face up to the necessary reforms .
We have now approved rules on more stringent financial regulation and financial market supervision , and we should go further and take measures to kick-start European economies , for example , in the form of funding for common infrastructure projects and tax incentives for firms to invest in science and research .
I would like to warn against the introduction of a tax on financial transactions and various forms of bank taxes , because it would tie up the financial market and distort competition .
Eurobonds are not the solution , as they only transfer fiscal irresponsibility to the European level , to places further away from public control , where attempts at excessive spending would have even more serious repercussions than at the national level .
I am also not in favour of a Europe-wide carbon tax , as this would impose a disproportionate burden on the energy sector in particular , and ultimately reduce the energy security of the EU .
Financial transactions account for a large proportion of the resources in the financial sector , and the various speculative operations on financial markets played a considerable role in the global financial crisis .
It is surely not fair for taxpayers to bear the full burden of the financial crisis , as some of this burden should be transferred to the financial sector as well , so that it can share in the costs .
The report focuses mainly on transactions that are highly risky and speculative , and it will therefore lead to greater responsibility in the financial sector through the future taxation of financial transactions , which will paradoxically lead to greater stability in the global financial sector .
Another reason for introducing a tax on financial transactions is the fact that financial services are not subject to VAT in most Member States .
I voted in favour of this report because I think it is a positive step towards the future innovative financing instruments that will underpin European economic recovery .
I consider it essential for Europe to find resources on the market to finance the key sectors of our economy , in accordance with the objectives of Europe 2020 , in particular , the trans-European transport energy and telecommunications infrastructures necessary for ending the crisis .
It is essential to drive the European economy .
The EU 's responsibility is not to impose and / or increase taxes , but have the courage to face the market .
The solution is to be able to find new forms of financing that can ensure full achievement of projects in the shortest possible time , through the creation of ad hoc funds built upon the issuance of securities directly related to the implementation and economic exploitation of the work , and which are known as project bonds .
Any taxation on financial transactions should be proposed in Europe only if introduced globally : I believe that the Commission should investigate the possibility of introducing such a tax at EU level , attempting to predict whether this will result in negative consequences for the competitiveness of the EU .
I voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution as I agree with the Commission 's objective of increasing the size of the EU budget through the use of innovative fiscal instruments , and recognise the potential benefits of increasing private sector financing using public funds .
I also believe that such measures should be accompanied by transparent reporting , combined with investment guidelines , risk management , exposure limits and adequate control and supervision procedures , established in a democratically accountable manner .
I welcome the European Parliament 's support for the introduction of a tax on financial transactions at European level during the vote in plenary .
A tax on financial transactions at European level will penalise highly speculative and socially useless financial transactions , while providing the European Union with an annual income of EUR 200 billion .
This vote goes against the competitiveness pact .
Rather than penalising States and citizens , we need to tax the financial markets .
The Commission and the Council must urgently take note of this .
I support , with some reservations , the Podimata report on innovative financing .
I share the rapporteur 's concern about the economic and financial crisis that we are going through , and the consequent lack of investment .
I also agree that it is desirable for investment to translate into greater progress and innovation , and that there is a need for Europe to increase its capacity for intelligent investment .
However , I fear that , overall , the report seems overly inclined towards increased taxes , when in several countries ( such as Portugal ) , we are already experiencing an overdose of fiscal burdens .
In its final version , the report calls for the introduction of a financial transaction tax ( at a global , or at least European , level ) , while admitting that the consequences of this need to be studied ( positing an a posteriori study for this ) .
I applaud the defence of the launch of Eurobonds , which would facilitate access to the market for the more fragile euro area countries , and the opinion that this would be beneficial ' to all participating Member States and to the euro area as a whole ' .
in writing . - ( FR ) Some people do not support a financial transaction tax ( FTT ) at European level because it would distort competition on the financial markets at Europe 's expense .
I do not believe that a tax of only 0.01 % on these transactions will cause investors to withdraw from the world 's largest financial market .
If we rely on the G20 to take this initiative at global level , we will wait forever .
I am therefore pleased that the amendment tabled by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament in favour of this FTT at European level has been adopted .
It would provide an estimated EUR 200 billion of income a year , thus allowing the Union to properly finance its budget , at a time when Council Members are already making known their intention to cut it , despite the added value that results from European expenditure .
The crisis , brought about by financial market players , is being used as an argument by our right-wing governments to call for budgetary cuts , especially in social expenditure .
Hence , European citizens would pay for mistakes that were not of their making .
The FTT would reintroduce social justice into European decisions by consolidating public finances at the expense of those who weakened them in the first place .
Therefore , this was exactly the right time to make this move .
The economic and financial crisis has highlighted the total lack of ethics in this area .
The paradigm of the new welfare economy , whereby the pursuit of individual wellbeing is the key to collective welfare , which is the sum of its parts , is apparent in all its inadequacy .
According to this approach , individual interest does not set any limitation on the collective interest , let alone the general interest .
Yet because public government must set general interest as a framework within which to operate , and provide free space for freedom and individual rights within it , it must support this with a fair and progressive tax system .
Consistent with this approach , which must be supported at global level by the EU and all G8 and G20 countries , the revenue from financial transactions must be made comparable to other revenues through a specific tax system that favours greater responsibility by operators together with other rules and new paradigms .
The introduction of Eurobonds designed for the crisis fund and infrastructure projects could strengthen the EU 's ability to take action if they were additional to the EU budget .
The report that we have adopted seems to me to be moving , albeit slowly , in this direction .
The current economic crisis has highlighted shortcomings in the supervision of the financial sector .
We therefore need new tools and new fiscal policies .
Indeed , the financial system has generated substantial profits from speculative transactions , and it does not have to pay any tax .
By voting in favour of a tax on financial transactions , the revenue of which could be usefully channelled into development aid , the European Parliament has indicated that it wants to stop this injustice .
This tax should , of course , be applied internationally , but if this does not happen , we would ask the EU to shoulder its responsibilities by implementing it in Europe .
In this way , Europe would set an example , both in terms of innovative financing and in terms of showing solidarity with developing countries .
It is now up to the European Commission to submit to us a legislative proposal that meets the expectations expressed by a very large majority in this Parliament .
I welcome this vote on the tax on financial transactions because the European Parliament is calling for the Union to implement this tax scheme without waiting for a hypothetical decision on the matter at global level .
The European Union has the largest financial sector in the world .
It should therefore lead the way .
According to various studies , the creation of a tax of around 0.05 % on transactions would generate some EUR 200 billion of annual revenue to be used to finance the recovery and development cooperation , and to protect the environment , while , at the same time , discouraging financial speculation .
Having said that , I also remain convinced that we need a tax of this kind at international level : the Union must encourage its partners to adopt regulations on financial taxes .
I say this because , if this tax is applied only in the European Union and not internationally by Europe 's main financial competitors , the Union 's finances will suffer greatly .
In particular , I hope that a compromise will be reached on this point during the French Presidency of the G20 .
For over 10 years , the European socialists have been fighting in the European Parliament for a tax on financial transactions .
This tax would have many benefits : not only would it discourage financial speculation ; it would also fund aid to developing countries and their adaptation to climate change , while contributing to the European Union 's budget .

The world is now in a different situation : the recession has made the need to stabilise the financial markets yet more acute , and the European Union needs new resources to overcome this recession - it must overcome it by means of a recovery , not by means of austerity .
At the same time , the groundswell in favour of the tax is getting bigger : more and more governments are supporting the idea , and the European Parliament has already voted repeatedly in favour of introducing a tax on financial transactions .
This new vote in favour of the tax is an important step : Parliament is saying that we must act immediately at European level , even if there is no global agreement .
Parliament 's request is clear , and the vote was an overwhelming one : we must now turn our words into deeds and implement the tax on financial transactions .
The report on innovative financing addresses a number of important aspects .
Unfortunately , it contains a proposal for Europe to introduce a financial transaction tax on a unilateral basis .
I believe that the Swedish example of the unilateral introduction of a kind of financial transaction tax in the 1980s , which resulted in the majority of trade in shares , bonds and options moving to London , should be taken into consideration so that we do not make the same mistake at European level .
I consider there to be a big risk that the stabilising effects on the financial market will not be realised if the EU introduces such a tax independently .
The risk of trade in shares , bonds and options transferring to less transparent and less open markets outside Europe is great .
That will not create better conditions for control of the financial market .
I therefore voted against the amendment that proposed a European Tobin tax but , in spite of the fact that this proposal was voted through , I chose to vote in favour of the report in the final vote .
This choice was made on the basis of the fact that , as Europe 2020 negotiator for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I would otherwise have risked undermining the group 's negotiating position on what are , for us , important issues , such as the importance of creating a real internal market , enabling the financing of infrastructure projects by means of European project bonds , and a possible solution with regard to a European carbon tax .
I voted in favour of this report as it defends the creation of specific instruments , such as the introduction of a financial transaction tax , which could contribute to improving the efficiency of the market , increasing transparency , reducing excessive price volatility and creating incentives for the financial sector to make long-term investments , with added value for the real economy .
We Swedish Social Democrats are very much in favour of a transaction tax at global level .
The EU should work very actively to get such a system established .
If an international agreement should , in time , prove to be politically impossible , the alternative of introducing a transaction tax within the EU alone should be given very careful consideration .
It should be based on a well-balanced impact assessment .
The Commission is currently preparing an analysis , but this has not prevented its representatives from pre-empting events on several occasions by expressing clearly negative views of a tax at EU level .
That is unacceptable , in our opinion .
Therefore , in order to send a clear signal to the Commission that this matter should be taken seriously and that the process must be unbiased , we have chosen to vote in favour of the amendment that talks specifically about the introduction of an EU tax .
It is very important for an objective and thoroughly considered basis for a decision to be established with regard to this matter .
This report deals with the need to find new forms of public sector financing at a world and European level .
In reality , the current economic and financial crisis is requiring Member States to seek revenue to attenuate their budget crises .
New means of financing include taxation of the financial sector and CO2 emissions .
In recent times , the financial sector has distorted its objectives of financing the development of the economy and , with the excuse of needing to cover risks , has increased rates , immediately obtaining enormous profits that seriously affect public finances and citizens .
Meanwhile , a tax on CO2 emissions would make the ' polluter pays ' principle fairer and more consistent , contributing not only to reducing climate change , but also to financing investment projects in this area .
I agree with having a financial transaction tax at a global level .
I believe that its introduction at a European level should be preceded by an impact study .
I also agree with the implementation of Eurobonds , as I believe them to be a common instrument for debt management .
This report talks about ' innovative financing ' .
In truth , however , it does not escape from the tired old positions rejecting the most elementary justice .
The financial market should have been effectively controlled and regulated a long time ago . A brake should have been applied on speculation a long time ago , whether it involved commodities , including food , property , benefits and pensions , or the sovereign debt of states ( to give a few examples ) .
The European Commission , however , obstinately refuses to proceed with these proposals .
This is despite knowing that financial losses caused by tax evasion and fraud in Europe are estimated to be between EUR 200 and 250 billion per year , a sum that would be sufficient to reduce public deficits without the need to increase taxes on employment - the old solution .
It also obstinately refuses to introduce a financial transaction tax at EU level and is not pressing for its adoption at a global level .
The same applies to the scandalous continued existence of tax havens .
These would be ways of bringing in revenue to combat poverty and other persistent economic and social problems .
Current estimates of revenue generated from a financial transaction tax , even at a low rate , indicate that around EUR 200 billion per year would be generated at an EU level .
I welcome the resolution on innovative financial instruments which represents Parliament 's contribution to the debate on how to generate new revenue , ensure a fair tax policy and maximise income recovery capabilities .
I support the introduction of a financial transaction tax ( FTT ) : the recent crisis - for which we can blame a certain kind of speculative finance - shows how states and citizens end up paying personally for the damage caused by others .
A tax on financial transactions would swell the EU coffers by about EUR 200 billion each year and help curb speculative activities , making them more expensive and therefore less attractive .
However , I believe that this tax should be established globally and not only in Europe , in order to avoid creating a competitive disadvantage to Europe itself which , let us not forget , is highly attractive being the largest global market .
We should also all welcome Parliament 's support for Eurobonds and project bonds , which will promote recovery by stimulating the real economy and encouraging the creation of infrastructures vital to the European economy .
There has long been a need to control and effectively regulate the capital market , preventing speculation on a very wide range of products , including commodities , property transactions , benefits , pensions and insurance , as well as a whole panoply of derivatives , including speculation on sovereign debt .
Unfortunately , the European Commission has made no progress with these proposals , when it is well known that financial losses caused by tax evasion and fraud in Europe are estimated to be between EUR 200 and 250 billion per year , which alone would be sufficient to reduce public deficits without the need to increase taxes on employment .
However , if we also had financial transaction taxes at a world level and , therefore , also at a European Union level , as well as an end to tax havens and speculative financial products , we would have even greater sums with which to address economic and social problems .
Current estimates of revenue generated from a financial transaction tax , even at a low rate , indicate that around EUR 200 billion per year would be generated at a European Union level .

In the light of this , we cannot accept that a clear position on the creation of a financial transaction tax should be delayed under the pretext of further studies and assessments .
If the financial system , responsible for reckless trading and speculation , is being held up as one of the major causes of the financial crisis , then it is right that those responsible should have to pay their share by offering the most significant economic contribution .
I nevertheless consider the method suggested in this report will affect the precarious balance of competition by undermining its foundations , since it would have to be applied on a global scale .
For this reason , and to avoid creating a dangerous precedent with regard to the European tax system , I do not support Mrs Podimata 's report and voted against it .
I voted for the amendments and for those parts of the text that relate to taxing financial transactions .
In fact , I voted for the principle of making financial institutions help to shoulder the cost of the recession , for which they are responsible , and to consolidate our public finances .
However , the problem with this report , which I voted against , is that its main aim , by way of innovation , is to create new taxes , managed , where possible , at European or global level , or at the very least with international bodies deciding who the beneficiaries will be and how the money will be used .
Moreover , there is no guarantee that taxes on labour would be significantly reduced .
Similarly , I can only oppose a carbon tax at every level , as it would invariably penalise the least well-off citizens , as seen with Mr Sarkozy 's unjust and unpopular project .
I also oppose the creation of a European agency responsible for issuing European bonds in order to pool public debt - this a real bonus for madmen paid for by people with more sense .
Finally , I regret that , although the part devoted to development funding rightly castigates government corruption and tax havens , it is careful not to denounce the outrageous practices of multinational firms , and especially their use of transfer prices .
in writing . - The report on ' innovative financing ' sends a strong message to the financial institutions and , in particular , to the banking industry , that it is time to further regulate the financial sector , holding banks administratively responsible and legally accountable for their negligent actions and ineffective risk management practices .
It has become evident that the financial services market is often incapable of regulating itself sufficiently and that the quality of consumer protection and safeguards in the financial services sector require tangible and strong improvement , particularly with regard to the monitoring and supervisory aspects .
The current situations might be used as a window of opportunity to strengthen the financial services industry and to restore citizens ' and consumers ' confidence in the sector , as they are now the ones footing the bill for the big blunders and bailing out the major financial institutions .
Having said that , the Commission should first evaluate the impact which a tax on financial transactions will have on the European economy , because any future proposals should not be based solely on decisions taken on impulse to address the buzzword of the moment , but should consist of a pragmatic approach that will prove to withstand the stresses of time and will restore the trust of the European citizens in the financial markets .
The adoption of the Podimata report was the chance for Parliament to show unequivocal support for the introduction of a tax on financial transactions at European level .
Until now , the European right had always frustrated the proposals by the socialists on this matter , whether in parliamentary committees or in plenary sessions .
The fact that a majority of MEPs , and hence a section of the right , have been won over by this project , which has been advocated for many years by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , is good news .
It shows that , together , we are gradually becoming aware of the merits of this project .
This vote marks a new stage in the process of introducing a financial instrument that would serve , in particular , to generate additional own resources for the EU budget , but also to support development initiatives internationally .
However , the fight is not over .
For the time being , this is only a policy position .
Beyond their statements , we must remain alert to the genuine willingness of European Heads of State or Government , a large majority of whom are right-of-centre , to introduce this tax .
For many years , we have been fighting for the introduction of a tax on financial transactions .
Despite the many reservations this idea has met with , the adoption of this resolution by a large majority is an important step .
By encouraging the taxing of financial transactions internationally and , in any case , by recommending the creation of such a tax within the European Union , Parliament is laying the foundation of a new global financial order .
On top of this , we should mention the new financial prospects that such a tax would offer , since its introduction could generate some EUR 200 billion per year .

This vote is a great victory ; it is now up to the international bodies to be as bold as the Members of the European Parliament have been .
The taxing of financial transactions is something that the socialists and the Left in Europe have long been fighting for .
The adoption , by a large majority , of the report by my Greek colleague , Anni Podimata , is testament to the political progress made by the European Parliament .
This is a great victory for the European left , and one of which it can be proud .
Although the text has no direct legislative effect , it does mark a decisive political step forward : from now on , the European right within the European Parliament will be unable to prevent the introduction of such a tax .
This is a real step in the direction of budgetary federalism , which is the only way for the European Union to achieve its goals in terms of growth , employment and overcoming the recession .
I agreed with this report , because one of the main advantages of innovative financing tools is that they can bring a double dividend , as they can contribute to the achievement of important policy goals , such as financial market stability and transparency , and offer significant revenue potential , but the effects of these tools on the negative externalities produced by the financial sector should also be taken into account .
I agree with the provision and the call for innovative financing measures to raise more from this sector and contribute to shifting the burden of taxation away from working people .
This would have the potential to improve market efficiency , increase transparency and reduce speculation , even out excessive price volatility , create incentives for the financial sector to make long-term investments with added value for the real economy , as well as help to finance global public goods and reduce public deficits .
I support the idea of issuing common European project bonds to finance Europe 's significant infrastructure needs and structural projects within the framework of the Europe 2020 agenda and anticipated new EU strategies , such as the new strategy on energy infrastructure development , and other large-scale projects .
EU project bonds would thus secure the investment required , would attract the support they need , and would become an important mechanism for maximum leverage of public support .
These projects must also contribute to the ecological transformation of our economies , paving the way for the zero carbon economy .
in writing . - ( LV ) A new financial transaction tax will not solve European Union Member States ' budgetary problems .
That is why I did not support the report on innovative financing at the global and European level .
Contrary to what some people believe , it will not be banks that pay such a tax , but their customers , the same old taxpayers therefore .
At a time of economic recovery , we should not be introducing new taxes ; instead , we must reduce government expenditure .
A new tax would only serve to conceal governments ' inability to reduce expenditure , and not have the desired effect .
The report put to the vote in Parliament today relates to the introduction of innovative financial instruments .
I wanted to support the resolution with my vote because the economic crisis of recent years has highlighted the lack of regulation and the need to create new financial instruments that can resolve major financial speculations .
This EU action will therefore be able to unequivocally re-establish the necessity of responding to the needs of the real economy by supporting long-term investment and creating new additional resources to face up to and win major global and European challenges , achieving growth and development objectives under the EU 2020 strategy .
The dramatic increase in financial transactions has revealed the growing gap between finance and the real economy .
The introduction of a tax on financial transactions , the issuance of common European bonds and the anticipation of a carbon tax , are some of the proposals geared to the creation of new processes , which are needed for our economy but must not , however , have a negative impact on the most vulnerable consumers .
I very much welcome the result of the vote on the report on innovative financing at a global and European level .
Two matters of key importance were covered in this report , namely , the tax on financial transactions and Eurobonds .
These could be important sources of funding to increase the EU 's financial and economic capabilities , enabling it to implement large and strategically important projects , including transport and energy projects , and also possibly facilitating the mobilisation of private capital .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has been calling for a similar solution for some time .
I am pleased that a clear majority has voted in favour of introducing these innovative solutions .
The Left has supported the introduction of a financial transaction tax for many years .
This idea was accepted by the European Parliament in general terms today .
The Podimata own-initiative report adopted by Parliament does not entail a definitive yes or no to the issue of a financial transaction tax .
It is not clear whether we can expect a corresponding proposal from the Commission or , if so , then when ?
We still have a long way to go before a legislative process is put in train .
At present , the Commission is simply preparing a feasibility study .
One of the framework conditions for this feasibility study is that competitiveness should not be impaired by the financial transaction tax .
It is quite unrealistic to expect a worldwide introduction of a financial transaction tax at present .
The own-initiative report did not just deal with the issue of a financial transaction tax , but also with the smooth functioning of competition policy in the EU and the introduction of a carbon tax following the VAT model , to be charged on every product in the internal market .
We cannot accept this carbon tax .
This is an environmental policy demand of the Conservatives , who are seeking an energy mix that combines nuclear energy and renewable energies .
Nuclear energy would remain unscathed by this tax .
We are calling for the taxing of energy inputs , also covering nuclear energy , through a combined primary energy / carbon tax .
I abstained from the final vote because I could not vote in favour of a report that links one good idea , a transaction tax , with measures that would place an even greater burden on the people of Europe .
In recent years , the global economic and financial crisis has exposed major weaknesses in the global financial system 's regulatory and supervisory framework .
Financial transactions are typified by a hefty increase in volume and by a noticeable disparity between the volume of financial transactions and the needs of the real economy .
Short-term investments , which predominate , have led to excessive volatility and risk-taking .
Short-term speculative transactions were at the heart of the crisis and have underlined the clear connection between inefficient financial regulation and supervision and the sustainability of public finances .
I voted for this report because the problems caused by this market behaviour have had a major impact on public finances , European citizens and beyond .
The report intends to create tools designed to reduce speculation , guarantee a fair distribution of the burden between the key financial players and create new additional resources to meet the major challenges .
Tax evasion and fraud are currently estimated to cost EU Member States approximately EUR 250 billion a year .

The novel element is the tax on financial transactions , which would generate revenues of approximately EUR 200 billion per year for the EU and would discourage speculative transactions .

in writing . - In voting for this report , Euro MPs are responding to the public 's call for fair taxation of the financial sector .
The financial sector is largely exempt from VAT and is under-taxed , while ordinary citizens have faced the costs of the financial crisis , including contributing EUR 9 500 in government support from every man , woman and child in the EU .
In this vote , MEPs have backed the hundreds of thousands of campaigners who are actively working for a Robin Hood Tax - a tiny tax on financial transactions that can raise billions to meet priorities at home and our commitments to fighting poverty and climate change internationally .
Global agreement would be the best way to introduce such a tax , but the UK 's stamp duty on shares demonstrates it is possible to introduce a successful , well-designed financial transaction tax ( FTT ) without undermining competitiveness .
An EU-wide coordinated FTT would be the first step towards a global FTT .
It is time for action and the EU can lead this campaign for global fairer taxation .
in writing . - Labour Euro MPs are responding to the public 's call for fair taxation of the financial sector .
The financial sector is largely exempt from VAT and is under-taxed , while ordinary citizens have faced the costs of the financial crisis , including contributing EUR 9 500 in government support from every man , woman and child in the EU .
In this vote , Labour Euro MPs have backed the hundreds of thousands of campaigners who are actively working for a Robin Hood Tax - a tiny tax on financial transactions that can raise billions to meet priorities at home and our commitments to fighting poverty and climate change internationally .
Global agreement would be the best way to introduce such a tax , but the UK 's stamp duty on shares demonstrates it is possible to introduce a successful , well-designed financial transaction tax ( FTT ) without undermining competitiveness .
An EU-wide coordinated FTT would be the first step towards a global FTT .
It is time for action and the EU can lead this campaign for global fairer taxation .
The idea of a tax on financial transactions has been advocated by the Left for years .
This idea is today the subject of a consensus .
This concession to our views is welcome .
Nevertheless , a tax on financial transactions should be aimed solely at promoting the general interest of the people , not the smooth operation of free trade or of the pollution rights trading that some - and indeed this text - call the ' carbon market ' .
I shall vote against this crude hijacking of what was a good idea .
Despite agreeing with a large part of the content of this report , I could not vote in favour of it since it advocates the introduction of a financial transaction tax ( at a global , or at least European , level ) , although it admits that the consequences of doing so need to be studied ( proposing an a posteriori study for this ) .
The party that I represent has always fought against the introduction of such a financial transaction tax in Portugal , in the light of the detrimental effect it could have on the financial markets .
Portugal is exhausted and unable to deal with further tax burdens , given that in the end , this tax would be borne by the citizens , as the financial institutions would pass it on to their customers .
The introduction of such a tax only at a European level could lead to other markets gaining competitive advantages in relation to European financial markets .
in writing . - ( ES ) I have voted in favour of the Podimata report regarding innovative financing on a global and European scale as it introduces an idea that has been one of the pillars of the Left in the world : the introduction of a financial transaction tax .
The text could certainly be much braver and not make this tax dependent upon the creation of a similar tax at global level .
My political organisation has always advocated the need to create a tax on world capital flow , such as the so-called ' Tobin tax ' .
For this reason , although the proposal made in the report seems insufficient to me , I believe it is a step in the right direction .
With the global economic and monetary crisis of 2007 , we were able to observe the major weaknesses of the global financial system 's regulatory and supervision framework .
I spearheaded the fight within the European Parliament for innovative financing by setting up a working group on the feasibility of a tax on international transactions .
I am convinced that such a tax would not only allow for better regulation of the financial sector by restricting purely speculative activity , but would also help the poorest , particularly developing countries , and the least developed countries among them , to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and to take the measures necessary to adapt to climate change .
A tax on financial transactions at European level could potentially generate around EUR 200 billion of revenue per year in the Union and close to USD 650 billion per year globally .

If we made consistent progress at European level by applying a tax on international financial transactions , we would preserve the strong message we sent in December 2010 when we adopted the recommendation entitled ' the financial , economic and social crisis : recommendations concerning measures and initiatives to be taken ' .
in writing . - The adoption of this report would be the first strong signal by Parliament in favour of a financial transaction tax at a time when the Commission has an ambiguous approach , both showing a willingness to regulate financial actors but exempting them from taxation .
It is necessary to point to the hypocritical discourse of some right-wing leaders , calling for a form of taxation of the financial sector , but only at global level , where we all know it is most unlikely to be implemented .
The Commission should give a precise and clear signal about the fact that the transaction tax must be paid by everyone .
The situation where farmers pay tax while financiers do not is not acceptable .
Social injustice gives birth to malice and permissiveness converts government institutions into a sandpit created by banks .
I voted ' for ' .
The introduction of a financial transaction tax is a step in the right direction and would mainly affect hedge funds and similar products , which would seem to be of very little benefit to the real economy .
It is doubtless right for Europe to take the lead here - after all , we would have to wait indefinitely if we were to try to bring the Americans on board too .
However , a financial transaction tax should not be used as an opportunity to introduce an EU tax by the back door .
Unfortunately , however , Mrs Podimata 's report takes us in precisely that direction .
Fiscal sovereignty must remain with the Member States .
If Brussels cannot manage on the money it gets , then it needs to tighten its belt .
There are enough powers already that could be better regulated at a national level than at EU level .
The other calls contained in the report , namely for the introduction of Eurobonds and a carbon tax , should be rejected .
On the one hand , Eurobonds are a product that goes against all economic sense , while on the other , fiscally prudent euro area countries are once again unfairly required to pay the price .
The EU would simply become a transfer union .
Also , a carbon tax with dubious objectives would damage Europe 's economy and destroy jobs and would thus have a negative impact on most people .
For this reason , the report should be rejected .
I voted against this report because , while the idea of a contribution by the financial system , which is greatly to blame for the crisis of the last two years , seems right , the way it is implemented leaves me very puzzled .
I must say that I welcome the proposal for the creation of Eurobonds , which I believe can be a useful tool , but I have more problems with the bulk of the report , which is on the introduction of a tax on financial transactions .
I think it is too risky to apply this only to one level of the European Union , as it might make the entire EU financial system uncompetitive , and operators could get around it without too much difficulty by focusing on other markets .
Also , I would not want this tax to pave the way for the creation of a potential centralised EU tax system , which is something to which I would be totally opposed .
Until now , the European taxpayer has borne the main financial brunt of the economic crisis .
It is therefore important that other instruments should be used to ensure that the players and speculators in the financial markets shoulder some of the responsibility .
This is only fair .
However , a financial transaction tax should not be used as an excuse for the introduction of direct taxation from Brussels .
This would erode the fiscal sovereignty and general sovereignty of the Member States .
This report reveals tendencies in this direction , which is why I have voted against it .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution on innovative financing at global and European level .
Europe , with the world 's largest financial market , is gradually trying to get back on its feet following the crisis , the effects of which will be felt for many years to come .
Consequently , it is crucial to establish innovative financing measures which would ensure financial stability and transparency .
Currently , the majority of financial services are exempt from VAT .
Therefore , significant revenue is being lost through the financial sector and the tax burden is increasing for working people .
I believe that the tax on financial transactions is an effective financing measure that would help reduce speculation and public deficits .
Having properly assessed its possible negative impact on the EU 's global competitiveness , we must make every effort to ensure that it is also applied at global level .
Furthermore , in order to increase the GDP of all countries , it would be advisable to establish a tax on bank assets which would be proportionate to the systemic significance of the credit institution concerned and to the level of risk involved in an activity .
I agree with the proposal on issuing European project bonds which , as a common debt management instrument , will help to attract increased investment in European infrastructure projects .
Furthermore , in order to obtain maximum benefit from the application of the carbon tax , it is necessary to set the minimum mandatory requirements for all Member States , preventing overwhelming burdens from being shifted to low income consumers .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament 's own-initiative report on innovative financing at a global and European level .
The financial crisis and the debt crisis have revealed the gaps in the operation and control of the financial sector today .
The introduction of a tax on global financial transactions is not a new proposal and it is certainly an unpopular proposal in all the developed countries without exception , especially in those which apply low taxation policies .
Nonetheless , if global agreement proves impossible , the introduction of a financial transaction tax in the EU , if it does not damage its competitiveness , will help to improve how this particular sector operates and , at the same time , will generate important public revenue .
This is the thrust of Amendment 2 , which I voted in favour of .
This report relates to innovative means of financing at a world and European level .
It outlines measures for dealing with the serious deficiencies in the regulatory and supervisory framework for the world financial system revealed by the global economic and financial crisis of 2007-2009 .
Financial transactions are currently characterised by an enormous increase in volume and a substantial discrepancy between the volume of financial transactions and the needs associated with them in the ' real world ' .
New trading patterns , such as short-term investment and automated high-frequency trading , which have taken a central role within global financial trends and led to excessive volatility and risk taking , merit the attention of those in government .
These are sufficient reasons for the European Parliament , within the framework of its remit , to make its contribution and indicate the measures it believes to be appropriate to resolve the current situation .
The report on innovative financing addresses a number of important aspects , such as the importance of creating a real internal market as a basis for European growth , the importance of enabling the financing of European infrastructure projects by means of European project bonds , as well as a possible solution with regard to a European carbon tax so that we can switch to sustainable production in Europe .
The fact that the report points out that the EU Member States must meet the aid targets that have been set is also important .
We nevertheless chose to abstain in the final vote because we do not believe that it is a good idea for Europe to introduce a financial transaction tax independently if other countries do not also do the same .
We believe that the Swedish example of the unilateral introduction of a kind of financial transaction tax in the 1980s , which resulted in the majority of trade in shares , bonds and options moving to London , should be taken into consideration so that we do not make the same mistake at European level .
We consider there to be a big risk that the stabilising effects that we hope a financial transaction tax will have on the financial market will not be realised if the EU introduces such a tax independently .
The risk of trade in shares , bonds and options transferring instead to less transparent and less open markets outside Europe is great .
That will not create better conditions for control of the financial market and it would also undermine the joint European supervision of the financial market that we have put in place .
In order to tackle the global financial crisis and the major recession resulting from it , several governments have increased sovereign debt to unsustainable levels , with the aim of rescuing financial companies and stimulating their respective economies .
At the same time , banks are accumulating profits through the differential between loans obtained from central banks at an interest rate of almost nil and the price at which they grant credit to customers and to states .
Thus , it is a moral imperative for financial businesses to shoulder their responsibilities in the face of the crisis that they caused .
A financial transaction tax is the least that can be demanded .
To those seeking to delay this accountability , on the pretext that such a tax can only be introduced at a global level , I would say : ( 1 ) that the EU 's position would be greatly strengthened by the unilateral launching of this tax ; ( 2 ) if a proportion of the capital applied in speculative transactions were to leave the EU , this would result in a reduction in the volatility of the financial markets , which would be beneficial ; ( 3 ) if global financial regulation is not viable or advisable , sensible rules on the circulation of capital will be needed .
The report is a step in this direction .
I voted in favour of the report because it is high time for the EU to take the lead and to introduce a financial transaction tax at European level .
I believe that if we take this first step , it will increase the likelihood of achieving the objective of a worldwide financial transaction tax .
The amendment proposed by my group calling for the introduction of a financial transaction tax at EU level without further delay ( such as the carrying out of more studies ) was passed by a narrow majority .
I would now call on the responsible Commissioner , Mr Šemeta , finally to take action .
The resolution was passed with a broad majority of 529 votes in favour , 127 votes against and 18 abstentions .
This is a strong signal from Parliament that cannot be ignored by the Commission or reinterpreted on flimsy grounds .
I call on President Barroso to take action , to exercise the Commission 's right to take the initiative , and to present a draft proposal to us , the legislature .
A total of EUR 200 billion could be collected in this way - funds that are sorely needed and that should be contributed by those who caused the crisis .
We should not turn to the taxpayers to make up for the deficits caused by the financial crisis , but instead should demand that the private sector finally pays its way .
This money should be used both for budgetary consolidation and as a separate source of revenue for the EU budget .
in writing . - The European Parliament today reiterated the call for the introduction of an EU-level financial transaction tax , as part of a report on innovative financing adopted by MEPs .
The Greens have long called for the introduction of a financial transaction tax and welcomed the vote , with Green MEP Philippe Lamberts commenting : ' The EP has kept the pressure on for the introduction of a financial transaction tax at EU-level .
While the ultimate goal should be to introduce a global FTT , there are clear benefits for the EU to push ahead on its own .
MEPs have today urged the Commission to take steps to this end .
The Greens have long championed the introduction of a financial transaction tax both as a means of curbing harmful speculation and as a new source for generating public revenue .
As well as being a potentially significant source of revenue at a time when national exchequers are under strain , a financial transaction tax is socially just .
A FTT would also clearly address the systemic risk emanating from high-frequency trading , acting as a disincentive for risky speculation .
It is time for the Commission and Member States to stop stalling ' .
The recent economic crisis has laid bare the shortcomings of the system for regulating and supervising global finance .
All too often , the volume of these transactions has far exceeded the needs of the real world , causing speculation which , over time , has made the capital involved extremely volatile and at risk of insolvency .
The first to take the brunt have been taxpayers , also in terms of rising unemployment , dwindling incomes , reduced access to social services and increasing inequalities .
To prevent future crises , the EU now needs to promote real changes in regulation and supervision , giving shape to a more healthy and robust financial environment .
The idea of a levy on financial transactions has important advantages , especially in the aftermath of a crisis like the present one : stabilising the markets , providing incentives for long-term investment and ensuring traceability for the auditing of individual transactions .
Curbing speculation , supporting long-term investment and achieving greater long-term growth under the EU 2020 strategy : it is important to complement all this by introducing a similar system of financing outside the European Union as well , in order not to give rise to competitive disadvantages against us .
In today 's vote , we saw support for the report concerning innovative financing in the world and in Europe .
The only part that was not supported was the proposal calling on the Commission to investigate the feasibility of the EU 's carbon tax , which , like VAT , will be introduced onto the internal market for each product .
I am pleased to note that there was support for the main points calling on the Commission to investigate the feasibility and practicality of various new taxes and the consequences resulting from them .
With the bank taxes , taxes on financial activity and taxes on financial transactions , everyone has their own economic objective , and their potential for bringing in income differs , so it is important that , before imposing additional taxes , an in-depth analysis is carried out .
There was support for the idea under consideration that , if a financial transaction tax is imposed , it should be introduced as widely as possible .
At the same time , Members of Parliament , including myself , asked for clarity on who will ultimately pay this tax , because the tax burden usually falls on the customer , which , in this case , would be retail investors and individuals . Thank you .
in writing . - I supported the Podimata report which includes a number of good ideas regarding a global financial transaction tax .
The truth is that much of the financial sector , particularly the investment banks , has still to reform itself following the flaws that were revealed by the financial crisis .
Even the Governor of the Bank of England , Mervyn King , admitted last week that the cost of the austerity measures being taken in Britain , and across Europe , were being borne by ' people who were utterly blameless ' while the financial sector had gone back to a ' business as usual ' mentality .
It is right that the private sector should pay its share for the consequences of the financial crisis and provide for any future bail-out given the existence of many banks which are still deemed ' too big to fail ' .
The onus is now on the IMF , and the European Commission , to assess the positives and negatives of a global financial transactions tax .
in writing . - During today 's vote on the Podimata report on innovative financing , a separate amendment was voted on that called on the Commission to come forward with proposals for an EU-level financial transaction tax proposal in the absence of any initiatives at the G20 level .
I voted in favour of the amendment for the purposes of group solidarity and because I believe that clear support for the concept of an FTT from Europe may spur further discussions at the G20 .
However , I am very clear that the introduction of an FTT at EU level , if not also implemented globally , raises potential risks to the UK 's competitive position as a financial centre , which has a clear impact on citizens in South-East England .
I am very wary of an EU-only FTT and believe that any proposal must be rigorously impact-assessed to ensure that the positive impacts outweigh the downsides for my constituents .
Prior to the result of such an impact assessment , I flatly reject proposals for a blanket 0.05 % FTT on all financial transactions as being arbitrary and ill thought-out .
I voted against the report , as it does not guarantee that a tax on financial transactions would be used for the purpose for which a true Tobin tax should be used , namely , developing countries and investments in the climate .
The report is unclear about whether the tax will accrue to the EU 's budgets , which opens up the possibility of more problems .
Firstly , I am fundamentally opposed to increasing the EU 's own resources .
Secondly , we will be wasting an opportunity to have a genuine Tobin tax if the EU has the right of disposal of the tax - see the Commission 's proposal that the tax should finance EU projects and gaps in the EU budget .
My vote should not be construed as opposition to a tax on financial transactions in the EU .
I fully support a genuine Tobin tax .
I also support the positive elements of the report , such as the fight against tax fraud , the ' polluter pays ' principle and the call for energy efficiency .
Today , I once again voted in favour of the introduction of a financial transaction tax ( FTT ) and agreed that , if we fail to impose an FTT at a global level , the EU should take the first step , anyway .
We have to take advantage of this momentum and restrain the greed of the financial and banking sectors .
After all , a global crisis requires global solutions and Europe , as the largest financial market , can play a pioneering role in this regard .
A financial transaction tax could provide Member States with sufficient revenue to balance their budgets and keep their economies going .
Because the revenue potential of an FTT of 0.05 % amounts to nearly EUR 200 billion in the EU and USD 650 billion globally , this tax could also form an important part of the solution in the search for new and sustainable sources of income .
An FTT could limit speculation and stabilise markets , create incentives for long-term investments and , because each transaction is traceable , it could increase transparency and ensure that financial players accept their share of the cost of the crisis .
Moreover , the report calls for the possibilities of issuing Eurobonds and imposing a CO2 tax to be examined in greater detail .
in writing . - In contrast to my Scottish Conservative and Scottish Liberal colleagues , I have supported this report which addresses a variety of possible financing sources including a Financial Transactions Tax .
It also calls for a debate on the use of revenue which could come from a FTT .
I strongly supported the introduction of a tax on financial transactions at global level during the vote on the report on innovative financing at global and European level .
However , the possibility of applying such a tax exclusively at European level should first be the subject of a feasibility study by the European Commission .
Indeed , we should establish whether this tax could be implemented at European level without having adverse effects on European competitiveness internationally .
The economic and financial crisis has revealed serious deficiencies in the regulatory and supervisory framework of the global financial system .
Responses need to be provided to the crisis through new instruments that can put a brake on speculation , restore the role of the financial sector , ensure an equitable distribution of the burdens , and create new , additional resources for facing global challenges , such as climate change , development goals and intelligent , sustainable , inclusive growth within the framework of the Europe 2020 strategy .
This own-initiative report is the result of a desire to find new , innovative sources of financing .
Taxation instruments based on the receipt of income are not considered to be sufficient .
The document examines the following possibilities for innovative financing : taxation of the financial sector , Eurobonds and taxation of the energy sector .
In my view , it is essential to innovate in terms of alternative means of financing that are equal to today 's challenges and in line with the modern world , but it is inadvisable to do this without first studying its real impact .
Just as important as increasing income is bolstering the regulatory role of the market , creating mechanisms to strengthen its transparency , efficiency and stability .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of the document during the plenary session .
The report is an insult to the intelligence of the working classes and the grassroots classes , which are suffering under the barbaric war unleashed on them by capital and its political representatives .
It clarifies from the outset that there can be no question of taxing capital : ' emphasises that an increase in the rates and the scope of existing taxation ... can be neither a sufficient nor a sustainable solution ' .
However , in order to deceive the workers , it calls on the EU to adopt a ' financial transaction tax ' of 0.01 % , which is presented as an allegedly ' fair distribution of the burden ' of the crisis between capital and the workers and an effort to limit speculation by capital .
At the same time , direct taxation on poor grassroots classes is being increased and indirect taxation , which literally eats into working class and grassroots incomes , is being pushed through the roof .
The financial transaction tax is not a tax on the financial sector ; it is another indirect tax .
Alongside this new indirect tax , a whole series of so-called ' innovative financing ' measures , or rather new taxes on grassroots incomes , is also proposed , such as a ' carbon tax ' , a ' solidarity contribution on air tickets ' , even a ' global lottery ' to combat hunger .
The Greek Communist Party voted against this particular report , underlining that the only popular way out of the capitalist crisis is to target the profits of the monopolies .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report .
In my opinion , Mrs Podimata 's report is very well balanced and very well explained , and I welcome the four financial instruments introduced by the report .
The four measures are all innovative and I would like to stress that this is not solely about the issue of a financial transaction tax .
We should be careful in choosing which instruments to implement : in my opinion , we should exclude tax on sectors - such as the energy sector - which have a multiplying effect on living costs .
Thus , for the final phase of this issue , the Commission should conduct an evaluation through an impact assessment of the efficiency and potential results of using these instruments .
The report contains some good ideas , for example , a financial transaction tax of just 0.05 % that would net EUR 200 billion for the EU 's budget .
At present , we are failing to benefit from this money , which would simply make speculation harder , but not impossible .
The exciting question is what the Council of Ministers will do with this own-initiative report .
We still have a long journey ahead of us .
in writing . - With citizens across the EU facing a growing bill for the financial crisis , the measures included in this report have the potential to raise billions of euro and alleviate some of the pressure on families in these challenging financial circumstances .
A tiny tax on financial transactions will be able to be put to use to fight poverty in the UK and across the world and mitigate the effects of climate change .
Campaigners for this so-called Robin Hood tax , including Labour MEPs , now need to expand on their success and continue to put pressure on the global financial sector to expand this scheme to create a worldwide Financial Transaction Tax .
I voted in favour of this resolution , which is aimed at encouraging innovative financing by means of a tax on financial transactions , increasing the economy 's recovery capacities , and promoting the transition to green growth while maintaining aid to developing countries .
The economic crisis showed , very forcefully , the vital importance of establishing global financial governance to ensure that we are no longer subject to the vagaries of unbridled financial capitalism .
This is what the French Presidency of the G20 wants , and we must do all we can to achieve that objective .
Financial speculation , encouraged by the lack of rules and supervision , has destroyed millions of jobs , seriously affected public finances and considerably reduced living standards for a large majority of Europeans .
It is time to move on from this short-term vision of the economy , where money is all-important and irresponsibility is everywhere , and which led us to the edge of the abyss , so that the financial system can resume its role of serving the real economy and the people .
The European Union should set an example in this regard , and the resolution adopted by this House sends a strong signal to our partners .
I have voted in favour of the report by Mrs Podimata on innovative financing at global and European level .
Until now , only the European taxpayer has borne the brunt of the financial and economic crisis in 2007 and subsequent years .
This is the first report to consider a variety of innovative mechanisms designed to ensure that players in the financial markets also carry some of the costs .
The proposal for a financial transaction tax at global level , if possible , is to be welcomed and a similar scheme at EU level should be seriously considered as an alternative .
The great advantage of this tax is not just the potential income from a sector that has had little or no tax levied in the past , but also the simultaneous regulating effect .
It is a well-known fact that the financial sector , which is frequently built on speculation , has become divorced from the real economy .
By taxing the financial sector , we could generate incentives for longer term investments again , thus considering the needs of the real economy .
I am voting in favour of this report because the importance of reducing inequalities in the area of health is intrinsically linked to the reduction of social inequalities , as pointed out in this report .
Health inequalities begin at an early age and continue throughout life , and they also reproduce themselves in other generations .
In light of this , Member States need to adopt the principle of ' health in all policies ' .
In addition to this , I strongly support the rapporteur 's recommendations defending the need to promote universal access to health , including for undocumented migrants , and access to welfare protection for pregnant women in line with legislation in their own countries .
Edite Estrela 's report serves to review the health inequalities that exist within the European Union and the measures that need to be taken to reduce them .
Thus , it is a useful report and one for which I voted , not least to reaffirm the inviolable nature of the right to abortion and the need for easy access to methods of contraception , at a time when these rights are not yet effective in all the Member States of the European Union .
The march towards equality goes on .
There are very significant health inequalities between countries and regions in the European Union .
Due to the economic and financial crisis , some Member States have taken austerity measures leading to a reduction in the level of funding for public health , disease prevention and long-term care services .
Not all EU citizens have access to quality health services .
This is particularly true in the EU 's poorer regions , where patients do not have access to quality healthcare and treatment services .
Major disparities exist both in reimbursement for medication and the treatment of individual complex diseases , such as Alzheimer 's disease , which prevents the patients of some Member States from obtaining reimbursable medication and the treatment they need in their country .
I believe that the European Commission must take measures to reduce disparities and inequality of access to quality healthcare services faced by people in the EU and establish mechanisms to monitor inequalities in health .
The Commission should also present an initiative , aimed at encouraging and supporting the development by Member States of integrated national or regional strategies to reduce health inequalities .
European citizens enjoy longer and healthier lives today .
Despite average health levels within the European Union having improved over time , health disparities still exist between Member States and within Member States in Europe .
On account of the current economic , financial and social crisis , these disparities are tending to increase .
As the shadow rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I pointed out the need to seek solutions .
These will necessarily involve all participants : the European Union , national governments , regional and local authorities , and operators within the social economy .
The challenges facing the European Union , the result of demographic changes , require a concrete plan for combating health inequalities in rural areas .
Strengthening the mechanism for recognising qualifications will facilitate the circulation of skills within the EU and the mobility of professionals .
Campaigns promoting healthy lifestyles and prevention and screening programmes directed at specific groups are also important for reducing health inequalities .
For all of the above reasons , I supported this report .
At a time when we are still fully feeling the social effects of the economic and financial crisis in our respective European societies , it was important to vote today for Mrs Estrela 's report on reducing health inequalities .
Indeed , this report is a reminder that inequalities also affect health services and that it is important to act on the fundamental causes of those inequalities so that all European citizens can at last enjoy their fundamental social rights .
Citizens are not equal , whether in terms of life expectancy , poverty or social exclusion , and they are not all exposed to health risks .
The report also mentions undocumented migrants , who often face tremendous difficulty in accessing health services in host countries .
Hence , we invite the Member States to improve access to healthcare for all , whether citizens or not , and call on them to further coordinate their national health policies .
Indeed , access to high quality healthcare is one of the most fundamental rights and should therefore be a priority both for the Union and for the Member States , which still have jurisdiction in this area .
In the European Union , there are significant health inequalities and measures to tackle these inequalities also vary widely within Member States .
Since I believe that these differences in health matters can have a considerable influence on individuals throughout their lifetime , they pose a problem to be tackled with determination and with an innovative political outlook .
This report contains very interesting solutions for acknowledging the specific right to health of citizens , in particular , by focusing both on training the population and on health service coverage .
The social consequences of the recent economic and financial crisis are obvious : since the crisis began , the number of jobless people has increased by 5 million , many households have been affected by the recession and are now more at risk of poverty or a situation of excessive indebtedness .
I think it is essential that reducing these inequalities should be considered a priority at all levels of decision making .
I also call on the Commission to give them greater recognition in the EU 2020 strategy and to ensure that the objective of reducing health inequalities is fully taken into account in future initiatives .
I voted in favour of this report because health inequalities are a problem that needs to be tackled as a matter of urgency .
They start early in life and persist not only into old age but subsequent generations .
Inequalities experienced in earlier life in access to education , employment and healthcare , as well as those based on gender and cultural background , can have a critical bearing on the health status of people throughout their lives .
Furthermore , poverty and social exclusion have a significant impact on the state of health .
The reasons for these differences in health are , in many cases , avoidable and unjust .
In order to tackle health inequalities , specific measures need to be taken , particularly as regards the most vulnerable groups .
It is essential that the reduction of health inequalities is considered an essential priority , ensuring effective impact assessments in the area of health .
The crisis has hit healthcare services hard in several EU Member States in terms of both supply and demand .
On the supply side , the economic and financial crisis has resulted in a fall in the level of funds allocated to public health and healthcare services , and in the long term too , as a result of budget cuts and lower revenues obtained from the collection of taxes .
On the other hand , the demand for healthcare services has risen in the long term as well , as a result of a combination of factors contributing to the deterioration in the population 's state of health in general .
Several Member States have included as part of their recovery packages measures to alleviate the effects of the economic crisis on healthcare services , by investing in the health service 's infrastructure , making optimum use of the funds allocated to healthcare services , as well as by restructuring and reorganising the healthcare system .
However , there are large discrepancies in Member States in terms of measures adopted to combat inequalities .
Access is a key issue in the case of all public services .
Gathering and exchanging evidence on effective strategies , policies and measures will help obtain support at administrative level and in different sectors .
I agree with the assertion of the rapporteur , Mrs Estrela , that enormous health disparities exist both between people who live in different regions of the EU and between more advantaged and less advantaged population groups .
These inequalities tend to begin at birth and persist into old age , influenced throughout life by access to education , employment and healthcare , and may be exacerbated by differences based on gender and race .
It is essential to reduce the size of the existing disparities , which jeopardise the commitments made by the EU with regard to solidarity , social and economic cohesion , human rights and equality of opportunity , as a result of which this is one of the priority actions within the 2008-2013 EU strategy for health .
However , it is important to recognise that health policy is the responsibility of the Member States , together with the establishment of respective systems for people to access healthcare .
The report describes several interesting measures , but does not examine their financial impact .
I am also unhappy with the introduction of the question of abortion , which is part of a national and not European remit .
The principles of universality , access to high quality care , equity and solidarity must become a reality within the health systems of the European Union .
That is why the European Parliament , by a large majority , adopted the Estrela report .
Many inequalities can still be seen in the health systems of the 27 Member States .
MEPs have therefore called for universal access to affordable healthcare to be improved .
Basic care must be less expensive and access to medicines more affordable .
Inequalities between different social and age groups must be reduced .
Member States should improve the effectiveness of their health expenditure , focus on prevention , and offer targeted programmes for the most vulnerable groups .
This is what MEPs are asking the European Commission and the governments of the Member States to do , in order to ensure a health standard in Europe that is worthy of the European social model that we want .
I was anxious to support Edite Estrela 's report on reducing health inequalities between the countries of the European Union , but also within them .
This is simply because it mentions a very wide range of the persistent inequalities in this area within the Union .
These inequalities , which are unfair , are the product of numerous economic , environmental and lifestyle factors , but also of difficulties in accessing healthcare , be it for economic reasons or because of ' poor distribution of medical resources ' in certain areas of the Union .
Although health policy remains ( for the most part ) a national responsibility , we MEPs have a duty to encourage our Member States to continue their efforts to reduce socio-economic inequalities , thereby also reducing disparities in healthcare .
Member States must ensure that vulnerable groups ( the disabled , the elderly , migrants ... and women ! ) really can enjoy fair access to healthcare .
A special focus is also needed on health prevention and information , in coordination with organisations from civil society .
Despite the fact that the report contains provisions that I consider to be of great relevance on the growing importance of healthcare provision for the elderly and the need to improve knowledge of diseases that affect older people in particular , in general , it says little that is new .
In fact , by trying to mention everything , it ends up being a ' wish list ' , to which the rapporteur has added , on the pretext of ' reducing health inequalities ' , issues as diverse - and unconnected to equality of access to healthcare - as domestic violence , investigation of the pharmaceutical sector , and the policies of the Member States with regard to the voluntary interruption of pregnancy and access to fertility treatment for homosexuals .
I do not believe this to be the arena where these issues should be dealt with .
We know that access to abortion and medically assisted reproduction for homosexual couples are controversial issues within the Member States , and only the Member States can freely make decisions about them .
For this reason as well , I cannot vote in favour of the report .
Health and life expectancy are intimately linked to social conditions .
It is essential that the reduction of inequalities be considered a fundamental priority at all levels of political activity , in pursuit of the ' health in all policies ' strategy and ensuring that effective impact assessments are conducted .
Inequalities persist , as shown by the fact that , in 2007 , life expectancy at birth showed a variation of 14.2 years between EU Member States for men , and 8.3 years for women .
There is a need to improve universal access to health systems and healthcare that is financially accessible to all .
It is important to improve access to disease prevention and health promotion , as well as to primary and specialist health services , and to reduce inequalities between different social groups .
However , I did not vote in favour of the report as I do not agree with paragraph 29 , which , and I quote , ' calls on the EU and the Member States to take the necessary measures , in relation to access to assisted reproductive technologies ( ART ) , to eliminate discrimination against women on the grounds of marital status , age , sexual orientation or ethnic or cultural origins ' .
The report contains a set of guidelines that we consider to be valid and fair .
However , there are some comments that we need to make .
The so-called austerity policies , which are profoundly anti-social in essence and in content , with cuts in public investment and the social functions of the state - specifically with regard to health - among other consequences that are extremely detrimental from an economic and social point of view , are also exacerbating inequalities in the area of health .
When , in the name of the need to reduce the budget deficit , the cost of accessing public health services increases , medicine prices increase , even for chronic illnesses , due to cuts in state subsidies , and support for patient transport to treatment and healthcare appointments is removed in areas where there is no public transport , health inequalities will increase , as is happening at the moment in Portugal .
The effect of this is that people on lower incomes have increasing difficulty in accessing healthcare .
Rather than mere words , what is needed is a real change in the content of policies .
Neoliberal policies need to be dispensed with , and effective equality of opportunity guaranteed , not least in terms of access to healthcare .
This report tackles a set of important questions , but it does not go to the heart of the problems that are currently being caused by austerity policies and anti-social policies that are increasing inequalities in the area of health .
Words are therefore not enough !
Neoliberal policies need to be dispensed with , and top priority given to prevention and public health , in order to guarantee effective equality of opportunity in access to healthcare .
The Stability Pact needs to be dispensed with in order to prevent the cost of accessing public health services increasing , medicine prices increasing , even for chronic illnesses , and support for patient transport to treatment and healthcare appointments being removed , even in areas where there is no public transport , all in the name of the need to reduce the budget deficit .
We know that the result of these policies is an increase in health-related inequalities , as is currently happening in Portugal .
People on lower incomes are having increasing difficulty in accessing healthcare .
Therefore , rather than fine words , what is needed is a break and change in policies , in order to give priority to respect for human rights and to economic and social cohesion .
We are bound to acknowledge that this report contains a number of very interesting points with regard to recognising the right to health in the real sense ( access to care , training of the population , service coverage , etc . ) .
We cannot , however , help but express some reservations stemming from contradictions inherent in the document itself , which have triggered a wide debate .
Equality should be understood in a real sense and not by isolating individuals ( especially women ) from their relationships with their partners , children and the social context in which sexuality and reproductive ability are actually exercised .
I am also concerned about the proclamation of ' new rights ' , such as the ' right to safe abortion ' , because that statement reduces or even nullifies the rights of others ( father 's expectations or life expectancy of the unborn ) .

Similarly , we can highlight some shortcomings such as the document 's complete failure to mention professional operators : it says nothing about their role and their responsibilities , they are treated as automatons and not as professionals with their own skills , abilities and , above all , their own personal consciences .
This report contains some outrageous proposals . For example , it aims to ' enable ' healthcare staff to ' adopt an intercultural approach based on respect for diversity ' when treating their immigrant patients .
Furthermore , it aims to eliminate discrimination regarding access to assisted reproductive technology - particularly discrimination based on age or sexual orientation - while , at the same time , claiming that we must promote universal access to abortion .
The predominant theme here is a synthesis of the culture of death and a reversal of values .
Finally , it aims to make all Member States establish the equivalent of State medical aid - namely , access to free care for illegal immigrants .
Let us remember that in France , such care is actually accessible to any illegal immigrant for any complaint - the original intention being to respond to emergencies or to the risk of epidemics - and the conditions on such access are minimal and unverifiable .
This system - which has no checks and no limits - allows palliative treatments , promotes illegal immigration and encourages medical tourism , as well as every type of cheating imaginable , at an ever-increasing cost .
At a time when our hospital and medical systems are in ruins , and when more and more of our fellow citizens have to go without care because they cannot afford it , such a proposal is outrageous .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the report on Reducing health inequalities , which addresses the various gaps present in healthcare throughout the EU-27 .
The rapporteur highlights the fact that the disparity in the health of citizens throughout the Union is , in many cases , due to the differences in opportunity , in access to services and material resources , social background , income and education ; and also that such differences have been exacerbated further following the financial crisis .
I am in agreement with various issues raised in this report - one being the suggestion that the Commission collaborate with Member States in the promotion of best practices on pricing and reimbursement of the cost of medicines , with the aim of optimising affordability and reducing inequalities in access to medicines ; another being for the EU and Member States to recognise male violence against women as a public health issue ; and also the calling on Member States to adapt their health systems to the needs of the most vulnerable in society by developing methods for setting the fees charged by healthcare professionals for guaranteeing access to care for all patients .
However , I am not in agreement with references made in the report which support the promotion of abortion .
It was absolutely crucial for the report to take age-based health inequalities into account , as it has now done .
Age-based health inequalities result in limited access to adequate healthcare and innovative treatments .
Older people should be able to make use of medications which have been tested for effectiveness and safety on people of the same age .
People of this age group are still excluded too often from clinical trials .
The average age of patients participating in clinical trials of treatments for high blood pressure is 63 , yet 44 % of patients are older than 70 when first diagnosed with this problem .
Without further ado , the Union and the Member States must plan for the social and economic consequences of an ageing European population and take this demographic change into account .
The fight against health inequalities between the countries and regions of the EU - inequalities which have been exacerbated by the economic crisis - has finally become a priority thanks to the adoption of Mrs Estrela 's report .
As rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , I voted in favour of this report , which aims to improve access to healthcare for all , particularly for vulnerable groups , and to support medical and pharmaceutical research .
It also argues that Member States should call a halt to budget cuts in healthcare services .
Furthermore , this report takes into account the gender aspect of health inequalities and improves women 's access to reproductive care .
These considerable steps forward are only the beginning of the fight against health inequalities in the EU .
I voted for this report because despite improvements made in healthcare , the gap in health outcomes between those at the top and bottom ends of the social scale remains large and , in some areas , continues to widen .
Inequalities experienced in earlier life in access to education , employment and healthcare , as well as those based on gender and cultural background , can have a critical bearing on the health status of people throughout their lives .
The combination of poverty with other vulnerabilities such as childhood , old age or disability further increases health risks and vice-versa , ill health can lead to poverty and / or social exclusion .
Increasingly , the link between social determinants and health inequalities is being recognised .
This means that social problems are becoming widely viewed as being linked to health problems requiring an integrated response .
The social consequences of the current economic and financial crisis have now unfolded .
There are nearly 5 million more unemployed than at the beginning of the crisis .
Many households have seen their income drop , a considerable number is more exposed to poverty and over indebtedness , and some have lost their homes .
Workers on short-term contracts were among the first to be hit by the downturn .
Migrants and young and older workers , who are more likely to be in precarious positions , were especially affected , but categories of workers who were so far relatively well protected also became unemployed .
An innovative view of policy is needed to tackle health inequalities , especially for people in lower socio-economic groups .
Hitherto , insufficient attention has been paid to the issue of narrowing health inequalities in Europe .
This is a problem that needs to be resolved .
There are various reasons for the health inequalities between population groups .
They relate , for example , to living conditions , education and training , occupation , the prevention of disease and services that promote health .
It is good that people have started more and more to understand the link between special problems and health problems .
These problems have to be resolved comprehensively .
It is possible to address the factors that result in health inequalities through sociopolitical action .
For example , alcohol consumption can be dealt with through policies implemented at national level ( like pricing and tax policies ) , through regional policy ( by stepping up controls ) , and through local activity policy ( for example , by developing leisure activities for youth ) .
At European level , we need to exchange information on best health practices between the Member States .
It is important that we stress the need to reduce health inequalities at all levels of decision making .
In particular , sustained cooperation between all actors is needed to reduce health inequalities .
We are all very well aware of the importance of health .
Unfortunately , we often fail to appreciate it properly until one of our family members or friends falls ill , or we fall ill ourselves .
Access to healthcare is only one of many factors determining the health of the citizens of any country or area .
Other factors which have an equally significant impact on the health of the citizens include occupational status and the resultant material situation , access to education , advanced age or disability , belonging to a minority group and many more .
' Social stratification ' and archaic divisions into ' classes ' also result in disproportionate differences among Europeans in terms of health .
Our priority , and the priority of the European Union , should be to ensure that absolutely all the inhabitants of our continent enjoy equal access to healthcare , and to eliminate social differences .
The health and welfare of citizens is a priority that this Parliament must guarantee and safeguard .
More than this , we believe it fundamental that this right should be guaranteed to all European countries .
Socio-economic , cultural and structural inequalities often create a diversified scenario where not all have equal access to healthcare facilities and medical care .
It therefore happens that the most vulnerable groups , migrants , the elderly , children and the disabled pay , sometimes with their lives , the high price of having the right to health denied them .
This should not happen , either at European level , or at national or regional level .
The victims of a poor healthcare system , which is unfortunately widespread , are as blameless as those who do not have equal access to healthcare facilities .
I voted for the resolution , which stands for the elimination of inequalities between Member States regarding public health standards and promotes health policies that are more efficient and affordable for everyone , not only for users , but also for those who , in their capacity as employees and medical staff , will thus be able to find more suitable working conditions to enable them to work effectively for the good of all .
I would like to make it known that I voted against the Estrela report on reducing health inequalities as a result of paragraph 25 of the text , which emphasises , among other things , that the European Union and the Member States must guarantee women the right to safe abortion .
I would like to note that the abovementioned document raises many important health issues , and provides us with interesting material to use as a basis for further work , but I could not vote in favour of its adoption due to the reference to abortion .
I always stress that abortion cannot be viewed in isolation from beliefs about the consequences of becoming sexually active , since human life deserves more .
Inequalities in health constitute a problem to be addressed at European level .
The reasons often stem from differences in terms of opportunities , access to services and material resources , as well as from different life choices made by individuals .
We need an innovative political outlook to address them .
The economic and financial crisis of recent years has resulted in a reduction in the level of funding for health services and long-term care as a result of budget cuts and reductions in tax revenue , while the demand for health services and long-term care has increased .
Numerous Member States have included in their recovery plans measures such as investments in healthcare restructuring and additional financing of the health system .
Interventions to tackle health inequalities , however , vary widely from state to state .
The collection and sharing of data on strategies , policies and effective interventions will help to obtain support from governments .
It is essential that the reduction in health inequalities should be considered a high priority , by pursuing such an approach based on ' health in all policies ' and ensuring effective impact assessments that take into account the results obtained in terms of equality in health .
in writing . - I voted for this report and welcome its focus on inequality in health among lower socio-economic groups .
I welcome the attention given to the importance of housing and employment factors with regard to health .
I also agree with the report 's drawing attention to the increased risk of obesity , smoking and drinking among lower socio-economic groups .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for an excellent piece of work , and to thank her for accepting my amendment proposals .
The issue of equal access to health is one of the pillars of our common policy , both now and especially in the future .
The unequal performance of economies and the current crisis should not impose limits on securing equal opportunities for the provision of healthcare to EU citizens regardless of differences between health systems .
In my opinion , it is very significant that the text emphasises greater patient awareness and high quality legal advice for immigrants , as well as for others , including illegal immigrants .
The fundamental principle must be that the health of individual citizens is secured through territorial and financial accessibility , and not only to medicines .
Ensuring the coordination of education and professional training for health workers will be an important factor for progress , along with setting minimum standards for the quality and safety of care .
The rapporteur correctly emphasises the prevention of both smoking and obesity and other conditions influencing the length of active life .
I support the emphatic request to the Commission to encourage Member States to provide and fund treatment for patients with conditions such as Alzheimer 's disease , diabetes and multiple sclerosis .
The treatment of these conditions is not funded in some Member States .
These conditions affect both elderly and particularly young people , and lead to social exclusion .
This report highlights the inequalities in the area of health between EU citizens , men and women , young and old , which are linked to a very wide range of factors : economic , social , educational and professional situations and living conditions .
It emphasises the importance of maintaining and improving universality and access for all to high quality healthcare , including for undocumented immigrants , among other vulnerable groups .
It draws attention to the fact that the economic and financial crisis , together with the austerity measures imposed by Member States , have had a severe impact on the health sector , and this will make inequalities even more marked .
This report encourages the Commission and Member States to develop a set of common indicators for monitoring inequalities in the area of health , and to continue with the ' health in all policies ' strategy .
It also stresses the importance of preventative action and a ' local care approach ' .
In the light of the above , and to encourage the suggestions contained in the report , I voted in favour .
Ensuring access to care for everyone , both citizens and non-citizens , with or without papers , is a basic principle of public safety .
The best way of protecting individual people 's health is by protecting the health of everyone as a whole .
I welcome this report , which makes this argument for public health as indispensable for the common good .
The report voted on here deals with some important issues , mainly with regard to the defence of equal healthcare for all , a situation which , unfortunately , is not yet the case in the EU , in particular , among more disadvantaged groups , such as children , the elderly , and in some cases women .
However , in my opinion , a number of other issues are also addressed that have nothing to do with health .
What strikes me most is the approach taken towards the policies of the Member States with regard to the voluntary interruption of pregnancy and access to fertility treatment for homosexuals , which , in my opinion , should respect the principle of subsidiarity and be handled in a less surreptitious manner .
Hence , I voted against this report .
I voted in favour of the Estrela report on reducing health inequalities in the EU .
Access to health services for all citizens , be they from the EU or immigrants with or without papers , is one of the basic human rights .
It is the very people most at risk of exclusion that have to see that this fundamental right is guaranteed .
Therefore , I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - Inequalities experienced in earlier life in access to education , employment and healthcare , as well as those based on gender and cultural background , do indeed have a critical bearing on the health status of people throughout their lives .
It should be highlighted that nobody wants to deal with this problem seriously .
Therefore , the report of Edite Estrela is really timely .
When we are able to ensure equal medical care for all population strata , society will become more efficient in the economic , financial and political sense .
I voted for that report .
Public health continues to be our greatest asset and should be regarded as an absolute priority by governments .
However , there are still serious divergences in the various states within the EU in relation to the health of the population .
The effects are particularly clear when one considers the different levels of life expectancy , which can vary by 5.6 years in the case of men , and as much as 6.6 years in the case of women , within the 27 Member States of the EU .
The reasons for this are partly to be found in poor levels of education , and high levels of poverty and unemployment .
It is therefore hardly surprising that the wave of redundancies that followed the economic crisis has not had a positive effect on public health .
After all , loss of income significantly reduces access to medical services in many countries .
I have not voted in favour of the report , because it does not provide enough concrete detail about strategies to deal with the problem .
Attempts to reduce healthcare inequalities in the European Union are certainly to be welcomed for consistent social and economic development , and that is why I voted for Mrs Estrela 's report .
Suggestions for improving healthcare in Europe through health education , access to treatment , knowledge of data and the use of mechanisms to measure , monitor , evaluate and communicate information provide an important contribution to the development of policies that are effective for reducing health inequalities .
In doing these things , I nevertheless naturally think it is equally important to respect the principle of subsidiarity and certain national traits and characteristics that I believe must be defended and protected .
This report on the reduction of health inequalities in the EU sets out various measures that I believe to be worthwhile and important .
Nevertheless , I abstained from the final vote as I could not agree with the EU and the Member States having to guarantee women completely free access to abortion .
Investment should always be made at the level of family planning and contraception , with abortion being a last resort for exceptional situations .
I also do not believe that there should be free access to assisted reproduction technologies , which should be subject to the principle of subsidiarity and never used as an instrument for eliminating discrimination against women because of their marital status , age , sexual orientation , or ethnic or cultural origin .
The differences in life expectancy within the EU vary from one state to another , ranging between 14.2 years for men and 8.3 years for women ( 11.86 for men and 7.38 for women in Romania ) .
Even within countries , groups with a different education or social level have different health prospects .
A rise in the unemployment rate and the austerity measures could exacerbate the health inequalities which already exist in the EU .
I voted for this resolution to call for an improvement in monitoring and preventive measures against diseases , as well as for attention to be focused on the vulnerable groups .
in writing . - As the draft report already covered most of the relevant issues , there was no need to table many amendments .
While we , the Greens / EFA , co-signed a number of amendments with the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs , we were the only ones to try to introduce criticism of the current model of drug development based on patents , which leads to high prices for medical innovation and lack of access to affordable essential medicines .
We called for new models of medical innovation and for tackling the lack of access to affordable essential medicines .
We called for new models of medical research ( innovation prize schemes , equitable licensing , patent pools , public / private partnerships and social conditionality in the concession of EU research funding ) , but these amendments were not adopted .
Eurostat figures for 2010 are clear : there are still great inequalities between the 27 Member States with regard to the quality of healthcare provided .
Parameters such as life expectancy in the various Member States still show too much variability from region to region , demonstrating that healthcare quality standards are still too heterogeneous within the EU .
Access to primary and secondary education , a stable and satisfactory job , gender , cultural background and access to quality healthcare are the factors that contribute to enhancing the quality of life of citizens more than any others .
For this reason , the report should prioritise the rights of the weakest , especially women and their specific needs .
Although we agree with the basic principle of the report , namely , that the average level of health in the European Union has continued to improve despite major differences in healthcare due to the different systems in Member States , it is deficient when it comes to the rights of migrants .
These are included among the most vulnerable groups such as the disabled , elderly and children , not taking into account the fact that many migrants are illegal , and have therefore arrived in Europe improperly .
We cannot therefore consider migrants in the same way as disabled people , who are a vulnerable group that requires special care and assistance appropriate to their needs .
The report divides society into classes - rich , poor , ethnic minorities , men , women and children - applying outdated methodology instead of talking about citizens with rights , and claims to measure these supposed health inequalities through appropriate legislation .
The approved amendments actually made the text worse by including various topics such as climate change , violence against women , assisted reproduction and equal access to healthcare for illegal migrants .
On behalf of the four Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament ( Dan Jørgensen , Christel Schaldemose , Britta Thomsen and Ole Christensen ) .
We voted in favour of the report on reducing health inequalities in the EU .
The report contains a lot of important proposals for reducing health inequalities .
However , it also proposes that undocumented migrants be entitled to and guaranteed access to health services in the Member States .
We do not share this point of view .
We do believe , however , that it is a human right to receive emergency treatment , irrespective of a person 's status in society .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report to support the approach of the rapporteur who has set out principles which should really matter concerning women 's health .
Many women in European society do not have essential rights to health programmes and access to facilities because of their social and economic position within our society , in particular , ethnic minorities and migrant women who may be undocumented .
While it is important to safeguard against ' health tourism ' as it is unfortunately termed , it is also essential to remember our commitment to fundamental human rights .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which looks at different health inequalities in Member States and encourages them to keep healthcare as a priority during the financial crisis and recovery .
It is vital that these inequalities do not increase as governments look to save money .
I voted in favour of the report on reducing health inequalities in the EU because I believe that there are currently great disparities between the Member States in relation to health .
All the Member States of the Union must ensure that women have easy access to methods of contraception and the right to abortion , for example .
in writing . - I voted against this report as I believe it failed to address its subject matter of health inequalities and took a totally different approach .
Although there are many parts of the report I do not agree with , I would like to focus on the liberties given to ' undocumented ' or ' irregular ' migrants , as they are referred to in the report , which , in essence , is a method of renaming illegal immigrants .
The report promotes giving many civil and health-associated liberties to individuals who have illegally entered many EU countries .
This report will create many disadvantages for Member States that deal with the issue of immigration on a daily basis , such as Greece and Italy .
Not only does it give illegal immigrants the right to claim equal access to healthcare , but it will also become the reason why even more so-called ' asylum seekers ' will want to come to Europe , in a desire to benefit from free healthcare , which is non-existent in most third world countries .
I voted against the report because it once again promotes abortion by the back door .
Human beings are God 's creation and we should not set ourselves up as arbiters in questions of life and death .
There is no room for compromise here .
Although I am not in a majority in taking this position , I will not be changing my stance and refuse to sacrifice a single life because of contemporary mores .
I took the same decision in relation to pre-implantation diagnosis .
The report from Mrs Estrela deals with the issue of reducing health inequalities in the EU .
I welcome this work very much because although the current financial and economic crisis means that we are mainly required to deal with economic and legislative questions , we should never lose sight of issues such as health , education and social security .
It will only be possible to implement the Community 's higher objectives , such as the EU 2020 strategy , if we have sustainable systems in the broad area of social security and equal opportunities .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the report .
I approve this report , taking into account the amendments proposed by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
We have a duty to transfer our experience of economic governance , so that developing countries can establish their own tax systems .
This is the only way in which it will be possible to create a fairer and more equitable and sustainable tax system , combat evasion , and , as a result , promote a better international fiscal environment .
I would also highlight the importance of this report in stressing the urgency of abolishing tax havens , a fundamental measure in the area of transparency that will enable the necessary automatic exchange of tax information .
While taxation can be a reliable and sustainable source of financing given a progressive taxation system , efficient fiscal administration and transparent and responsible use of tax receipts , many developing countries are failing to enforce a minimum tax rate to finance their public services .
The European Union must therefore cooperate with these countries in order to encourage good governance in tax matters .
This is why I voted in favour of this report , which will allow for the creation of a tax system which is stable and more efficient , but also fairer , in order to reduce poverty in these countries .
The report will also allow for the creation of a transparent , cooperative and fair international tax environment .
Developing countries are facing difficulties establishing tax systems ( the establishment , collection and administration of taxes ) .
Combating tax havens is one of the principal challenges set out in the Millennium Development Goals , as they weaken developing countries ' institutions and their political systems .
Off-shore centres and tax havens facilitate an annual illicit capital flight of USD 1 trillion and this represents roughly ten times the amount of aid money going into developing countries for poverty alleviation and economic development .
I agree with the proposals made in the report that when allocating financial assistance , donors should support developing countries ' efforts to improve tax governance and ensure that aid is used transparently and responsibly .
This report , by agreement with the Commission , focuses on strengthening synergies between fiscal policies and development policies .
To achieve this , the Commission , in fact , published two studies , and one year ago in this House , a resolution was approved on the same subject .
I voted for the report because I support the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) and governance of the tax system , the commitment to support the tax systems of developing countries , dialogue and international cooperation in the field of taxation .
It is , however , only right to point out the shortcomings still ongoing concerning the governance of customs revenue , the current deficiencies of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and the erosion of tax revenues .
I consider it appropriate that the European Union should do more to combat inefficiencies , including fighting to combat against tax havens , the manipulation of trading prices and the weakness of the international structure .
It is time to reduce the manipulation of trading prices , the ' curse of natural resources ' , and expand the tax base , encouraging greater coordination among taxpayers .
The increasing globalisation of markets and mobility of taxpayers mean that taxation has become a complicated matter in this day and age .
It is even more complex and difficult to correct the situation in developing countries , due to internal factors such as vast informal sectors , the predominance of agriculture and the limited use of new technologies .
I applaud the Commission 's initiative in cooperating with these countries in order to promote good governance in tax matters through a report that identifies the main problems and solutions in a way that promotes synergies between fiscal policy and development policy , making both more efficient .
The existence of efficient , transparent and equitable tax systems is crucial for the advancement of developing countries , in that they contribute to the financing of their public assets , the sustainability of their institutions , their reduced dependency on external aid and the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals .
Within this context , I believe that the EU should , on the one hand , concentrate on taking action against tax havens and tax evasion ( which undermine political and economic systems in developing countries by encouraging financial crime and inequality in the redistribution of tax revenues ) and , on the other , establish a process of cooperation and dialogue with the tax authorities of these countries .
I would also like to highlight the importance of expanding the tax base in these countries .
It should be noted that tax systems in developing countries are characterised by being based on indirect taxation ( in which most revenue comes from the taxation of goods and services ) , which constrains tax revenues and creates inefficiency within these systems .
Efforts need to be concentrated on the development of direct taxation .
No less important is the need to promote consistency between the European Union 's development policy and its trade policy .
Developing countries have seen their customs resources fall as a result of market liberalisation .
These losses in resources can be compensated for by better governance and a fairer and more efficient taxation system .
We should therefore develop improved technical and legal support in these countries in order to introduce a fair , progressive and transparent taxation system ; for example , we should abolish all discretionary tax exemptions and preferences for multinationals and mining companies .
Another way in which we can further help these countries is to put an end to the tax havens which seriously hinder their development .
Clearly , a fairer taxation system and greater legal certainty will encourage overseas private investment and therefore , eventually , growth .
All these provisions must not , however , lead to a fall in official development assistance .
We should remain vigilant on this point , as the Member States are always inclined to reduce the portion of their GDP allocated to official development assistance .
I voted for this report for the following reasons : it emphasises the need to tackle the phenomena of tax competition and tax evasion in the countries of the South ; it states that the automatic exchange of information on taxation matters should be applied universally ; it underlines the importance of the principle of ' country-by-country ' reporting for all multinational companies ; it advocates combating the phenomenon of tax havens , going beyond the insufficient actions of the OECD ; and it emphasises the need to increase the consistency of European policies in support of development .
The basis of this report is a Commission document that acknowledges the link between the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and good tax governance .
The objective of this report is the need to promote greater synergies between tax policy and development policy , making both more efficient ; to that end , it identifies the difficulties that exist in developing countries with regard to the mobilisation of tax revenues .
The report also suggests ways in which the Union might improve the use of existing funds and instruments .
It underlines the importance of supporting effective and sustainable tax systems , in particular , by combating fraud and tax evasion , in order to contribute to a transparent and equitable international tax environment , in particular , through assistance with taking action against tax havens .
It is through good economic governance that these countries will be able to move away from their dependence on external aid , contributing to the development of the public and private sectors and to economic growth .
This report deals with taxation and development in developing countries .
In order to achieve the goals set by the UN in 2000 in the Millennium Declaration , these countries need to know how to promote good governance in tax matters , by maximising all external support .
In 2009 , the European Commission , which has an interest in cooperation with these countries , published the document ' Tax and development - Cooperating with developing countries on promoting good governance in tax matters ' , with the objective of promoting synergies between development policy and tax policy , in order to make them fairer , more transparent and more effective .
The same resolution was approved by Parliament in 2010 .
The EU believes that fairer and more consistent tax systems will contribute to reducing poverty and making up for the loss of some revenue .
I therefore support this report , which calls for the end of tax havens - veritable ' weapons of mass destruction ' for developing countries - the combating of economic crime , action against tax evasion and unfair competition , and development through good governance .
The report identifies a set of questions that are relevant and very much of the moment , namely : - Making ' the fight against tax havens and corruption a top priority of the agenda ' ; - ' Difficulties encountered by developing countries in raising domestic revenues ... , multiple exemptions being granted to large domestic and foreign companies in order to attract investments ' ; - ' The financial transaction tax ' at an international level , with ' a first step at the EU level ' ; - ' Low income countries need the capacity to effectively negotiate with multinational corporations ' in order to ' impose capital controls ' and fully exercise their sovereignty .
However , this report is not free of contradictions , in particular , when it identifies the problems that will derive from the implementation of economic partnership agreements , namely , with regard to the reduction in tax revenue , but does not adopt a clear position rejecting such agreements .
It also does not adopt a basic critical position on the responsibilities of the World Bank , the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organisation in promoting policies that favour the destruction of production infrastructure and public services , create unemployment and undermine countries ' internal markets , thus further undermining their tax revenues , budgets , sovereignty and independence .
While recognising that cooperation in the area of taxation can be important , we should not ignore the fact that tax policy is an essential instrument of economic and social policy , on the definition of which clear political criteria and evaluations have an impact .
Therefore , it does not fall to the European Union to export so-called ' good tax governance ' .
The sovereignty , choices and options of developing countries must be respected in full , with due attention to their specific situation and conditions .
Meanwhile , the so-called ' Economic Partnership Agreements ' that we have been imposing on developing countries , despite their resistance , severely constrain their tax systems though the significant reduction in customs revenues that they involve , alongside other serious damage .
In addition , the continued existence of tax havens leads to very great losses of revenue for developing countries every year .
The European Union , therefore , needs to change its policies and resolve these contradictions .
I voted in favour of this document because it identifies positive aspects such as a clear understanding of taxation , which is essential to provide the basis for an accountable and responsive democratic system .
Another aspect is the fact that the EU is committed to the principle of ownership of development strategies , and acknowledges the prime responsibility of developing countries themselves to improve their revenue systems , according to their own economic and political circumstances and choices .
The Commission aims to engage the EU instruments in providing enhanced support in designing developing countries ' tax systems and implementing the principles of good governance in the tax area , i.e. by paying more attention to effectively integrating the principles of good governance in tax matters into the programming , implementation and monitoring of country and regional strategy papers .
The Commission supports country-by-country financial reporting standards for multinationals as a tool to detect international tax avoidance and evasion practice .
It is also important to underline the fact that a Communication on Corporate Social Responsibility will consider how to develop a system for mandatory disclosure of governance information in annual accounting .
The Commission aims to step up the process of international dialogue and cooperation in tax matters , notably by enhancing the participation of developing countries in relevant international fora .
The Commission also insists on the need to conclude and implement Tax Information Exchange Agreements , including through a multilateral mechanism , by referring to the model of the EU Savings Taxation Directive , based on the automatic exchange of information .
Appropriate taxation systems form a basis for sustainable economic growth and monetary stability .
Developing countries , where such systems do not function properly or indeed at all , face serious economic and political problems .
International legal standards supporting the proper functioning of taxation systems should have a positive impact on the economic situation in such countries .
Let us remember , however , that we should not , under any circumstances , impose taxation policies on others , since every country must decide for itself on its own taxation systems , taking into account its current social , political and economic conditions .
Let us therefore support good taxation policies , but not impose them .
Efforts to make tax systems more sustainable , fair and transparent also help promote the establishment of democratic systems .
As a result of globalisation , it has become difficult to tax internationally mobile capital .
Developing countries must be supported to give them enough political room to manoeuvre so that speculation can be prevented and financial stability can be secured .
I welcome joint initiatives to combat tax havens , as well as practices that intensify international dialogue between the relevant countries .
A responsible approach to taxation will necessarily have a lasting positive effect on the development of these countries .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which concentrates on the need to strengthen the capacities of good tax governance for development and sees the need for a regulatory framework designed to support international tax cooperation , transparency , public and private sector development and economic growth ; highlights that tax-to-GDP ratios in developing countries range between 10 and 20 % , as opposed to between 25 and 40 % in developed countries ; regrets that too little support has been given so far by donors to tax-related assistance ; in this context , welcomes the Commission 's proposal to provide enhanced support for assisting developing countries in tax reforms and strengthening tax administrations regarding EDF for ACP States , the Development Cooperation Instrument and the ENP and Partnership Instrument , and support for national supervisory bodies , parliaments and non-state actors , and notes that more emphasis should be placed on efforts to undertake capacity-building within developing countries in order to help them make effective use of the exchange of information and effectively counter tax evasion with their own , internal , legislation .
The Commission is doing a good job in promoting principles and criteria for the development of best governance in tax matters in cooperation with the countries in the developing world .
Criteria of transparency , information exchange and fair tax competition are fundamental .
The Commission seeks to implement this process by strengthening synergies between fiscal and development policies in order to identify the difficulties encountered by such countries in the mobilisation of revenue through taxation .
On the other hand , the Commission still overlooks several issues that require a prompt response .
We consider it necessary , in fact , to conduct a determined fight against tax havens in order to achieve the Millennium Development Goals , but in no way limit the further measures taken , in particular , by paying attention to tax treaties .
To this end , it is desirable that most international organisations should hold a specific mandate in order to combat tax havens .
Lastly , it is essential to extend the tax base , passing through the adjustment of tax reform to the development of direct taxation , in order to resolve collection difficulties arising from the regressive VAT system .
The fight against offshore companies and other tax evasions is a necessity .
Hedge funds have been granted almost total freedom to operate by the majority of this Parliament .
In that case , what is the point of the purely declaratory restrictions in this report ?
The economic partnership agreements , negotiated in a disgraceful way by the use of pressure , are ruining the ACP States without leaving them the possibility of recovering in the long term .
The report does not say a word about all this .
Even worse , it argues that any type of nationalisation or renationalisation should be abandoned .
I am voting against this report .
It is a reality that poor fiscal governance is detrimental to the satisfactory economic performance of the Member States .
The Commission now acknowledges the link between achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and good tax governance .
It is therefore imperative that tax evasion is combated and concrete steps are taken to harmonise such measures through the entire EU , as it is well known that some countries are more effective than others at combating fraud and tax evasion .
in writing . - We should help developing countries to elaborate policies and provide mechanisms to avoid tax evasion ; this entails greater transparency .
Also , we should transfer our economic governance experience to individual countries to help them set up their own tax systems .
Reducing the level of corruption in developing countries and increasing their income will result in stability and balance .
That will remove the tension and minimise the amount of financial aid from EU to developing countries .
It is a very timely and important report , therefore I voted ' for ' .
I believe that there is an urgent need for an efficient tax system for developing countries .
The ideas contained in this report are perfectly suitable for this .
In particular , when the new tax systems are being implemented with the support of the EU , care should be taken to ensure that the economic partnership agreements between the EU and the developing countries promote this aim , rather than running counter to it .
Investment policy in the EU must also create a business-friendly environment for investors at home and abroad .
All the measures taken should result in a fundamental improvement in the living conditions of the majority of the population , who are currently cut off from income from raw materials sales and who are often forced into migration .
I have voted in favour of the report , because it takes a comprehensive view of many of the factors involved .
There is a need for specific measures for the improved promotion of the principles of responsible behaviour in the area of taxation , for example , in relation to transparency , the exchange of information and fair tax competition .
It is important that the synergy effects between taxation and development policy should be improved .
This report is moving in this direction , which is why I have voted in favour of it .
Given the fact that developing countries have lost significant revenue from trade taxes , it is consequently very important to ensure effective cooperation in both tax and development .
It is important for every country to establish an efficient and effective tax system and policies to implement it , because this is the backbone of their public finances and a way of attracting investment .
We must therefore leave developing countries some discretionary powers in this area .
Cooperation must be based on mutual assistance , without creating additional obstacles or burdens for either party .
I agree with the proposal that we must help ensure the quantitative and qualitative improvement in developing countries ' revenue mobilisation .
Aid allocated to developing countries should be targeted , effective and only provided if it is essential , and countries themselves should not have the right to decide whether it is required .
I do not believe that it is advisable to give the EU an additional burden and compensate developing countries for the decline in customs revenue .
In my opinion , we should establish a tax on financial transactions , which would limit speculation and would make the market function more effectively .
Furthermore , we must make every effort to ensure that this tax is applied not just at EU , but also at global level .
I voted for Mrs Joly 's report on Cooperating with developing countries on promoting good governance in tax matters , because , in line with the EU 2020 strategy , I believe it is essential to create global governance to support a global dialogue and international cooperation in the field of taxation .
I agree with the report when it states a wish to increase synergies between fiscal policy and development through the exchange of information in tax matters and through multilateral mechanisms that refer to the EU directive on taxation of savings income to combat evasion and tax avoidance .
The specific aim of tax cooperation with developing countries is to prevent them becoming tax havens for the multinationals , thus determining a distortion of competition with a negative effect on the development of economic processes given the interrelated nature of the global economic system .
I voted in favour of this report on Tax and development - Cooperating with developing countries on promoting good governance in tax matters , as I agree with the rapporteur on its importance for the development of an efficient tax system in developing countries .
In fact , the tax system needs to become the backbone of public finances in developing countries .
The EU 's new policy for investment in developing countries needs to contribute to the establishment of an environment that is more favourable to domestic and external private investment , and to the creation of conditions for more effective international assistance .
In order to promote growth , the EU 's investment policy needs to focus on the development of small and medium-sized enterprises , including the provision of micro-credit , the effectiveness of public services , public / private partnerships and knowledge transfer .
The European Commission working document published in April 2009 entitled ' Tax and development - Cooperating with developing countries on promoting good governance in tax matters ' provides pointers and methodologies for the promotion of synergies between tax policy and development policy , with the aim of making them both more efficient .
I voted for this report because it clearly recognises the link between achieving the Millennium Development Goals and fiscal governance .
It also recognises that taxation through a progressive tax system is essential to democracy .
It recognises that offshore centres and tax havens aim for illicit capital flight which , combined with ' zero tax ' systems to attract funds and investments , result in a transfer of burdens to workers and families on lower incomes by reducing the quality and quantity of public services in poor countries , as well as their ability to combat poverty .
Assisting developing countries ' judicial and anti-corruption services in their efforts to develop progressive taxation systems would be an excellent service provided by the EU .
in writing . - Parliament has today highlighted the importance of tackling the erosion of tax revenues in developing countries , notably by doing more to combat tax havens .
In order to be credible to this end , the EU must clearly clamp down on its own tax havens first and go beyond the OECD framework .
The report also calls for the adoption of an international convention on tax matters that would include sanctions both for non-cooperative jurisdictions and for financial institutions that operate with tax havens .
MEPs have also underlined the need to ensure greater transparency by multinational companies on their tax compliance in developing countries , notably the extractive industries , by ensuring country-by-country reporting .
EU tax assistance should encourage the development of progressive taxation regimes in developing countries , notably by securing an equitable share of a corporation 's profits .
Good tax governance is crucial to development and the EU should support developing countries to this end , particularly against a background of the decline in trade taxes resulting from trade liberalisation globally .
I welcome the support of MEPs for this report , which outlines clear proposals to this end .
I voted in favour of the text of this report because I support the idea that greater synergy between tax and development policies can help developing countries .
According to the latest Commission reports on taxation and development , taxation , especially if properly devised , can be a source of financing for development policies .
It is no accident that many developing countries do not , in fact , even reach the minimum level of revenue needed to finance basic public services .
Cooperation to strengthen its tax system and the fight against tax havens that facilitate illegal leaks of capital must underpin these processes .
This process should encourage the introduction of financial reporting requirements for each country in order to benefit the fight against poverty .
A fundamental condition for effective state function is that the area of taxation is in good order .
If developing countries wish to operate in the global economy , they must integrate and reform their taxation systems .
Taxes play an economic , political and social role in democratic countries .
They not only constitute the main source of state revenue , but also allow social objectives of the utmost importance to be achieved .
They fund basic services such as healthcare , education , social care and pensions .
Tax revenue in developing countries may sustainably fund the development of these countries and improve their citizens ' quality of life .
Nevertheless , at present , such revenue is frequently insufficient to cover the costs of basic public services or to fight poverty .
In an era of globalisation , capital subject to taxation is more mobile and barriers to trade are being abolished , which reduces tax revenue and poses a challenge , not only to the poorer countries .
Regardless of its obvious benefits , the progressive liberalisation of trade reduces customs revenue .
It is very important that foreign taxes should be replaced by those levied internally .
While income tax is one of the main forms of taxation in rich countries , its contribution is minimal in developing countries .
The majority of people are employed informally in agriculture and have irregular incomes , which makes it difficult to enforce income tax effectively .
in writing . - I have supported this report which focuses on the importance of taxation in relation to meeting development policies and suggests ways in which the EU can more effectively use existing funds and instruments for this aim .
The adoption of the report on ' Tax and development - Cooperating with developing countries on promoting good governance in tax matters ' is particularly important with regard to the effectiveness of the development aid granted to developing countries by the Member States of the European Union and the European Commission .
Ensuring respect for principles of good governance in tax matters ( transparency , exchange of information and fair tax competition ) and combating tax havens , which hinder the development of the least developed countries , are absolute necessities , and will be a priority of my term of office .
I voted in favour of this specific motion for a resolution because I consider that reforming and updating the tax systems of developing countries is the most important way of preventing illicit capital flight and combating tax evasion .
This capital , which often ends up in tax havens , has a direct impact on the economy of these countries , especially in this particular period of economic crisis .
Improving tax systems will allow us to exert a positive influence on growth in developing countries , apply a framework of good economic governance , promote transparency and gain the citizens ' trust .
I voted for Mrs Joly 's report .
The establishment of a fully functioning tax system is the basis for any responsible democracy .
The report calls for support for developing countries as they establish such structures , so as to promote responsibility in these states on a sustainable basis .
After all , development aid alone will not be enough to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
The report also touches briefly on the problem of so-called ' vulture funds ' , which I believe should be completely banned .
International development aid should not be allowed to become a football for global financial players .
I approve this report and highlight the importance of the recommendations issuing from the Papastamkos report , which states that non-trade concerns ( NTCs ) should be better incorporated into negotiations within the World Trade Organisation .
The need for some consistency between the common agricultural policy and the EU 's external trade policy is also clear - it is essential to secure a level playing field for EU producers in the world market , which must not encourage unfair competition .
If this is not negotiated , European farmers will continue to face unfair competition , and will suffer losses and discrimination in relation to competitors outside the European Union .
I support the essential role the agricultural sector plays in providing employment and maintaining the European agri-food model , which is a strategic component of the European economy .
Given that the European Union is the world 's biggest importer of agricultural goods , the production methods used in third countries exporting to the EU must provide European consumers with the same guarantees in terms of health , food safety , sustainable development and minimum social standards as those imposed on European producers .
I voted for this report because I believe that the agricultural and food policies must meet some basic objectives , such as food security and safety .
in writing . - The British Conservative Delegation strongly supports the principle of free trade .
Free trade creates prosperity and free trade will make a vital contribution to the recovery of the European economies .
We believe that this report places too much emphasis on protecting EU agricultural markets from outside competition and not enough emphasis on exporting production standards .
EU farmers are required to meet stringent environmental and animal welfare standards , for which they are , in part , compensated through the subsidy system .
However , products imported into the EU from third countries very often do not conform to those same high standards .
Closing EU borders to agricultural products from third countries is not the answer .
The EU should actively seek to export its strong animal welfare and environmental standards around the world , notably through more open international markets , rather than focusing on defensive , protectionist solutions .
For this reason , the British Conservative delegation voted against this report .
Through this report , the European Parliament explicitly asks the Council and the European Commission to take better account of agricultural interests in international trade negotiations , particularly in discussions with South America , a large livestock farming and grain production region which does not always meet European quality standards .
In my opinion , this is an essential report .
I therefore voted in favour of it .
The EU agricultural sector has a significant added value for the European economy and plays a strategic role in tackling the economic , social and environmental challenges that the EU is facing .
Therefore , external trade policy and agreements with foreign importers must not jeopardise the EU 's ability to maintain a strong and vibrant sector .
The Commission must assume a clear position in the World Trade Organisation and carry out specific impact assessments , negotiating with other parties as regards the importation of certain products to the EU market .
We must ensure respect for the principle that third-country production methods for export to the EU must provide European consumers with the same guarantees in terms of health , food safety , animal welfare , sustainable development and minimum social standards as those required of EU producers .
This is the only way to ensure that EU producers can compete on a level playing field with third countries , and that our farmers ' interests are protected .
I voted in favour of Mr Papastamkos 's report .
International trade plays a critical role within the EU , particularly with regard to the situation in which European farmers are disadvantaged by imports from third countries and by the failure to apply the principle of reciprocity , which gives foreign farmers undue advantage where they are often not obliged to comply with the same strict and costly regulations that are imposed on European farmers in order to be able to operate within the internal market , particularly from the sanitary and phytosanitary point of view .
I shall continue to fight for a high level of consistency to be maintained in Europe between the common agricultural policy and EU external trade policy .
Such consistency must guarantee the European agricultural model a level playing field for EU producers in the world market .
In my opinion , it is important to emphasise the link between EU agricultural production and international trade , which is reflected in the fact that the EU is the largest global importer of agricultural goods and , at the same time , the largest global exporter of processed food products .
In this context , I firmly believe that making trade flows as smooth as possible contributes to greater producer flexibility and to a reduction in the costs for exchanging goods , and that this has a favourable impact on both producer revenues and consumer spending .
I cannot therefore agree with the statement contained in the approved resolution that trade liberalisation will not make it possible for the threat of hunger to be eradicated from the world .
This is not the role of commerce , nor can it be .
I applaud the Commission for the fact that , within the framework of the World Trade Organisation negotiations and bilateral or bioregional negotiations , it has used measures arising from the ongoing long-term reforms as proposals in the field of agriculture , while always recognising the parameters of the common agricultural policy as a line in the sand .
In this regard , the approved text of the resolution unfortunately strikes me as having a rather one-sided focus , undermining the Commission 's steps in the political negotiations to date on trade .
I regard any further flexibility in the forthcoming negotiations as an unequivocal opportunity and a benefit .
In relation to the criticism of some steps , such as the reduction in import duties levied on bananas or the reform of the sugar regime , I would then like to add that they were primarily based on the conclusions of the dispute resolution in the WTO , which also influenced the parameters of the EU 's subsequent measures .
I agree with the need for greater consistency between the common agricultural policy and the external trade policy in order to secure the European agricultural model and , as a result , a level playing field for EU producers in the world market .
The accommodation of trade and non-trade concerns and the necessary convergence of regulations are essential .
Agriculture represents a strategic sector for the European Union .
While its impact in terms of employment and GDP may not equal that of other sectors , it assumes greater significance with regard to the characteristics of our respective regions and food traditions , since it ensures that we are self-sufficient in many ingredients that are essential for our farm produce , traditional or otherwise .
Furthermore , this sector plays a fundamental role in safeguarding and protecting the environment and ensuring the sustainable development of our regions .
It is obvious that trade agreements have to be made , particularly in the trade rounds of the World Trade Organisation .
For that to happen , however , the European Union has to pay more attention to safeguarding quality , traditional and certified products , so that they can be protected internationally to avoid fraud on foreign markets involving products that have been falsely attributed to our countries .
The basic tenet of the approved report seems to go in the right direction .
The mistreatment of European agriculture in trade negotiations with third countries cannot continue .
That is the subject of the report that we have just adopted , which refers to a number of principles and calls for non-commercial aspects to be better integrated into the negotiations .
Quite rightly , it calls on European livestock farmers to respect binding environmental and health standards relating to product hygiene , even though some of their competitors put products on to the European market which do not always respect those standards .
Indeed , too often , our farmers suffer as a result of unfair competition , and thus as a result of distortions of competition when some third countries are involved .
The Commission must take into account the warnings of Parliament and of farmers , particularly when it comes to negotiations with Mercosur , which risk endangering European livestock farming , as well as fruit and vegetable producers in the outermost regions .
The report on relations between EU agriculture and international trade shows us the disastrous loss of power that European agriculture has suffered , and attempts to alert the European institutions , which are responsible for this failure .
It is currently difficult to feed Europe ; the common agricultural policy has been transformed , by the Commission , into the gravedigger of the agricultural sector .
The restrictions weigh a little more each day on the shoulders of farmers .
All the power which formerly belonged to European agriculture , as well as its export capacity , have been reduced drastically as Europe opens itself up to foreign agricultural goods produced using methods which fail to respect the standards that Europeans are imposing on themselves .
The future of agriculture is at stake , and it must certainly no longer be left to the Union and its institutions .
The Member States must have the capacity to help their farmers for the good of everyone .
I voted in favour of the report on EU agriculture and world trade , as it highlights the importance of integrating non-trade concerns into the development of the Doha Agenda , such as social , environmental and human health considerations , as well as those relating to the health and wellbeing of animals , in order to meet the highest environmental and social standards and avoid a loss of competitiveness among EU farmers within the context of world agricultural production .
Agriculture has social functions that transcend the mere limits of food production , such as the settlement and planned use of land , the protection of the environment and the preservation of cultural traditions .
I believe that these are entirely deserving of protection and support from the Member States and the European institutions .
Despite my position of being favourable in principle to greater openness of markets , I believe that , where the agricultural sector is concerned , there is a need to be particularly strict with regard to reciprocity requirements and the need to ensure food security for European consumers .
The European Union should bear in mind the need to balance conflicting values and , especially during the current economic and financial crisis , take into account the impact of the trade agreements it signs on the lives of European farmers and their holdings .
One of the sectors most affected by the free movement of people and goods has been agriculture .
Despite constant changes to the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) - seen as a symbol of European integration - the situation in this sector continues to be very precarious , as it is required to comply with exacting environmental protection and product safety standards , exacerbated by the current financial crisis .
This is a sector that overlaps with other areas , such as trade , the environment , industry , transport , etc . , which makes it very difficult to adopt a regulatory framework that satisfies all participants .
Despite advances such as the SPS ( sanitary and phytosanitary measures ) and TBT ( technical barriers to trade ) agreements , there remains a great deal to do .
I give my support to this report as it acknowledges the fundamental role of the agri-foodstuffs sector within the EU , which is a very sensitive sector that cannot stand up to aggressive competition ; this needs to be taken into account when new agreements are signed .
However , I hope that the new economic framework for the CAP improves coordination between productivity and the international market .
This is a report full of contradictions .
It points out the negative consequences of the liberalisation of trade , but does not oppose the course being taken by policies that are at the root of the main problems for agriculture in EU countries ( and also in developing countries ) .
It suggests nothing to change this course .
It makes a fair criticism of the Commission 's approach , which places agricultural interests below the interests of industry and the service sector , and which makes concessions on agriculture in order to obtain enhanced market access [ in other areas ] in third countries .
It gives examples of the disastrous consequences of this policy - the case of sugar is a prime example .
It acknowledges that greater liberalisation of world trade in agricultural products , increased by World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) agreements , has not , to date , enabled the threat of hunger in the world to be held at bay .
However , it does not condemn or oppose this move towards the increased liberalisation and deregulation of world trade that the EU is promoting , whether within the framework of the WTO or within that of innumerable bilateral agreements .
On the contrary , it defends it .
We have been criticising the failure of neoliberal policies for a long time .
The report also does so , although in a very patchy and , at times , ambiguous way , only to then support the policy of disaster .
We consider this to be unacceptable .
We have seen many examples of the disastrous consequences for the agricultural sector of the liberalisation of world trade .
This report calls attention to a number of cases , and does not shy away from the fact that agriculture has been used as a bargaining chip for the promotion of other interests during negotiations conducted at the World Trade Organisation , namely , the interests of large service and international trade corporations and certain leading-edge industries .
We therefore advocate other solutions , given that the report is not consistent .
We want international trade to be oriented along the lines of complementarity rather than competition - between countries , producers and types of production .
We want agriculture to be oriented towards safeguarding the food sovereignty and security of each country , in contrast to the dangerous anarchy of producing for a liberalised market .
I wish to congratulate Mr Papastamkos on the report and the excellent cooperation , which have my support .
I wish to emphasise the major importance of international trade within the EU and to draw everyone 's attention to the fact that European farmers are being disadvantaged by imports from third countries ; the principle of reciprocity is not being applied , and often imported agricultural products do not comply with the same regulations that are imposed on European farmers , particularly from a sanitary and phytosanitary point of view .
This problem affects not only the health of products , but also their quality .
Hence , there must be consistency between the common agricultural policy and EU external trade policy .
Such consistency must ensure the preservation of the European agricultural model , as well as a level playing field for EU producers in the world market .
I support the main recommendations of this report .
One very important point in the report is that the European Commission often makes concessions in trade matters in order to obtain better access to markets in third countries for industrial products and services .
It is also stated in the report that the same standards of health , food safety , animal welfare , sustainable development and minimum social standards ought to apply to the methods of production of goods being imported from third countries as apply to the EU 's own producers .
Although I voted in favour of this resolution , of course , I wanted to use my vote ( particularly on certain amendments ) to show my commitment to several principles .
Indeed , I wanted to stress the fact that , in the many negotiations on trade agreements currently under way with several of the EU 's partners , it is essential to reach balanced agreements which are based on the principle of reciprocity .
In this regard , imported products originating from third countries should respect health and social rules , as well as rules to protect consumers , the environment and animals , which are similar to those that we have in the EU .
Furthermore , too often , concessions are made on agriculture in order to obtain enhanced market access in third countries for industrial products and services .
This approach is no longer acceptable , and I wanted to use my vote to state once again that European agriculture must not be viewed as a tool to serve EU trade policy .
Finally , the defence of the EU regime for authorising and marketing GMOs is a point to which I attach particular importance .
At a time when this regime is increasingly coming under attack at the WTO , it is essential that the European Commission defends it .
There is no denying the link between our policies on international trade , development and agriculture .
European agriculture is encountering increasing difficulties when it comes to the export of products to the world market because price levels there are low and production costs in the EU are higher .
This ongoing trend will continue to have a negative effect if support programmes are not put in place for agriculture .
That is why I welcome this own-initiative report , which , among other things , provides for compensation for farmers in the event that the further opening up of the internal market to imports leads to a deficit for farmers .
The agreements with third countries negotiated by the EU are , in themselves , unproblematic .
However , the overall thrust of these agreements makes it difficult to maintain high standards in the EU .
One of the things called for by the own-initiative report presented here therefore is greater coherence in agricultural policy and joint trade policy in the EU .
In this context , I support the call for the Commission to carry out an impact assessment on trade agreements and to publish this before entering into negotiations .
I voted in favour of this document because , at a time when the EU is reflecting on the future of its common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , ensuring consistency between agricultural and external trade policy becomes all the more crucial .
Coherence between the CAP and EU external trade policy shall ensure the preservation of the European agricultural model , as well as a level playing field for EU producers in the world market .
The most important thing for us should be food security , safety and quality at an affordable price for EU citizens .
There is a global increase in food demand against a background of higher production costs , severe volatility in agricultural markets , less land , less water and reduced energy inputs .
A strong CAP is also crucial for the preservation , environmental sustainability and economic development of the EU rural areas against the threat of land abandonment and rural depopulation .
The European agricultural sector has a clear added value and a major role to play in the Europe 2020 strategy towards tackling the socio-economic and environmental challenges that the EU is facing , both internally and as a leading global player .
EU trade policy will play a decisive role , determining whether agriculture will continue to make a full positive contribution to these objectives .
Trade policy should not undermine the dynamic of the EU agricultural sector .
On the contrary , trade policy and agricultural policy can and must be mutually supportive .
Worldwide agricultural practice and , in particular , European agricultural policy , are of major importance for food and development policy .
That is why it is so important that international trade in this area should be strengthened and developed .
However , this cannot be achieved by working counter to European agricultural policy but only in close coordination with such policy .
It is also essential that stringent European standards should also be applied to imported products .
Anything else would threaten the strict quality and safety requirements of the European agricultural sector and would therefore have a negative impact on European producers and consumers .
We need and demand free trade in goods .
However , this cannot be achieved without fair competitive conditions as a basic requirement .
in writing . - ( LV ) European farmers play an important role in supplying food to more than 500 million people in Europe and in securing food supply in the world as a whole .
Unfortunately , the attitude towards farmers has not always been fair .
I fully support free trade agreements with other countries or groups of countries , but , in concluding such agreements , we must not put our farmers at a competitive disadvantage .
The real losers from this unfair competition will be the people of the European Union , for whom we must ensure daily access to high-value and high quality food at reasonable prices .
Often enough , this is taken to be self-evident , without thinking that it is our farmers who provide this security ; farmers , whose incomes are often considerably below the average income in their countries .
Nor do we have to do anything supernatural - we must simply stipulate that agricultural products imported into the European Union should be subject to the same environmental , social , animal welfare and safety standards that European farmers are obliged to observe .
That would be fair and would put those farmers who wish to sell their products in the European Union on the same competitive footing .
In this report , the European Parliament calls on the Commission to take a more forceful role in representing the interests of the European agricultural and consumer sectors in international trade negotiations .
We should not act lightly in abandoning the benchmarks that characterise the EU agricultural sector - the highest quality and social standards in agricultural production and the best quality food for the population - by signing up to a large number of economic agreements .
I am in favour of only opening up the market for agricultural imports if it can be assured that the competitiveness of European agriculture will be maintained .
I believe that no further concessions should be made in the area of agriculture during the negotiations on the Doha round .
I welcome the clear demands set down in this report .
With today 's vote , we are sending a strong signal to the Commission : the European Union cannot continue to make concessions so as to obtain access to third-country markets at the expense of the agricultural sector !
At a time when the European Union is reflecting on the new common agricultural policy , finding mechanisms that can ensure consistency between the CAP and external trade policy becomes a prime objective .
The European agricultural sector guarantees many public benefits , including food safety and quality .
Therefore , the defence of European farmers ' interests must be a priority , and I am pleased in this respect that the document includes some paragraphs guaranteeing reciprocity for European farmers by means of the request for the same requirements that are imposed on European farmers to be applied to exporters of meat to Europe in order to guarantee consumer safety and fair commercial competition .
At this point in the negotiations on the Mercosur and Morocco agreements , I think it is essential to express clearly to the Commission our concerns and also our firm position in defence of European and Italian farmers ' interests .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of Mr Papastamkos 's report on EU agriculture and international trade .
In particular , I wanted to support the desire of the European Parliament to emphasise strongly the dangers that the European Commission 's trade strategy presents to agriculture in the European Union .
While several negotiations on trade agreements are in progress between the Union and some of its partners ( Mercosur , Canada , Ukraine , and so on ) , it is up to us to remind the European Commission of the need to establish trade partnerships - with realism but without naivety - which are based on the principles of free trade , of course , but also on the principle of reciprocity - both in relation to respect for health and social rules and in relation to rules for protecting consumers , the environment and animals - and which do not endanger certain European spheres of activity .
I am thinking , in particular , of the agricultural sector , which is too often ' sacrificed ' in favour of industrial products and services during trade negotiations .
With this aim in mind , the European Union must ensure consistency between its agricultural policy , currently under revision , and its trade policy in order to maintain a strong agricultural sector , thus ensuring the food security of our fellow citizens in a context of increased market volatility .
I voted in favour of the report by my colleague , Mr Papastamkos , because it presents a very realistic view of trade relations between the European Union and third countries in the agricultural sector .
Our trade balance deficit with the Mercosur countries in this sector is alarming .
The gap between our exports to , and our imports from , these five countries has doubled in less than a decade , and our imports are now worth EUR 19 billion as against only EUR 1 billion worth of exports .

Too often , the European Commission makes unacceptable concessions on agricultural products , endangering the existence of European farms under the pretext that we have to ensure better access to the market in third countries for our industrial products and services .
EU external trade policy should not sacrifice our agricultural sector , which ensures the food security of our fellow citizens , particularly in a context of increased market volatility .
In order to prevent distortions of competition , the Mercosur countries must apply the same standards - in terms of health , food safety , animal welfare and sustainable development - as are required of our farmers who , in addition , face higher social costs .
in writing . - I voted against this report which sends out a highly protectionist message as regards Parliament 's attitude to trade .
Taken literally , this report would make it impossible for the EU to negotiate any meaningful FTAs or , for that matter , complete the Doha Development Round .
This report underlines the fact that the EU should contribute to world food security , and I congratulate it on that .
Nonetheless , and despite its mention of a number of the devastating consequences of market liberalisation on agriculture , the solutions that it suggests are , once again , along the lines of reinforcing free trade , and subordinate agricultural policy to the interests of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
The report explicitly threatens Argentina for not submitting to the WTO and restricting imports of food products that compete directly with domestic producers .
However , at the same time , it calls for more EU restrictions on imports and calls for proactive promotion of EU agricultural interests .
Also , no precise mention is made of Brazil 's situation .
Therefore , and since this report prioritises liberalisation and competition in agricultural markets , I voted against .
I voted in favour of Mr Papastamkos 's report , which sends out a strong message concerning the weight that European agriculture must carry in international negotiations .
At a time when Europe needs to strengthen its agricultural production to ensure food security , negotiations on international agreements are often to the detriment of the agricultural sector .
So that we can be aware early on of the consequences of these agreements for European agriculture , we want the European Commission to carry out and publish in-depth impact assessments of trade agreements before entering into negotiations .
Furthermore , the EU 's high standards in relation to health , the environment and animal welfare must be applied to products entering European territory .
Border checks carried out by Member States must ensure that European legislation is correctly implemented in this area .
In the context of the EU 's future common agricultural policy , we must take into account the balance between internal production and imports .
Our efforts will have to be aimed at greater harmony between market liberalisation and protection for the domestic economic sector .
Food security at Member State level is achieved by maintaining a stable agricultural sector , which is not jeopardised by external trade policy , against the background of increased market volatility .
Small farmers make a significant contribution to food security in the regions where they operate .
I think that trade agreements with third countries on importing agricultural products need to be concluded based on compensation for farmers in the event of possible losses .
At the same time , I support an agricultural policy which is orientated as much as possible to ensuring access for EU agricultural products to third country markets .
The purpose of promoting products with an EU regional label is to make them well known outside the EU , which , by extension , would boost their consumption .
According to recent studies , the world 's population is growing at a much faster rate than global cereal production .
The EU has many regions which have the capacity required to utilise more efficiently their cereal production potential and are capable of making an effective contribution to narrowing these differences .
In its favour , this report has the merit of showing concern for overseas citizens and advocating food security .
I am aware of that .
However , this report endorses the ' active promotion of the European Union 's agricultural interests ' , free trade areas and trade agreements between the EU and Chiquita or Dole .
Even worse , it explicitly threatens Argentina with sanctions for taking decisions that I would recommend for my own country .
I am voting against the report .
Agricultural products are an essential part of international trade and must therefore be treated as such .
Therefore , there is no doubt that the constant increase in food prices as a result of increased commodity prices is an increasingly pressing concern for the EU .
On the other hand , the agricultural sector also has to satisfy the food needs of an increasingly large number of people , despite being faced with increasingly limited natural resources and high prices of the factors of production ; to this can be added concerns relating to the environment and conservation of natural resources , which can lead to distortions of competition , mainly in developed countries .
In view of future needs , there is no doubt that agriculture will become a strategic sector - I would even say a crucial sector - for the economic development of the EU and the whole world .
Since agriculture is not simply an economic activity , and since agricultural and food policy must be in the service of essential objectives such as food supply and food security , the main challenge is the efficient harmonisation of commercial and non-commercial considerations .
The EU is the largest importer of agricultural produce from developing countries , and imports more than the US , Japan , Canada , Australia and New Zealand taken together .
If we allow these countries to gain increased market access , it could have detrimental effects not only on European farmers , but also on those developing countries most in need .
For this reason , the EU should take a more balanced approach between the various sectors during trade negotiations , and should promote both its defensive and offensive agricultural interests .
The agricultural sector of the EU plays a special part in the Europe 2020 strategy with regard to the various socio-economic challenges .
The EU 's commercial policy has an important and decisive role in ensuring that agriculture continues to deliver a positive contribution to the fulfilment of our objectives .
I agree that commercial policy must not impede the dynamics of the EU 's agricultural sector , and for this reason , I voted for this report .
I did not vote in favour of this report on agriculture and international trade since it hinges on the central element of EU trade policy : free trade agreements .
It is true that there are positive points in the report which deserve special treatment , such as the singling out of the outermost regions in order to guarantee their food sovereignty .
Despite that , this report endorses the active promotion of EU agricultural interests without taking into account the imbalances with its trading partners and the commitment to free trade areas without accounting for the harmful impact on the people in those regions .
Furthermore , the report explicitly threatens Argentina with sanctions for implementing protectionist measures .
For these reasons , I abstained .
Despite the fact that food prices have been continually increasing for some time now - and apparently the price of some agricultural products is about to rocket as a result of the capriciousness of the weather , rising fuel prices and agricultural speculation - prices in the shops bear no relation to what small farmers get for their hard work .
Moreover , EU producers can scarcely compete on price in the world market because our social , quality , animal protection and environmental standards are so high - the very standards that we are unable or unwilling to check when importing foods .
If we do not want our rural areas to continue to decline and the numbers of farmers to continue to reduce , posing a serious threat to the self-sufficiency of the EU Member States , then it is high time we stopped paying agricultural subsidies to the big agricultural concerns and instead gave the money to those who really need it in order to survive - in other words , to small farmers .
If that is not possible in the centralised EU , then renationalising agricultural subsidies is the only way forward .
The report fails to make a clear commitment to small and medium-sized farmers , many of whom find themselves slaving away for a pittance .
That is why I abstained .
I voted against the European Parliament resolution on agriculture and international trade because I believe that it entirely subordinates the Union 's trade policy to agricultural policy , when it is well known that only trade policy can guarantee our industry , our services and even our agriculture access to external markets ; this access is crucial to economic growth and job creation in the Union .
If , in the future , we continue with the political orientation running through this resolution , it will become practically impossible to conclude trade agreements with countries or regions with significant agricultural sectors , such as Brazil or India , for example .
Common trade policy - which affects the entire Union and all the Member States - cannot be completely at the mercy of the interests of the agricultural sector , which , in fact , affects a limited number of Member States .
I also find it regrettable that this resolution includes accusations against Brazil that are completely unfounded , as has been amply demonstrated from the Brazilian side .
There is a close link between the future of the CAP and EU external trade policy .
They are two realities which cannot be considered in isolation and to which the European Union must pay particular attention .
We cannot separate the trade discussions from their impact on agricultural production in the Member States .
Therefore , I am in favour of a liberalised market that also takes into account the requirements of the EU 's economic and trade partners .
At the same time , however , I believe that agricultural policy should be included in the negotiation of the agreements for monitoring the quality of products exported to or imported by our markets and protecting European producers and our food supplies .
Consequently , I am in favour of the Papastamkos report .
However , an imbalance has developed in some areas of trade due to the distribution of responsibilities between the agricultural and trade committees of this Parliament , which should work in synergy to define a contractual balance applicable to the various commercial treaties within the EU agricultural sector .
I voted in favour of Articles 49 , 53 and 54 for the following reasons .
With regard to the first article , it is absurd for negotiations to be conducted with Mercosur based on a 12-year-old mandate .
With regard to Articles 53 and 54 , I wish to remind you that European farmers have to comply with the highest standards of quality , food safety , environmental protection and animal welfare .
I think that we ought to have the same requirements from all our trade partners , not only for the sake of European farmers , but also for the sake of consumers , who need to be protected .
At today 's plenary sitting in Strasbourg , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on EU agriculture and international trade .
Many events have been observed in recent years which indicate a deterioration in the state of EU agriculture ; inter alia , a significant drop has been recorded in the EU 's share of global exports of agricultural products .
The trade deficit in agricultural products is also growing , and the EU 's numerous concessions have not been reciprocated .
In view of the above , it is essential for the EU 's agricultural policy and its common trade policy to decide on and agree joint directions for the areas of agriculture , trade and development .
The document we have adopted sends out an important message in defence of the food sector in the EU .
It condemns the European Commission 's over-willingness to compromise , and stresses that decisions to open up to new markets must not have a negative impact on EU farmers .
I voted in favour of this resolution on EU agriculture and international trade .
The EU is the largest importer of agricultural goods in the world , but its share of global agricultural exports is declining as a result of the growth of other key agricultural trading partners and world market prices , which are low while the Union has high production costs .
The EU is the world 's biggest importer of agricultural goods from developing countries and it is therefore necessary to protect the interests of EU farmers and provide for a mechanism to compensate them for their losses .
EU farmers must be protected from unfair competition and therefore , the same standards that apply in the EU 's agricultural sector must also apply to products exported from third countries .
These conditions must be included in bilateral trade agreements .
Furthermore , there must be comprehensive support to obtain market access in third countries for EU products .
I believe that the Commission 's proposal to grant Pakistan a zero-duty tariff rate quota for exporting to the EU 100 000 tonnes of ethanol per year for a period of three years will not provide direct and immediate assistance and will have a negative impact on the EU renewable energy industry .
In view of the fact that Ukrainian cereal production is highly competitive and enjoys reduced tariffs , the Commission must be more careful about applying concessions in negotiations with Ukraine .
The report on agriculture and international trade focuses on the trade agreements between the EU and third countries with regard to agricultural products .
The European Commission , which has been criticised on several occasions with regard to agricultural policy , is condemned by the European Parliament in this report for arriving too often at conclusions that are unsustainable for European agricultural policy .
I voted in favour of the report because I consider the political role of Parliament , which the Commission avoids consulting when trade relations with third countries are being discussed , to be indispensable .
I agree with the request for the Commission to suspend the agreement with Mercosur until a new agreement has been drafted with the countries concerned , in order to guarantee high quality , safe products for European consumers , as well as value for money on foreign markets .
I voted for this report as it clearly defends the interests of European farmers in the context of international trade .
I believe that external trade policy should not damage the EU 's ability to maintain a strong agricultural sector and guarantee food security in a context of increased market volatility .
Nevertheless , it is not unusual for the Commission to sacrifice agriculture 's interests in order to achieve better access to third countries ' markets for industrial products and services .
In addition to the above , it is also important to bear in mind that the European agricultural sector is obliged to meet the highest standards in terms of quality , product hygiene , sustainable production methods , animal and plant health and welfare , traceability , pesticide residue control , veterinary medicine and additives ; these aspects increase production costs and should be taken into consideration during multilateral and bilateral negotiations .
In general terms , I believe that decisions that further open up the EU market to agricultural imports should not be taken without prior impact studies and guarantees that EU farmers will be compensated for their losses .
The common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is a symbol of European integration , representing one of the most advanced forms of EU supranational decision making .
The internal EU pressures towards making the CAP market-orientated and greater emphasis on other European policies are equally reflected in the EU 's external trade policy aimed at opening up the agricultural market in exchange for improved access for European industrial products and services in third-country markets .
This also involves preserving the European agricultural model , as well as a level playing field for EU producers in the world market .
The multifunctional role of the European agricultural sector can serve as a catalyst for new paradigms : food security , safety and quality at an affordable price for EU citizens .
There is a rise in global food demand against a background of higher production costs , worsening volatility in agricultural markets , less land , less water and reduced energy inputs .
A strong common agricultural policy is also fundamental to the preservation , environmental sustainability and economic development of EU rural areas against the threat of land abandonment and rural depopulation .
Today in plenary , we voted on the agriculture and international trade report .
The report by Mr Papastamkos states that international trade policy must not jeopardise the EU 's ability to ensure food security against a background of market volatility , or to ensure the preservation of a strong European agricultural sector .
The report condemns the approach adopted by the Commission in making concessions on agriculture in order to obtain enhanced market access in third countries for industrial products and services .
The report expands on various issues , including the impact assessment , financial compensation , the WTO / Doha , but especially on problematic bilateral trade agreements , such as those with Morocco , Pakistan , Ukraine , and Mercosur in particular .
It also considers it unacceptable for the European Commission to be resuming talks without publishing the impact assessment and without initiating a proper political debate with the Council and the European Parliament .
in writing . - Given the impasse in the multilateral trade negotiations , the EU has pursued the negotiation of bilateral and interregional trade agreements , as complementary to the multilateral framework .
As in the case of Morocco , there is currently severe competition between the US and the EU as to who will enter first - and under which conditions - into key new markets .
My colleague , José Bové , has been able to clearly question the approach of these bilateral agreements in the case of Morocco in his report in INTA which might lead to a rejection of the agreement as proposed by the Commission .
We have voted in favour .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe it strengthens the position of agricultural policy , a cornerstone of European economic and social cohesion , not least from the point of view of the challenges presented by the Europe 2020 strategy .
Up to now , the European Union has been the world 's largest importer of agricultural products , particularly those sourced from developing countries .
In the last 10 years , imports into the EU have almost doubled in value ; they alone account for 20 % of world imports .
In view of this situation , we need to establish a European trade policy that is strong and which implements Article 208 TFEU , which stipulates that Europe must cooperate in implementing growth policies in developing countries .
The priority now is to ensure that trade policy and European agricultural policy work together in a global context , facilitating access to the markets of developing countries , while , at the same time , enabling them to foster economic development through these practices .
I want to stress how important this report is , especially in the context of reforming the common agricultural policy .
I think that there needs to be coherence between the CAP and trade policies .
Unfortunately , it has happened on very many occasions that trade agreements with a number of third countries have caused major harm to Europe 's agricultural sector and its farmers .
However , I hope that this situation will not arise again in the future .
I also want to point out that our farmers are obliged to comply with very high standards in terms of quality , environmental protection and animal welfare .
We should get producers from third countries who export to the EU to comply with the same standards too , to guarantee fair competition .
In today 's vote , we saw support for the report on agriculture and international trade , which dealt , to a large extent , with imports of genetically modified foods and feeds into Europe .
I am very pleased that there was also support for the point calling on the Commission to resolutely protect EU regulations concerning the approval and marketing of genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) against the demands being made in the WTO .
Essentially , this means that the use of GMOs will remain strictly regulated , and this will improve food safety as well as the situation of our farmers .
There was also support for a number of points concerning taxes on imports of various groups of agricultural products , as well as quality requirements on these products .
In addition to GMO-related issues , general issues of food safety were also discussed .
For example , Brazil has thus far not managed to consistently meet EU producer and consumer standards on food safety , animal identification and traceability , animal health and disease monitoring .
Another issue of concern is the extensive use of pesticides in Brazil that are banned in Europe and the importation of the resulting products into Europe . Thank you .
in writing . - I , on behalf of the EPLP , did not support the report on EU agriculture and international trade .
While the report makes some valuable points on protecting the interests of our agricultural industry , e.g. the need to protect geographical indications within bilateral and multilateral agreements , I am of the opinion that the report includes parts which are too protectionist and which set unrealistic conditions on current and future EU negotiations on trade agreements .
Additionally , the maintenance of protectionist measures within the EU as a means of shielding EU agricultural producers from external competition is out of step with the EPLP 's position on CAP reform .
We have always argued for the removal of trade barriers to promote a more efficient and competitive agricultural sector , to deliver a better deal for the consumer , and to present market access opportunities for less economically developed countries .
I voted in favour of paragraphs 53 and 54 of the report on EU agriculture and international trade because I think that it is the duty of Members of the European Parliament to defend European farmers and consumers from the danger that would be presented by massive exports of poor quality agricultural products , particularly products originating from certain Latin American countries .
We must not sacrifice the quality of our agricultural products on the basis of purely commercial considerations .
I welcome the adoption of the report by my fellow Member , Mr Papastamkos , which states the basic criteria which should guide European Union negotiators , and which emphasises that non-commercial aspects should be better integrated into the negotiations .
Likewise , we can no longer accept a situation in which our livestock farmers , who are constrained by very strict environmental and health standards ( particularly relating to production hygiene , sustainable production and animal welfare ) , are sacrificed at the altar of international trade , victims of unfair competition and shameful distortions of competition in relation to third countries who put products onto the European market which do not respect the production conditions imposed by the Union , and who do not face any consequences for doing so .
I also call on the Commission and the European Parliament to show the utmost vigilance when it comes to agreements involving Mercosur in particular , which clearly threaten European livestock farming .
Balance between agricultural , development and common trade policy is crucial for the European Union .
The European agricultural sector merits particular attention .
The common agricultural policy is the oldest common policy and must be kept robust .
I would remind you that this sector fulfils many roles and it needs to be related with other social and political objectives , such as the Europe 2020 strategy .
Nevertheless , European agriculture does not exist in isolation from European external relations , specifically as regards international trade and development aid .
The importance of international relations , not least through agreements such as that between the EU and Mercosur , is reflected at the economic , political and strategic partnership levels .
That is why it is essential to promote consistency of standards , in particular , as regards agricultural issues .
I therefore voted against paragraphs 53 and 54 of this report .
In addition , free trade agreements expose the sector to new challenges and different realities .
I would cite the situation of the outermost regions , which have fragile economies based essentially on farming products similar to those of our Latin American partners .
As a Member from one of the outermost regions , I would stress the importance of taking into account the specific characteristics of these regions , and of attempting to avoid compromising their development during future negotiations .
I voted for the report on EU agriculture and international trade because some coherence needs to be established between EU policies in the areas of agriculture , trade and development .
EU agriculture has an essential role to play in providing employment and maintaining vitality in rural areas , while the European agri-food model is a strategic component of the European economy .
Global food demand has grown due to the impact of climate change , higher production costs and a reduction in the area of farmland available and in drinking water resources .
I wish to stress the importance of the trade in agricultural products for economic development and eradicating poverty .
I call on the EU to adopt measures to support the countries hit hardest by the food crisis .
The EU 's share of global agricultural exports is declining .
In this context , I think that the EU-Mercosur Association Agreement is of paramount importance .
This is why the European Parliament should be closely involved in all the negotiations .
We call on agricultural imports to the EU to provide European consumers with the same guarantees in terms of consumer protection , animal welfare , environmental protection and minimum social standards as those provided by European production methods .
I wanted to use my vote to restate my firm position : we must not sacrifice our agricultural model at the altar of commercial considerations .
The aim of opening up and liberalising trade between the European Union and its partners must not lead us to revise the food quality and safety demands we make to protect consumers .
This is why I wanted to make clear my desire to see reciprocity of trade , health and social rules applied in our agricultural dealings with third countries , and not to accept additional concessions without guarantees .
In the same way , I reject the idea that we should lower our guard when it comes to defending the interests of European farmers .
If Europe has managed to establish a close link between its agriculture and its territory and to achieve a level of excellence in its agricultural production , it is thanks to the work of farmers .
It is therefore our duty to ensure fair competition in trade relations between the European Union and its partners .
That is why I am calling for the introduction of protection mechanisms for farmers at European level to help them to deal with any potential distortions of competition .
I have voted in favour of the report by Mr Papastamkos on EU agriculture and international trade .
As an Austrian , I am well aware of the problems facing our farmers from first-hand experience .
European agriculture is one of the main foundations of the European Union , our shared culture and our living space .
The rapporteur calls on the Commission to represent the EU 's agricultural interests more forcefully and proactively .
The EU is the world 's leading importer of agricultural products .
It is absolutely essential that we ensure that imported products meet the same high quality standards as the agricultural products originating from within the EU .
I am voting for this report because I agree that it is necessary for the Commission to include suitable and specific measures to support farmers ' improvements to crop rotation in the reform of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
Reducing the protein deficit in the EU should be an essential element of the reform of the CAP in favour of Europe 's farmers and internal market .
Such measures are extremely useful given that protein crops currently occupy only 3 % of arable land and the fact that the EU imports 40 million tonnes of protein crops , representing 80 % of internal consumption .
Protein imports represent the equivalent of 20 million hectares cultivated outside the EU , or more than 10 % of the European Union 's arable land , but these crops are not subject to the same health and environmental requirements as European crops .
The shortages of imports impose an additional cost burden on the livestock and feedstuffs sectors , putting the economic viability of domestic meat production at risk .
Rebalancing the supply and consumption of cereals , proteins and oilseeds in the European Union would have major economic benefits for farmers and the food and feed industry , as well as for improving the variety of healthy , high quality food for consumers .
Furthermore , in the context of climate change , protein crops can help reduce greenhouse gas emissions through the assimilation and fixation of nitrogen in the soil , with the consequent reduction in the use of synthetic nitrogen fertiliser .
These crops also help reduce soil acidification , improve its structure , reduce the use of herbicides and encourage greater biodiversity , assisting pollination .
I voted for this report because I support improving the balance between the production of plant and animal proteins , as well as the use of native protein crops .
Seventy per cent of the protein and oil crops consumed today by the European Union are imported , mainly from Brazil , Argentina and the United States .
As these producers are not always subject to the same environmental , health and GMO regulatory constraints as European producers , the European Union has decided to review its policy regarding proteins and to increase internal production of protein crops .
This would allow European consumers to benefit from food which is healthier and more varied .
That is why I voted in favour of this report .
I voted in favour of this important resolution .
There has been a decrease in protein crop production in the European Union in the past ten years , while our market has , to a large extent , become dependent on imports .
This situation was caused by previously established international trade agreements , which allowed the EU to protect its cereal production and , in return , allowed duty-free imports of oilseed and protein crops into the EU .
This created the conditions to import the production required cheaply and to ensure the competitiveness of agriculture , in particular , the livestock sector .
However , within the EU itself , farmers and processing businesses lost interest in this sector .
The number of plant protein research programmes dropped , the development of disease resistant and highly performing varieties stopped and throughout Europe , practical experience in protein crop production is being lost .
Today 's situation with constantly fluctuating prices on the markets and the high price of protein feed may have a negative impact on the EU livestock sector , which is largely dependent on imports .
The Commission should immediately consider measures to promote the production and storage of protein crops in the EU , and provide support to farmers growing such crops , which should be reflected in the reform of the common agricultural policy .
This would facilitate the recovery of this sector , safeguard incomes for farmers , and contribute to sustainable farming in the EU .
The dependence of some European sectors on markets outside the EU is a problem that concerns not only raw materials , but also feed .
In particular , Mr Häusling 's report highlights the fact that more than 40 million tonnes of crop proteins , mainly soy beans and corn gluten feed , are imported annually into Europe , representing 80 % of the EU 's crop protein consumption .
In view of this state of affairs , I can only vote in favour of the requests made by Mr Häusling , who hopes that the future CAP will see Europe encouraging agricultural policies aimed at ending this dependence on imports , which will obviously have a positive impact on quality control and the sustainability of the supply chain .
Given the decline in production of protein crops in the EU over the last 10 years , we urgently need to combat the risk of dependence on the international markets and the volatility of their prices .
I therefore support the mentioned reforms of the common agricultural policy to introduce new provisions which , in addition to supporting farmers in the improvement of crop rotation systems , promote scientific services and research supporting protein seed crops .
I should also like to mention the importance of a decentralised approach to research programmes that takes into account farmers ' local knowledge and sustainable agriculture systems .
I therefore support the Commission 's proposal to consider the re-establishment of an agricultural research unit in the General Directorate for Agriculture and Rural Development .
According to data included in this report , production of protein crops in the European Union has declined 30 % over the last 10 years .
However , the rapporteur says that ' Overall EU protein crop production currently only occupies 3 % of ... arable land ...
In spite of public support ... , production of dried pulses ... has again decreased to roughly one million ha in 2008 .
More than 40 million tonnes of crop proteins ... are imported annually , representing 80 % of the EU 's crop protein consumption ' .
These figures should be enough to draw the attention of the political leadership and justify a change in policy .
At a time when food prices are hitting historic highs , putting food security at risk , the European Union , which is reviewing its common agricultural policy , cannot fail to look at the problem of protein crop production and try to find a solution .
This will have to involve an increased commitment to these crops which , as well as reducing imports , improve the contribution of agriculture to environmental protection , as protein crops can significantly cut greenhouse gas emissions .
In line with data recently published by the European Commission , production of protein crops in the European Union has been declining enormously , in the region of 30 % , revealing that something has gone wrong with the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
This situation obliges the EU to import more than 40 million tonnes of protein crops and is a result of longstanding agreements that permit the importing of oilseed and protein crops exempt from customs duties , such as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Blair House Agreement .
Recent climate change has brought this subject onto the agenda and I consider it an important element of the CAP reform that is expected soon .
The cultivation of protein crops , along with extended rotation of other crops , brings great benefits , not just in environmental terms , but also because it reduces costs by enriching soils in terms of nitrogen .
I am voting for this report , which aims to reduce the protein deficit in the EU , and I hope that its recommendations , such as support for farmers intending to opt for protein crops and practice crop rotation , will be taken into account when the new CAP is being drawn up .
The protein deficit in Europe and the imbalance between animal and plant protein production constitute a problem that has been getting worse , affecting changes to human consumption habits , food quality and security , and the crisis faced by livestock farmers .
The rapporteur presents figures that are enlightening and worrying .
These figures require attention to be paid to the problem and that measures be taken to solve it .
The roots of these imbalances lie in the agricultural and trade policies in force , and no solution will be found without profound changes to both ; the report makes no mention of this .
Overcoming the present deficits and imbalances must be based on support for increasing and diversifying protein crops , and on a policy of gradually replacing imports .
The report acknowledges this need and suggests some important measures that we consider positive , such as the creation of market conditions favourable to local production , sale and consumption , and the promotion of models for short supply chains free of genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) .
However , at the same time , it opens the door to solutions that we view with concern and cannot accept , such as lifting the zero tolerance for the presence in imported feed of GMOs , which puts the strict application of the precautionary principle at risk .
This report seeks to respond to the problem of the protein deficit in Europe , and to the imbalance between animal and plant protein production .
As we know , these constitute a problem that has been getting worse , affecting changes to human consumption habits , food quality and security , and the crisis faced by livestock farmers .
The roots of the imbalances lie in the agricultural and trade policies in force , and no solution will be found without profound changes to both ; regrettably , the report makes no mention of this .
We would argue that overcoming the present deficits and imbalances must be based on support for increasing and diversifying protein crops , and on a policy of gradually replacing imports .
Although the report acknowledges this need and suggests some important measures that we consider positive , it nonetheless opens the door to solutions that we view with concern and cannot accept , such as lifting the zero tolerance for the presence in imported feed of GMOs , which puts the strict application of the precautionary principle at risk .
Importing protein from third countries is a major problem insofar as equivalent requirements are not guaranteed for imported legumes .
These protein crops are mainly used in animal husbandry , which puts the price system at risk , since the volatility of these prices on the international markets increases exponentially .
I therefore agree with Mr Häusling on the need to continue to reduce the EU 's dependence on imports .
The ' EU protein deficit : what solution for a long-standing problem ? ' report from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has come up with a number of excellent solutions for dealing with the protein crop deficit in the EU , such as revising the Blair House Agreement with the USA , which permits protein crops to be imported duty free from the United States .
Other solutions include the introduction of protein crops in crop rotation , or a strengthening of research and consultation , and the expansion of seed development and infrastructures for protein production .
Unfortunately , a majority of members from three groups , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , the European Conservatives and Reformists and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , tabled amendments that go against this clear position adopted by Parliament .
They are calling for imports of protein crops , particularly soya , to be made easier , including genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) , which are prohibited in the EU .
Unfortunately , these amendments were passed with a narrow majority in a plenary vote in Parliament .
However , I am convinced that calling for increased imports of GM soya is counterproductive to our actual objectives of strengthening the EU 's self-sufficiency .
This position does not reflect the wishes of a significant majority of people in Europe , who reject the use of GMOs in agriculture .
I note with regret the voting pattern and have decided , in my capacity as rapporteur , to return the report .
I voted in favour of this document , because CAP reform must include adequate and reliable new measures and instruments which support farmers in improving crop rotation systems so as to substantially reduce the current protein deficit and price volatility .
The protein deficit in the EU is gradually increasing , and the EU only grows 30 % of protein crops used for animal feed .
Protein crops currently occupy only 3 % of the EU 's arable land and therefore , the EU is forced to import 70 % of these crops for animal feed .
The extended use of protein crops in crop rotation offers major agro-environmental and climate mitigation advantages .
Regarding climate change , leguminous varieties can substantially reduce greenhouse gas emissions through assimilation and fixation of nitrogen in the soil and thus reduce the use of nitrogen fertiliser .
With a higher percentage of protein crops in crop rotation , soil fertility and structure , nutrient storage and the health of the crops which follow is improved .
Permanent grass-clover mixtures for animal feed and mixtures of cereals and proteins cover soils better and so reduce nutrient run-off into groundwater and rivers , as well as offering better conditions for bees and other pollinating insects .
Extended crop rotation reduces the need for crop protection intervention and can contribute to the conservation of diversity in wild and cultivated species and varieties .
The production of protein crops has declined dramatically in the European Union in recent years .
As a result , we are now worryingly dependent on imports to a great extent .
For this reason , I would like to thank the rapporteur for calling on the Commission to take steps in the medium to long term to address this problem .
However , as long as the European Union is unable to provide sufficiently for itself , we should also consider changes in relation to our import provisions .
A technical solution for minor traces of GMOs in imported protein products could ensure that the European market has sufficient supplies of soya available .
As it stands , the policy on high protein crops in Europe works to the disadvantage of farmers and producers , who are forced to pay quotas for them which are dependent on turbulence in the global market .
It also works to the disadvantage of consumers , who buy meat and milk from animals fed with high protein feed .
Area-related and climate conditions have made it possible for the production of high protein plants in the EU to undergo structural changes , and such changes can even be considered advisable in connection with biodiversity and measures to counteract climate change .
Feed imported from third countries is not subject to such rigorous checks as European feed , and so we cannot be 100 % sure of its quality , or know the exact origin of the raw materials from which it is made .
We should therefore take prompt measures to change this situation , since the guarantees we have given that European food will be safe , healthy and of high quality will otherwise be proved empty words .
The next step we take to resolve the EU 's protein deficit should be to relax the regulations banning the feeding of animals with meat and bone meal .
In the case of poultry and pork , there has not been found to be any risk of diseases spreading as a result of this method of feeding , and after all , the ban on meat and bone meal was originally introduced in connection with BSE .
Making it possible to use meal in animal husbandry will reduce production costs , which is extremely important in view of the drop in profitability of meat production .
It would also allow us to reduce imports of high protein feed from America .
Many studies show that the protein deficit in the European Union has markedly increased in the last ten years .
For this reason , the European Union 's dependence on imported protein has increased .
Many sectors run the potential risk that , as a result of price volatility on the international market , they will be unable to obtain supplies of protein crops at reasonable prices .
Unfortunately , when trade agreements with other countries were concluded several years ago , unfavourable competitive conditions were created for the cultivation of protein crops in the EU .
We are experiencing the consequences of these ill-considered decisions today , which is why it is important to understand what happened , so that we can mark out the direction we need to take to overcome the protein deficit .
We are currently actively engaged on a reform of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
The focus here is on support for active farmers , protection of the environment and the development of rural life .
However , where CAP reform is concerned , we ought not to forget other matters too .
It is emphasised in this resolution that greater use of protein crops in crop rotation significantly improves the agricultural environment and helps to mitigate climate change .
I consider that these arguments are sufficiently persuasive for us also to resolve protein deficit issues within the framework of CAP reform .
The EU is hugely dependent on animal feed imports in the livestock sector because it does not produce the feeds it requires itself .
Seventy percent of the protein rich crops required for animal feeds are imported from Brazil , Argentina and the US .
This problem is clearly outlined in the report on this protein deficit and stringent standards are called for in relation to feedstuffs .
Imported goods must also comply with quality , environmental and social standards .
In addition , the raw materials suitable for the production of feed must be used more efficiently .
It is important that our enormous dependence on third countries should be reduced as this is responsible for price volatility and a lack of transparency in terms of production conditions .
This will only succeed if we in the EU take the production of protein crops into our own hands again , as this report proposes .
However , I am clearly opposed to the cultivation of genetically engineered crops in Europe 's fields .
To state that protein crop production currently occupies only 3 % of the EU 's arable land and supplies only 30 % of the protein crops consumed as animal feed is to describe a reality that most people find very difficult to understand .
The reduction in the supply of protein crops is paradoxical at a time when protein crop production is producing a number of positive effects that are necessary for the agricultural ecosystem , beneficial for the quality of final livestock products and important for keeping market prices in check .
The debate , which has already started in committee , is fundamental in order to redefine the role that protein crop production will play in the context of the future challenges for European agriculture .
I refer to the fight against climate change and the correct use of natural resources , which are being given due attention at this stage in the drafting of the framework of the future CAP .
I supported this report , which I believe symbolises a new phase that must start now in order to reduce the protein deficit .
I regard as a priority the creation of a specific framework programme for decentralised agricultural research so as to improve cooperation , share best practices and accelerate the process of improved breeding of locally adapted protein plants , making this an innovative area in the various Member States .
The last decade has seen a decline in plant protein production in the EU .
Protein crops currently occupy only 3 % of the European Union 's arable land and supply only 30 % of the proteins used for animal feed .
I support the rapporteur 's opinion stating that this situation must change as this will be beneficial for human health , as well as for the environment and biodiversity .
The European Commission should draft a report on the possibilities and options for increasing domestic protein crop production in the EU by means of new policy instruments .
It is also useful to establish a mechanism for monitoring the origin of protein crops imported into the EU .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which draws attention to the EU protein deficit and the need to rebalance that deficit , but I oppose measures that would mean increased subsidies for farmers to ensure EU protein production .
My view is that encouraging domestic protein crop production needs to be done in line with a reformed CAP which sees the EU moving towards sustainable farming and greater market orientation and , importantly , moving away from trade-distorting subsidies .
The decline in the cultivation of protein rich crops and the replacement of domestic production by cheap imports on a massive scale may ultimately have a negative impact in the form of loss of know-how regarding actual cultivation techniques .
It may result in a considerable reduction in research into the cultivation of these crops in a domestic environment .
I also consider it important to retain sufficient variety in terms of the selection or range on offer of these products .
As is the case with many reports or proposals negotiated by Parliament , the need for high quality products is also mentioned here .
In relation to the products previously mentioned , it is also necessary to inspect actual samples , and to integrate this with verification of locally used agricultural processes and resources .
Quality verification should be carried out very carefully and thoroughly when importing , through the use of modern laboratory methods and unambiguous identification of the origin of goods .
For most EU countries , there are some typical crops .
In the Czech Republic , for example , it is peas , which have a long-established tradition .
Cultivation of peas is now in decline , however .
The opinion of the Czech Republic is generally favourable towards the report submitted .
The production of protein crops in the European Union is experiencing an ever more significant decline , which makes the situation alarming .
The protein deficit causes imbalances not only in agricultural production but also in the research and development of agricultural techniques .
Farmers , in fact , have gradually lost interest in protein crops , resulting in the loss , at a European level , of practical experience related to these crops .
There is therefore a need to follow up on the urgent situation described in the report and to formulate a truly integrated European strategy .
It is only possible to respond to new challenges such as climate change or the loss of agricultural biodiversity if there is a more balanced supply and consumption of protein crop products within the EU .
We therefore hope that the European Commission will examine possibilities for overcoming the current protein deficit emergency via a radical reform of the common agricultural policy , which will make it capable of meeting the new challenges .
It would also be appropriate to introduce a supplementary payment if farmers use a mandatory rotation of at least four different crops , including at least one protein crop .
Lastly , it would be necessary to establish a unit for agricultural research at the Directorate-General for Agriculture and Rural Development at the Commission , to motivate consumers and catering services to make more environmentally-friendly food choices .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report on the EU protein deficit .
Europe depends largely on imports of protein crops , which are mainly used for animal feed .
Along with this dependence come increased risks connected to the volatility of prices on the international markets .
In order to combat this phenomenon , we are proposing that the common agricultural policy reform should include the introduction of new provisions to assist farmers in improving crop rotation systems , investment in research on protein crop seeds , and improved training of farmers in crop rotation and mixed farming .
The Haüsling report was a good one .
Increasing the protein independence of the Union , promoting shorter supply routes and helping farmers contributing to reductions in greenhouse gas emissions are all measures that I support .
However , the pro-GMO lobbies and their representatives have succeeded in converting this report into a plea for allowing contaminated food to enter Europe .
The report also advocates a return to animal meal , with all the risks that it involves .
It is time to relocate the production of plant protein crops .
In its new form , this report does not enable us to do that .
I will vote against this report if GMOs and animal meal are approved by this Parliament .
It is essential to increase production of protein crops - plants rich in protein - with the goal of reducing dependence on imported soya , maintaining food security and benefiting the environment .
There are scientific studies available demonstrating the environmental benefits of protein crops in terms of greenhouse gas emissions , as well as of biodiversity and soil quality improvements .
It is of great concern that only 3 % of European agricultural output is of protein crops .
It is unacceptable that we import 80 % of our requirements .
It is therefore very important that measures be taken to change this situation within the framework of post-2013 common agricultural policy aid .
The Häusling report on the protein deficit in Europe and the search for solutions introduces some positive elements such as aid to farmers that contributes to the reduction of greenhouse gases emissions .
Despite this , I voted against the report as the text clearly argues in favour of genetically modified organisms and totally opens the doors of Europe to contaminated food and animal-based meal on European territory .
in writing . - The report asks the Commission to include in the CAP reform adequate and reliable measures and instruments to support farmers in improving crop rotation .
It requests a legislative proposal which authorises processed animal protein from slaughter offal for the production of feed for monogastric animals ( pork and poultry ) .
If such authorisation is provided , what will change ?
It is impossible to control the banning .
Why spend time on a report that is unnecessary and not easy to comprehend just to put a ' tick ' for a rapporteur ?
I abstained since I do not vote for unclear , ' cooked-up ' initiatives .
Protein crops are an important part of the animal feed industry and are therefore a significant economic factor .
However , the cultivation of protein crops is an issue that has generated little positive interest in Europe .
Over the last 10 years , there has been a decline of up to 30 % in such crops , the only exception being soya , where the decline has only been 12 % .
Only 3 % of arable land in the EU is used in the production of protein crops .
As studies show , this not only leads to significant economic disadvantage because it results in an 80 % import quota , but also brings disadvantages in the area of agriculture .
This is because the cultivation of protein crops enriches the soil with nitrogen , subsequently promoting fertility .
The research sector is also suffering under the low level of demand for seed for protein producing crops .
The downward spiral has already begun .
I voted against this report because I fear that it may hamper the cultivation of traditional seed .
in writing . - The general thrust of this report advocates that rather than import protein from third countries , we should encourage farmers to produce it here in Europe .
This view ignores the fact that , due to natural constraints , Europe is simply not able to produce the quantities of soya and maize necessary to meet the demand of our farmers at a viable price .
Affordable imports of protein from third countries such as the US are crucial if we wish to ensure food security and create conditions in which farmers can earn a decent living from agriculture .
Furthermore , the report refers to the fact that we should explore the possibility of using animal protein as a source of animal feed .
After our experience with BSE , I do not believe that we should go down this route , nor do I believe that this is necessary if an adequate supply of soya and maize is available to farmers .
For these reasons , I voted against the report .
I voted for this report , which highlights a series of significant problems with the way in which European agriculture operates .
However , I think that we should focus more on solutions .
In this respect , we need to be more open to using the most recent , state-of-the-art scientific solutions from the biotechnology sector .
The report supports the use of genetically modified organisms and bone meal .
In general , animal protein should only be permitted in animal feed if all scientific evidence and controls are in place that prevent negative effects ( I would remind you of the BSE scandal ) .
I therefore voted against this report .
The protein deficit in the EU is a relevant and important issue .
Given the fact that this problem is deeply rooted in the EU and protein shortages are constantly increasing , we must make every effort to ensure that this problem is addressed as soon as possible and the production of local protein crops is increased .
I believe that this resolution is an important step towards solving this problem .
The growth of protein crops not only mitigates the impact of climate change , but also has a positive effect on farmers ' incomes .
Furthermore , it is an important factor strengthening the EU 's livestock sector , given the fact that it would reduce the sector 's dependence on protein crop imports and would increase competitiveness .
I believe that the Commission must take immediate action to stop crops with even a low presence of GMOs from accessing the EU market .
We cannot allow even a low level presence of GMOs in protein crops for food and feed imported into the EU .
I agree with the proposals to support research into the breeding and supply of protein crop seeds and for a framework for rural development measures which introduce improved , decentralised facilities for the production of animal feed .
I believe that crop rotation must be actively promoted in the EU by giving financial support to farmers and this would reduce the current protein deficit and price volatility .
I voted for the Häusling report because it advocates a supply of proteins for animal feed , which has been contributing for a long time to a lack of competitiveness in European agriculture .
There has been a worrying deficit in the production of protein crops in the European Union over the last 10 years and the situation now is one of considerable decline .
The main dried pulses decreased by an average of 30 % , and soybean production by 12 % .
This trend increases the already existing alarming dependence of the Union on imports of protein crops , which are mainly used for animal feed , and carries major risks , especially for the EU livestock sector .
The problem is made worse by the fact that price volatility on international markets has substantially increased .
It is a priority for the Commission to quickly ensure an unhindered supply of soya to the EU market by providing a technical solution regarding the low level presence of genetically modified organisms in protein crops for food and feed imported into the EU .
Insufficient soya imports impose an additional cost burden on the EU livestock and feedstuffs sectors and jeopardise the economic viability of domestic meat production .
Protein crops currently occupy only 3 % of the European Union 's arable land ( excluding fruit and vegetables ) .
The production of dried pulses fell by roughly 1 million hectares in 2008 .
More than 40 million tonnes of protein crops , mainly soya beans and corn gluten feed , are imported annually , representing 80 % of the EU 's protein consumption .
The arable land cultivated outside the EU for protein imports to the EU represents 10 % of the EU 's arable land , which is 20 million hectares .
Regarding the EU 's commitments to contribute actively to global food security and to combat vigorously climate change , the future agriculture and rural development policy must promote more balanced plant and animal protein production so as to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and the run-off of nutrients into watersheds , as well as motivate consumers , public procurement authorities and catering services to choose a more balanced , environmentally-friendly and diverse range of food in their diet .
The Commission must present legislative initiatives to reduce food waste throughout the food chain , including slaughter offal and swill , which is still not adequately regulated .
Yesterday , I voted against the report on the protein deficit in the EU because I believe that this problem cannot be resolved by allowing genetically modified products to be imported into the EU .
The fact is that 80 % of our protein crop requirement already has to be imported .
The original intention of the report - the instigation of measures to increase the indigenous production of protein crops so as to combat the decline in protein production in the EU - has been fudged .
The genetic engineering lobby has clearly succeeded in promoting a positive attitude to genetically modified protein imports , which has made its way into the report through amendments that were unfortunately adopted by the majority in plenary .
Even the rapporteur was forced to vote against his own report .
As a member of the Social Democratic Party of Austria , I , along with my party colleagues in Parliament , favour a policy of zero tolerance for genetically modified organisms .
In today 's part session , the report on the EU Protein Deficit by Mr Häusling was adopted by vote .
The EU is heavily dependent on imports of protein crops , which are used mainly for animal feed .
This involves significant risks , particularly for the European livestock sector .
A series of compromise amendments has improved the initial report considerably .
The report that has been adopted calls on the Commission to opt for a medium- and long-term vision of a policy for protein crops and asks for the reform of the common agricultural policy to introduce new provisions that support farmers in the improvement of crop rotation , as well as to reduce the deficit of plant proteins and price volatility .
The report also calls for research studies on seeds and their contribution to disease control .
The report asks the Commission to guarantee an unimpeded supply of soya beans into the European market , providing a technical solution to the low level presence of genetically modified organisms for food and feed imported into the EU .
in writing . - Key points in the report are : to create a framework for the cultivation and use of protein plants in the EU in order to replace the import of protein crops from third countries ; to abandon the Blair House Agreement and to improve crop rotation in the framework of CAP reform ; to generate a new scientific approach and to improve training and facilities for farmers .
The result of votes in the AGRI Committee was satisfying except for the introduction of a number of amendments by ALDE and the EPP ' contaminating ' the report with amendments promoting GMOs .
The interested GM industry had been lobbying to ease the zero tolerance policy of the EU , which does not allow non-authorised GM feed to enter the EU .
Unfortunately , in plenary , we could not decontaminate the report on protein deficit from the GMO zero tolerance attack .
But the majorities in plenary were much closer to our position than in the AGRI Committee .
So it is worth trying hard to reverse majorities in plenary on GMO issues .
Häusling ( Green ) resigned as rapporteur .
The latest estimates on the protein crops sector reveal a disturbing trend over the last decade of reduced production of protein crops in the European Union .
Each year in Europe , the production of pulses falls by 30 % and that of soya beans by 12 % , resulting in the need to import 40 million tonnes of plant protein .
The content of this report shows that the European livestock sector , which is vulnerable to price volatility , is too dependent on the ability to access imports of plant proteins .
This dependence jeopardises the economic profitability of domestically produced meat and is increasingly weakened by the additional costs for imports of feed , notwithstanding the fact that - in addition to the economic problem and in anticipation of climate targets - the production of protein crops would contribute substantially to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions .
In recent years , the cultivation of pulses has suffered a decline in production , resulting in heavy dependence on imports from third countries , as they are used to feed both humans and animals .
As well as reducing the European Union 's protein deficit , once their products have been harvested , these crops are an excellent additive for the soil , which therefore requires less chemical fertiliser .
Good farming should include crop rotation , thus reducing the intervention of fertilisers and maintaining species diversity among wild and cultivated varieties .
The request , which we support , is for the future common agricultural policy to establish measures to overcome the Union 's protein deficit by constantly reducing protein imports .
I voted for this report because it highlights the importance of restricting dependency on imported protein , especially as this dependency poses major risks for the European Union 's livestock sector .
However , I want to point out that GMOs are not the only solution for decreasing dependency on proteins imported from third countries .
There are substitutes available for genetically modified soya , which could help provide protein requirements such as field peas , broad and field beans , lupins , lentils , chickpeas , not to mention lucerne / alfalfa and clover , which can , at the same time , substantially reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
The potential for growing protein crops , such as soya , in the new Member States , Romania and Bulgaria , should not be ignored either .
The rapporteur 's initial report was better than the text which has now been adopted .
That is why I voted against the final text .
Asking the Commission at this time to ensure an unimpeded supply of soya to the EU market by finding a technical solution for the presence of small amounts of GMOs in protein crops intended for use as feed is , to all intents and purposes , handing a major victory to the intensive agriculture lobby .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance advocates maximum development of the EU 's own protein crop production .
Such a policy would be good for farmers ' incomes and make a substantial contribution to combating climate change , to the preservation of biodiversity , and to soil fertility .
What is crucial is to put in place a mechanism whereby we can monitor the origin of imported protein crops and thereby inspect the sustainability of the agricultural practices applied in the country of origin .
Regular spot checks are absolutely necessary .
The debate on reauthorising processed animal proteins from slaughterhouse waste to be used in the production of feed for pigs and poultry may only be conducted in terms of ( food ) safety and public health .
Bans on intra-species recycling and forced cannibalism are crucial , as are reliable inspections in the animal feed sector and the correct application of existing EU legislation .
I thank my fellow Member , Mr Häusling , for his important report , even if I am disappointed by the final version , which is why I , like the rapporteur , voted against the report in the end .
On the one hand , I regret the fact that the report was spoiled by the inclusion of the zero tolerance issue .
The call to relax conditions on unauthorised imports of genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) does not resolve the problem of the protein deficit in the European Union and should therefore not have been discussed .
On the other hand , we absolutely must mitigate the considerable decline in protein crop farming in the Union and thus reduce our dependence , which is already alarming , on imports of plant proteins .
I would like to make a clear denunciation of the Blair House agreements , the market-oriented objectives of which have contributed to extreme price volatility .
Furthermore , those agreements completely contradict the Kyoto Protocol and its objectives concerning global warming .
For the future , in the context of rational and responsible soil management , we need to integrate protein crops into the crop rotation cycle .
I voted in favour of adopting the Häusling report .
I am glad that Mr Häusling has raised the issue of the protein deficit in Europe and provided us with important information on this subject .
It is evident that the matter requires urgent action .
Protein is one of the most important components of our daily diet , and a lack of protein can lead to serious health problems .
What is more , as is apparent from the research presented in the report , the cultivation of high protein crops and widespread application of the principle of crop rotation would reduce production costs and cut greenhouse gas emissions .
Given the poor eating habits of the citizens of the European Union 's Member States , as well as European farmers ' lack of experience of cultivating high protein crops , I believe that we should concentrate , first and foremost , on education .
I am thinking here , above all , of making people more aware of the positive impact of protein on human health ( the School Fruit Programme is an example of a programme with a similar aim currently being implemented within the European Union ) , and also of developing an incentive system for farmers cultivating high protein crops .
I am voting for this annual report on gender equality in the EU in 2010 and the recommendations it includes .
The current crisis has had devastating effects for women , even though the professional sectors dominated by men have been hit hardest .
I would also stress that there is still an inequality in terms of salary of around 18 % between men and women , even though there are more women graduates than men .
Of the necessary measures suggested , I would stress the development of equality plans and combating domestic violence by establishing a European year dedicated to the issue .
Today , we celebrate the centenary of International Women 's Day , a symbol of the struggle for the achievement of social equality and of liberation from the discriminatory and oppressive behaviour that women have suffered , and still continue to suffer .
In every single country in the world , there is a different perception of the female ; there is much talk about Islamic countries and the way in which women are judged and treated , which is further influenced by religion .
Fortunately , even though we in the West have a vision of man and woman being equal , the facts describe a disturbing situation .
In Europe , many inequalities still persist to the detriment of girls and women , in terms of employment , their private lives , health and their right of access to education and vocational training , and to fill positions in non-traditional sectors and positions that have a high level of responsibility .
However that is not all : women not only face multiple forms of discrimination , but they are also victims of violence of all kinds , both psychological and physical .
It is therefore necessary to protect women and put them in a position where they can lead lives which are qualitatively equal to those of men .
Gender equality is not just a matter of social justice but is one of the preconditions for achieving the objectives of sustainable growth , employment , competitiveness and social cohesion established in the Europe 2020 strategy .
Women from the working and grassroots classes , young people , immigrants and refugees have nothing to gain from the show being put on for them , or from the wish lists and lies being trotted out by the plutocracy , in order keep a grip on the capitalist system of exploitation and cheap labour and increase the profit of capital .
It is clear from life itself that the plutocracy 's claim that equality between men and women is allegedly being promoted within the framework of capitalist barbarity and EU policy is deceitful and insulting .
The anti-grassroots policy of the EU , of the bourgeois governments , of the IMF and of other imperialist bodies , is striking a blow at the rights won by women .
Mass unemployment , drastic pay cuts and cuts to social benefits , flexible forms of employment , an increase in the retirement age , flexible contracts of employment and the commercialisation of the social services of health , welfare and education are together exacerbating the living conditions of women and of the working and grassroots family as a whole .
The EU 2020 strategy , economic governance and the budgetary discipline of the IMF and the ECB hold new anti-grassroots , anti-labour measures in store for women .
This policy must be overturned .
We call on women to step up their fight , to join the working class trade union movement , and to rally round the objectives of grassroots power and a grassroots economy .
I agree with several points raised by this resolution , which I supported during the vote .
Thus , for example , the analysis which says that countries where men and women are treated equally on the labour market have benefited in terms of their socio-economic development seems to me to be fully justified .
In my opinion , the promotion of equality between women and men is an obvious requirement from a social , but also from an economic , point of view .
Equality between men and women constitutes one of the fundamental principles of EU law .
The European Union 's objectives consist , firstly , of ensuring equality of opportunities and treatment between the two sexes and , secondly , of combating discrimination on the basis of sex .
Despite all the efforts made as regards equality between men and women , even today , inequalities continue to exist in this area in the European Union .
The employment rate among women ( 58.6 % ) continues to be lower than that of men ( 70.7 % ) , even though the majority of students and university graduates are women .
Only one in every 10 board members in EU businesses is a woman , and only 3 % of executive directors are female .
The average disparity between the wages earned by men and those earned by women in the EU continues to be 18 % .
In order for Europe to attain its sustainable growth , employment , competitiveness and social cohesion objectives , it will have to continue combating the inequalities that still exist between men and women , which is why I voted for this report .
The annual report on equality between men and women is an opportunity to highlight the challenges which we face in these times of economic and social crisis .
This report , which has been adopted on International Women 's Day , should be seen together with Mrs Plumb 's report on female poverty in the European Union .
Indeed , women are among the categories of people said to be vulnerable and who suffered the full impact of the crisis .
Since they more often work part-time than men , because they carry out what can be casual work in the tertiary sector , because they have fragmented careers , because , even today , they are less well paid than men for the same kinds of jobs , and because their pensions are lower as a result , we need to make sure that women are constantly the focus of our attention .
The most sensitive issue in this report concerned quotas for women on the boards of large companies , both private and public .
Of course , quotas are not a panacea , and in an ideal society , we would like to do without them .
In order to change people 's mentalities , however , there is no doubt that quotas are necessary .
In its annual report for 2010 , the European Commission highlighted the challenges facing Europe as a result of the recent economic and financial crisis in terms of equality between men and women .
One important consequence that this crisis has had for women concerns employment : women were affected later than men because more of them worked in sectors that have withstood the effects of the crisis for longer ( health , education , etc . ) .
Now , however , even these sectors are at risk of being affected , bringing with it long-term insecurity for working women compared to men .
Partly for this reason , I believe that equality between men and women in employment should no longer be merely a goal to pursue , but must become a reality .
The commitment of Member States and of the Commission is therefore necessary not only so that the policy of equality between men and women can be maintained but , above all , so that the budget expenditure allocated to them is not revised downwards .
Finally , because I believe that the promotion of equality comes through the education and training of citizens and , in particular , of young people , I would draw the Commission 's attention to the opportunity for timely renewal of the campaigns to raise awareness on this issue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , equality between women and men is one of the fundamental pillars of the development of an efficient social and market economy , as Europe has always loved to call itself .
I am therefore convinced that we must ensure , by all possible means , that women are offered the same treatment and the same professional opportunities as those that are guaranteed to men .
However , I cannot support or vote in favour of the strategy proposed by Mrs Nedelcheva because I believe that starting from the central role of the problems experienced by a single ethnic group , rather than from a systemic analysis of all options , is not a methodological approach which is appropriate and decisive .
I voted in favour of this report and am pleased that the European Parliament has drawn special attention to gender equality issues .
We must recognise that we still have a lot of work to do to improve women 's position in the field of gender equality , in the labour market and in politics .
Women 's rights issues must be included in all areas of European Union policy and fine ideas and initiatives should not simply remain on paper , but must be implemented in all European Union Member States .
In the European Parliament 's report on equality between men and women in the European Union , we therefore established that it is crucial to eliminate the gender pay gap , to stop violence against women and trafficking in women , guarantee maternity leave and create suitable conditions to take advantage of the services of nurseries and childcare centres and reduce female poverty .
As for gender equality in business , attention should be drawn to the fact that only 3 % of companies are chaired by women , because they face discrimination and obstacles preventing them from climbing the career ladder and pursuing leadership .
An increasing number of MEPs agree with the introduction of a quota system , because if companies themselves fail to introduce changes to improve gender equality in business , there are plans to anchor quotas in legislation .
I hope that , in future , we will find solutions and measures which will strengthen gender equality and equal opportunities for women in the family and society .
On this subject , I voted against because , although I agree with a number of the points adopted , there are aspects that should be removed in my opinion .
Following the crisis that we are experiencing , women 's conditions of work and access to jobs have become difficult .
I therefore agree with the issue tackled in the European Commission 's report on the need for gender equality to be integrated into all policies , as well as into the education of European children from the very beginning .
Violence against women must continue to be combated and prevented through public information campaigns and teaching in schools .
Nevertheless , I do not agree with quotas in the private sector , lists of vulnerable women , or the guaranteed minimum wage , which I consider impossible to implement .
On 8 March , International Women 's Day , I would congratulate Mrs Nedelcheva on her report on equality between women and men .
I agree with her assessment that women have been particularly affected by the economic and financial crisis that we are experiencing .
All the indications are that as regards , inter alia , employment , health , education and social support , women will feel the consequences more and for longer than men will .
As regards income , working and recruitment conditions , and access to employment , the situation of women seems to be deteriorating more quickly than that of men .
As such , it is important to create new opportunities and strengthen equality synergies between the genders , which will contribute to stimulating recovery and to economic growth itself .
As 2010 was European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , I welcome the reference to combating poverty , paying particular attention to the most vulnerable women .
I find it regrettable that the Left in Parliament has brought the controversy of abortion into this too , without a care for what Union jurisdictions are .
in writing . - I welcome this report on equality between women and men , which renews the European Parliament 's call for the creation of a European Year to fight violence against women , estimated to affect between 20 and 25 % of all women in the course of their lives , and calls for a directive on violence against women .
The economic crisis has serious consequences for women , who are at greater risk of poverty than men .
Indeed , on average , they are paid 18 % less than men for equal work in the EU , a figure that rises above 25 % in some Member States , and are more likely to be precariously employed and / or employed part-time .
Moreover , women are less likely to be re-employed when they lose their jobs .
As a result , they enjoy lower pensions later in life .
Tackling gender stereotypes is necessary but not enough .
Countering such disadvantages obviously requires serious public investment in care facilities .
However , the Barcelona Council targets for childcare are yet to be attained , affecting lower income families the most .
We have to empower more women at all levels of political representation in Europe .
Gender equality is not only a matter of justice but also an imperative for social and economic development .
I welcome the vote on this report on equality between men and women .
In terms of remuneration , for example , and despite continued legislative efforts on the subject at European level , women still earn 18 % less on average than men for the same work in the European Union .
I would also like to emphasise that we had to battle for a long time within this Parliament merely to ensure that such a basic right as access to contraception could be mentioned .
This kind of rearguard debate does little for the reputation of the European right .
Luckily , the final report is a good one .
It sets the objective of reducing the pay gap to less than 5 % by 2020 and , in particular , calls on the Member States to do all they can to enforce the principle of ' equal pay for equal work ' , with sanctions for non-compliant States .
It calls for binding objectives to ensure equality in corporate , administrative and political positions of responsibility .
Today , 8 March 2011 , the centenary of International Women 's Day , Parliament had a duty to adopt , by a large majority , this report on equality between women and men in the Union for 2011 .
Although the principle of gender equality is enshrined in the Treaty and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , we cannot help but notice that this remains an unrealised objective .
Whether in terms of jobs , where far more women than men carry out casual work , in terms of pay , where women earn , on average , 18 % less than men for positions of the same responsibility , or in terms of career prospects , the female gender is still held back by the famous glass ceiling .
Women are also penalised when they have children .
The list of grievances is still a long one .
The report voted on today includes specific responses such as the establishment of binding objectives for the Member States , and sanctions for non-compliance , and the introduction of quotas ( a necessary evil ) to increase our aspirations to equality a little .
Our hope is that one day , it will no longer be necessary to dedicate a particular day each year to more than half of the global population .
As I have already said in this House , ' Men and women need to be treated fairly , giving them the same rights but taking their respective needs into account .
In the case of women , this is particularly pertinent in areas such as maternity support , the reconciliation of work and family life ' .
I am therefore pleased to discover here , inter alia , concern for protection of maternity rights and for support for older people at home , which are tasks that often fall to women within the family , making it difficult for them to find work .
Nonetheless , although I acknowledge that some of the rapporteur 's visions are very insightful , I do not agree with her that gender equality can be achieved using quota systems .
Quotas belittle women , who will end up attaining certain positions simply because of their gender and not on the basis of their skill , ability or aptitude .
It is therefore unacceptable to want to apply them in private companies .
Finally , I am a staunch advocate of the subsidiarity principle and believe that many of the subjects analysed in this report , while important and relevant , must remain under the Member States ' jurisdiction .
It is also because of this that I voted against .
This report aims to contribute to speeding up the process of creating conditions of equality between men and women in the European Union .
On this day , when we are celebrating the centenary of International Women 's Day , I should like to salute all the women who have struggled for acknowledgment of women 's rights and for gender equality over the last 100 years .
I would also express my solidarity for all women victims of violence , and for all those who have recently been fighting in the Middle East and North Africa for the self-determination of their peoples .
The EU has always been at the forefront of the defence of women 's rights , so I welcome the adoption of this report that aims to put an end to many of the discrepancies that still persist , such as wage differences , access to education and employment , difficulties in reconciling personal and professional life , and distance from decision-making positions .
I therefore hope that the EU will move from theory to practice , and will make it possible for women to show their worth .
It is particularly significant that the debate and vote on this report seeking to draw attention to the inequalities and discrimination that persist have taken place on International Women 's Day , whose centenary is being marked in 2011 .
There have been many struggles fought over those 100 years .
There have also been many victories .
However , these have not been enough to eliminate the existing inequalities , the discrimination that persists in accessing jobs with rights , the wage inequality which is reflected in pensions , the difficulty of career progression and professional achievement , and the obstacles to accessing management and decision-making positions in economic , social and political activity ; the tendency is for this situation to deteriorate at times of economic and social crisis .
Women continue to be discriminated against for being mothers and workers , which , well into the 21st century , is scandalous .
For all these reasons , it is important to continue to demand an end to inequalities and discrimination , which will involve a break with neoliberal policies , and a serious commitment to alternative policies that make the issue of human rights and equality central to EU decision making and policy .
On this day linked to the struggle of women for recognition and the exercising of their rights , what is striking is the worsening unemployment situation and the number of unstable jobs , along with low wages and discrimination in terms of wages and motherhood that assail women workers .
These take on expressions that are particularly shocking and unacceptable in the younger generations , as is happening in Portugal .
The consequences are increased poverty amongst women .
The situations of disabled , immigrant and retired women , and of low paid women workers , are particularly critical , as well as those of women in rural communities who live alone with their children .
The majority of the more than 85 million people living in poverty in the European Union are women .
The poverty rate amongst women has exceeded 18 % .
Preventing the taking , under the pretext of the crisis , of measures threatening women 's right to equality , and to the necessary economic and social cohesion , is therefore a crucial issue .
It is time to prioritise women and their rights , equality , and economic and social cohesion , so that we can have a better society and so that we can truly respect human rights and consolidate the progress that women have helped to build for our civilisation .
Equality of opportunity and non-discrimination do not mean abolishing and negating the differences and the complementarity between men and women in their natures , their aspirations and their way of seeing the world and life .
Pointing this out is not peddling stereotypes .
When pushed to the very limit , your philosophy of not distinguishing between the sexes only leads to absurdity .
It leads to absurdities such as this ' right ' , in inverted commas , for women to work nights - or to be obliged to do so .
This is a regressive step in social terms .
It is your right .
It leads to absurdities such as the French decision granting men free terms for their pension , a right which , until now , was reserved for women and which compensated - a little - for the career problems that motherhood and the time devoted to bringing up their children might have caused them .
This is absurd , because it threatens the very existence of this advantage for women .
Also absurd is the very recent decision of the European Court of Justice stipulating that statistical differences recorded between men and women must not be considered in the calculation of insurance premiums , even though they form the basis of risk calculation .
Ladies , this marks the end of the small financial advantage you enjoy for being more careful drivers and for living longer .
Where will the Talibanism of ' gender equality ' end ?
in writing . - I will be voting in favour of this report , especially since it promotes - in a very determined and concrete way - the fundamental principle of equality between women and men .
It is disappointing that , despite numerous efforts and studies on the subject , some national law makers are still neglecting the destructive effects of discrimination , further aggravating gender inequalities and endangering fulfilment of the Lisbon strategy goals .
In light of the persisting gap between men and women in terms of employment rates , working hours , wages and access to management positions , I call on Member States to better implement anti-discrimination and anti-harassment practices .
It is necessary to engage stakeholders at grass-roots level , through information campaigns , use of NGOs , and also by more formal instruments such as including special provisions in collective agreements and national legislation relating to gender equality .
I am in agreement with the various issues highlighted in the report , such as strengthening inclusion measures in favour of women and ensuring their presence in positions of responsibility , promoting employment and fair distribution of income , creating higher quality jobs , ensuring access to high quality public services and improving social welfare .
Having said that , however , I cannot support paragraphs which make reference to the promotion of abortion .
I am very pleased at the adoption of this resolution on the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day .
Indeed , although the principle of equal pay for men and women is enshrined in the EU Treaties , we can see today that women earn 17.8 % less than men .
This inequality permeates all areas of society : for example , only 3 % of major companies are chaired by a woman , and women are most affected by unemployment and casual employment .
Hence , the alarming observation that in 2008 , 17 % of women in the 27 countries of the Union were considered to be living in poverty .
Other measures are still necessary , such as a better distribution of family responsibilities and better protection of women from domestic violence .
All these figures prove that it is now necessary to introduce binding measures .
For this reason , therefore , I decided to vote in favour of establishing quotas , even though I was , in principle , opposed to the idea , and establishing policies of positive discrimination in the economic and political spheres .
We must recognise today that we will not achieve real equality without policies based on a real will to change the situation .
Each year , International Women 's Day provides an opportunity to take stock of women 's rights and gender equality in the European Union .
There have certainly been significant improvements , but it is clear that we have not yet fully achieved this equality , neither in reality nor in people 's minds .
Equality , however , is a prerequisite for realising the EU 's objectives of growth , employment and social cohesion .
I therefore voted in favour of this report , which stresses the need to target the consequences of the crisis for women and to remedy them .
It also stresses the role of education and calls on the European Union to combat female poverty and all forms of violence towards women .
I think that another fundamental point in this report can be found in paragraph 66 , which affirms the right of women to easy access to contraception and abortion .
Let us remember that in 11 countries of the Union , abortion is still not fully authorised .
I agreed with this report , because the current economic , financial and social crisis is having disastrous repercussions for employment , living conditions and our societies at large .
Women have been severely affected by the crisis , particularly in terms of their working conditions , their access to employment , their place in society as a whole and gender equality .
Whether on the boards of publicly listed companies or in the world of politics , women must be able to attain posts in line with their skills .
Women are sometimes denied access to positions of responsibility , leading to a mismatch between their levels of training and their status .
As 2010 is the European Year for Combating Poverty , particular attention should be paid to the most vulnerable groups of women .
Specific measures should be taken to stop women who are vulnerable on account of a disability or their status as immigrants from falling into precarious situations , and to facilitate their integration into society .
The promotion of equality also involves combating violence against women .
All forms of physical , sexual or psychological violence , however serious , must be combated and condemned .
As we mark the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day , I would like to convey my greetings to all women .
in writing . - I voted against the call to easy access to abortion in paragraph 66 of the original text .
Whereas I recognise the individual 's right to decide on his / her own body , I underline that any decision to undergo abortion also means deciding to end the life of another human being .
Furthermore , if this decision is made , it should always include the consent of both parents ( except in cases of serious illness , rape ) .
Calling for easy access to abortion is therefore misleading and gives society the message that abortion could be used as contraception and need not take any moral and ethical values into account .
In today 's European society where people are better informed and have easier access to healthcare than ever before , we must support responsible behaviour , which includes taking responsibility for one 's actions .
Calling for easy access to abortion is contrary to taking such responsibility .
Abortion is too often used as an easy way out of a difficult situation .
The EU should not support such behaviour , but should give subsidiarity to the Member States .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which notes that there is a need to strengthen the gender dimension in the fight against poverty .
As 2010 is the European Year for Combating Poverty , particular attention should be paid to the most vulnerable groups of women .
Specific measures should be taken to stop women vulnerable on account of a disability or their status as immigrants or minorities falling into precarious situations , and to facilitate their integration into society .
I agree with the conclusions of the report , both as an MEP and as a doctor .
The damage caused by the anti-social policy of most EU Member State governments will sooner or later become apparent in the health of many socially weaker groups of citizens , and particularly women .
I was led to support the previously mentioned report by concerns for the healthy development of Europe 's current and future population , which is directly proportionate to the quality of health and full social equality of women .
If we care about Europe 's future , in other words , the viability and development of the EU , we cannot try to solve its problems without securing equality for women .
To underrate this issue is to ignore the rights of 50 % of EU citizens .
Ultimately , this may mean alienating many citizens from the EU , despite the fact that the Europe 2020 strategy includes a solution to these problems .
The EU is made up of men and women .
They embody its potential and its creative development .
As long as poverty and social exclusion apply to almost one in six citizens , as statistical investigations in the EU show , it is up to us , as MEPs , not only to challenge the Commission and the Member States , but also to mount effective pressure for the implementation of the specific measures adopted in the fight against poverty and against anti-social cost-cutting measures , and to limit further decline in the social area , particularly with respect to women .
The financial crisis that we are currently experiencing is having disastrous repercussions on the rate of unemployment and the living conditions of our fellow citizens in general , and women in particular .
Just think about their working conditions , their access to employment or their position in our society .
In its report for 2010 , the European Commission rightly highlighted the challenges that await us in the field of equality between men and women , stressing that this crisis must be understood as an opportunity for us to reconsider the specific roles of men and women in our society , particularly through a strategy for their full integration in all policies .
This ideal of equality should be achieved by means of concrete , lasting measures notably concerning education .
We stress the importance of the role of women in decision-making positions , which are traditionally the preserve of men .
The promotion of equality also involves combating violence against women .
All forms of physical , sexual or psychological violence , however serious , must be combated and condemned .
Combating gender-based violence entails launching awareness-raising campaigns and teaching children and young people about the horrors of this violence .
I voted for this report because it stresses the need to prioritise the elimination of wage disparities between men and women , and advocates the ' equal pay for equal jobs ' principle .
I also voted for it because it calls on the Commission , the Council and the Member States to prioritise support for binding measures instead of non-binding strategies on gender equality , and to pay particular attention to groups of vulnerable women : disabled women , older women , migrants , lesbians , bisexuals and transsexuals , women belonging to ethnic minorities , and women with little or no education and dependents in their care , disabled women and single mothers .
It also acknowledges the need for women to have control over their sexual and reproductive rights , specifically through easier access to contraception and abortion .
I would also condemn all violence against women .
Unfortunately , this report is necessary this 8 March 2011 .
The annual report on equality between women and men this year focuses on the effects of the economic crisis on the female population , highlighting when they affect existing critical areas .
Mrs Nedelcheva has chosen to follow the path of the proposal and not merely that of claims and of victimisation .
The starting point for targeted action is an analysis of economic data from the female labour market , all of it negative .
The evidence from previous surveys shows that the greater socio-economic weakness of women has an impact on the overall economy and produces quantifiable losses for the system .
From this there follows a course of action to put in place which , although designed to reduce disparities , is directed at the general public because it contains systemic measures .
I do not agree with the part of the report about the promotion of sexual rights of women , particularly where it reaffirms the intention to make abortion ' easy ' -especially in light of the House 's vote against the oral amendment from Mr Silvestris - which aimed to introduce a reference to the protection of the unborn child .
This is a sensitive issue that cannot be proposed with slogans of doubtful interpretation .
I do not accept that the freedom of women and the attainment of social progress is achieved through abortion .
The Nedelcheva report makes a painful observation about the Union 's progress in relation to equality between women and men .
It is sad that we have had to wait until 8 March for it to be remembered that 50 % of European citizens are female , and that their right to equality is being flouted throughout Europe .
I welcome this report on account of its stated desire to introduce binding measures to enforce equal rights .
Nevertheless , I regret the fact that it boasts about the Europe 2020 strategy and retirement at 64 , and that it states that ' the family is a cornerstone of our society ' .
The cornerstone of our society is citizenship and the law .
I must denounce this process which seeks to make us swallow anti-social and culturally regressive pills bathed in impotent good intentions .
Today , Tuesday 8 March 2011 , I voted in favour of the Nedelcheva report regarding equality between men and women in the European Union .
This report points out the concern about the insufficient progress made by Member States toward achieving equality between men and women .
For this reason , the report calls on the Member States to establish mechanisms to combat this inequality .
Equality between women and men is a fundamental principle of the European Union .
Unfortunately , even today , numerous inequalities persist between women and men .
Furthermore , the financial , economic and social crisis that we are experiencing has severely affected women with regard to their working conditions , access to jobs , their place in society and pay .
Equality between men and women in employment really must become a reality .
Equality policies absolutely must be maintained and , above all , their budgets must not be reduced .
Equality between men and women must also be included in all policies in the form of specific and sustainable measures , particularly in the areas of education , training and vocational guidance .
Women must also play an important role in decision-making environments , whether on boards of directors or in political functions .
Finally , I cannot avoid mentioning the terrible scourge of physical , psychological and sexual violence against women .
These vile crimes must be combated with all our energy , whatever their level of seriousness .
On this day , the centenary of International Women 's Day , and on the occasion of the vote on this report on equality between women and men , I ask myself what kind of society could deprive itself of 50 % of its intelligence and 50 % of its energy .
And yet that is the world in which we live , but we do not want it to be that way any more .
I would like a general campaign in favour of equality to be announced .
If we look at the sums invested in the training of young women , we can see that the gaps in people 's working life continue to grow .
That is unacceptable , and it is why I support the report put to the vote : it highlights all the difficulties that women face .
The battle that we must fight is not a battle of the Right or the Left , but a collective battle in which everyone , women and men , must work together .
I voted in favour of the articles referring to women 's rights with regard to reproductive health and the freedom of abortion .
As an MEP from a country where pregnancy terminations were banned for more than 25 years , I am fully aware of how important this right is and of the serious consequences of casting any doubt on it .
What women really need is a genuine freedom of choice in life : They must have the certainty that none of their decisions will be given a lesser value .
An important step in this direction would be to introduce family tax splitting in all Member States so that the establishment of a family does not become a poverty trap .
However , establishing women 's quotas is the wrong move .
We need to begin in the areas where women suffer genuine disadvantage : we need to look at the position of unpaid carers , at part-time employment , and at the plight of the many women who work hard to cope with the demands of family and career .
This report does not deal with any of these issues , which is why I have voted against it .
The annual report on equality between women and men for 2010 underlines the need for a European commitment to ensure gender equality at a time of economic crisis which threatens to undermine the efforts made so far to support women 's rights .
Unemployment and recession risk widening the gap between men and women in the workplace .
Therefore , the report from Mrs Nedelcheva focuses on the points where work can be done to prevent discrimination : ensuring financial and economic justice for all citizens , hence , with reference to remuneration , incomes and pensions ; working for an increase in women 's quotas for better representation and to secure personal rights .
However , I believe that in so doing , one must respect the principle of subsidiarity and some of the typical national characteristics which I believe should be defended and protected .
The current situation of generalised crisis that we are experiencing affects the majority of Europeans , but women most seriously .
In this context , it is to be feared that the great , but slow and painful , victories that women have won in the EU could go significantly backward which , apart from obviously affecting them directly and unfairly , would also affect our societies , which are always healthier and have more robust prospects for development when they ensure gender equality .
It is therefore important to continue to invest in equality policies , not least by implementing equality between men and women in terms of working conditions , of levels of income , of access to work , and their place in society in general .
As regards equality policies , action needs to come from two different perspectives , which must be made and kept complementary : one in which , from the outside in , conditions are created for gender equality to exist and another , from inside out , in which conditions are created for the emancipation of women from what is making them inferior .
That said , and despite agreeing with many of this report 's statements , I abstained from the final vote because I do not accept generalised free access to abortion , or the assumption that abortion is a method of contraception , which it clearly is not .
I voted in favour of this report because it stresses the need to prioritise the elimination of wage disparities between men and women , and advocates the principle of equal pay for equal work .
It also calls on the Commission , the Council and the Member States to prioritise binding measures instead of non-binding strategies on gender equality , and to pay particular attention to vulnerable groups of women : disabled women , older women , migrants , lesbians , bisexuals and transsexuals , women belonging to ethnic minorities , and women with little or no education and with dependents in their care , disabled women and single mothers .
It also acknowledges the need for women to have control over their sexual and reproductive rights , specifically through easier access to contraception and abortion .
It also condemns all violence against women .
This is , unfortunately , a report that is needed on 8 March 2011 .
in writing . - The Nedelcheva FEMM report was adopted by 366 : 200 : 32 . The draft report and the final result were OK from our point of view .
Positive because adopted : reduce the gender pay gap to 0.5 % by 2020 ; Member States to implement the principle of equal pay for equal work properly ( para . 27 ) ; application of sanctions for non-compliant Member States ( para .
27 , originally Greens / EFA amendment in FEMM ) ; binding targets to ensure equal representation of women and men ( para . 53 ) ; quota to ensure parity on the management boards of companies , with Spain and France as an example ( para .
53 ) ; binding targets to guarantee parity between men and women in positions of responsibility in companies , public administrations and political bodies ( para .
56 ) ; health and reproductive rights , easy access to contraception and access to abortion ( para .
67 ) .
Despite being based on assertions which are worthy of endorsement , this report also tends towards a desire to recognise specific categories of citizens , in this case Roma women , who are considered particularly disadvantaged because of discrimination .
We are opposed to transforming the legitimate demands of women for attention and recognition at work in terms of equal participation in the labour market , wages and access to positions of responsibility , into racial discrimination .
We do not accept that Member States should pay particular attention to women in the European strategy on Roma inclusion : first , because a measure which deals with equality between women and men has nothing to do with the Roma ; and second , because , in our view , if we are talking about people who suffer from discrimination , then it is those citizens who suffer from the often illegal presence of Roma people .
Accordingly , and also given the demand to facilitate abortion and the imposition of quotas for women , we are voting against the report .
In relation to paragraph 66 : in my opinion , the expression ' easy access ' goes too far .
On the other hand , however , the option of abortion must be left open .
When voting today , I endorsed many key provisions in the report on equality between women and men in the European Union - 2010 .
I would like to draw particular attention to the issue of parity in business .
This is an important step towards ensuring that women 's positions are equal to men 's at the level of company management .
Our goal is not to make gender the only criterion to be taken into account when appointing people to sit on boards of directors .
We are , however , interested in ensuring that ambitious women whose qualifications are equal to those of their male rivals are selected for positions normally held only by men , because , as research shows , this may contribute to better and more sustainable management of companies and , as a result , to better financial results .
I voted in favour of adopting the resolution proposed in the Nedelcheva report since , in my opinion , gender equality is a matter of priority .
I agree with the conclusions set out by the rapporteur , who believes that measures in the fight against this problem should be stepped up at European level , for example , by creating appropriate strategies and funding instruments .
I believe that the solutions proposed in relation to education and communication are particularly valuable , as are those which aim to eliminate pay differences and ensure access to managerial positions .
However , the main initiative in this area continues to lie with the Member States .
The role of the European Parliament , as the representative of the EU 's citizens , is to exert pressure both on the governments and on the European Commission and the EU Council , so that consistent and effective measures are taken in the framework of dialogue with organisations involved in the fight for gender equality .
The issue of equal rights is being debated ever more widely in Poland , but in spite of the introduction of parity on electoral lists , there is still much to be done , for example , in the social arena .
In my opinion , impetus from the EU would be particularly valuable for my country .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which aims to tackle gender inequality within Member States .
It is disappointing to note that on the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day , my British Conservative colleagues chose not to support this report .
The report on ' equality between women and men in the European Union - 2010 ' is of particular importance because today , we are celebrating the centenary of International Women 's Day .
It is quite clear that there are still considerable disparities between men and women in Europe .
It is necessary to call for binding objectives to be set in order to ensure equal representation of men and women in political positions of responsibility , and also within companies .
That is why I voted in favour of this report .
In today 's vote on equality between women and men in the European Union in 2010 , I voted against , and today is International Women 's Day of all days !
Several of my colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and in other groups also voted against the own-initiative report - each having his or her own reasons .
Allow me to briefly state my own .
The most problematic paragraphs as far as I am concerned are those advocating binding targets for the Member States with regard to gender quotas .
Apart from the fact that this is an infringement of the Member States ' self-determination by the EU , I am also opposed to the very idea of quotas .
As if women are not capable of being judged on their own merit , just like men .
The text also contains passages concerning minimum income , which , of course , has to be a matter for the social partners to sort out , not for politicians , either at national or international level .
Altogether , the points referred to above resulted in my choosing to vote against the report , which was nevertheless adopted by the European Parliament .
I voted in favour of the report on equality between women and men in the European Union in 2010 .
Although 59 % of graduates in the EU are women , this proportion is not reflected in political or economic life .
In the European Parliament , only 35 % of MEPs are women , just 15 % of MPs in national parliaments are women , and only 3 % of boards of directors in the main European companies are chaired by women .
The representation rates for women are important because this helps encourage women to plan for a career in politics and to apply for a position with political , administrative or financial responsibilities .
There is a 17 % gender pay gap in the EU and there are not sufficient childcare facilities available for children under the age of 3 .
This means that young mothers are exposed more to temporary work contracts or the risk of unemployment .
I call for measures to be adopted at both national and EU level to promote entrepreneurship among women and also to facilitate access to public and private funding .
We call on the Commission to encourage Member States to promote in the media , in general , and in publicity and promotional material , in particular , an image of women which will respect their dignity , the diversity of the roles they perform and their identity .
I voted against the report because it once again seeks to introduce abortion by the back door .
Otherwise , it is simply a series of platitudes .
I have voted in favour of the report by Mrs Nedelcheva on equality between women and men in the European Union .
The equality and equal treatment of the sexes is a fundamental principle for the EU .
However , permanent public discussion about the number of women in business , the continuing major difference in salary levels and the numerous disadvantages suffered by women in the workplace show clearly that we still have a long way to go until the sexes are equal .
The Member States are called on to see the crisis as an opportunity to view their policies from a different perspective and to intensify their efforts in this important area .
in writing . - The ECR Group acknowledges that the fundamental principle of equality between men and women is enshrined in the European Treaties and is something that each Member State of the EU respects and upholds .
That being said , we were unable to vote in favour of this report for several specific reasons .
Firstly , we fundamentally oppose the introduction of targets and quotas for women in certain professions being set at EU level ; we believe this is something that Member States should do .
Secondly , we are reluctant to accept issues of conscience in political reports and believe that Member States should legislate on issues concerning abortion and contraception .
Thirdly , issues regarding employment , such as pensions , retirement age and pay should be determined at national level , and although we are fully in favour of eradicating the gender pay gap , it is not for the EU to set out prescriptive targets .
I am voting for this report , which stresses the grave situation of 17 % of Europe 's female population living in poverty , especially mothers and older women .
It also stresses that in 16 Member States , women are even more exposed to extreme poverty , and to the fact that their contribution to the economy is regularly underestimated and poorly paid .
It should be remembered that one of the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy is to reduce poverty , and that this can only be achieved through social and employment policies , through reconciliation of family life with work , and through ensuring that all women have the means necessary for a dignified life .
Women are increasingly exposed to the risk of poverty , especially in the case of groups of women with special needs , such as single mothers , disabled women and older women , who often receive wages and pensions barely above the minimum subsistence level .
It is not worth repeating that to prevent and reduce the risk of poverty , the equal participation of women and men in the labour market must be guaranteed .
Unfortunately , European women are four times more likely than men to work part-time , to have fixed-term contracts , and are often part of the black economy , which is characterised by the absence of employment contracts .
However , the issues related to the feminisation of poverty include not only work but also the lack of childcare and care of the elderly .
Member States have the responsibility to implement specific programmes to promote the active inclusion or reintegration of women into the labour market and specific opportunities for lifelong learning aimed at providing the required skills and qualifications .
At the same time , women from disadvantaged backgrounds must be guaranteed equal access to public health systems , as well as gynaecological and obstetric care , and to decent housing , justice , sports and culture .
This resolution offers an analysis of female poverty that I share .
There is no doubt that this unemployment is caused by the recent economic crisis , but it is also caused by a variety of factors such as stereotypes , wage gaps between men and women , a poor balance between family life and work life , longer life expectancy , etc .
In this respect , I am pleased , as our rapporteur is , that a European micro-financing instrument has been created .
Its aim is to make micro-financing more easily accessible and available to those women who are finding it difficult to enter the labour market or who wish to become self-employed or set up their own small business .
Historically , it is women who are most at risk of poverty - especially single mothers and women over 65 years of age .
It is estimated that there is a 36 % poverty level for women , compared with 11 % for men .
In the EU , older women are most at risk - a 22 % poverty rate for them compared with 16 % for men - because of difficulties they encounter in accessing social security and the pension system .
I voted in favour of this report .
The rapporteur is correct in saying that the poverty of women is hidden because women comprise two thirds of the ' inactive ' population .
I welcome what the report says about ensuring that women who care for children , patients , the elderly or the disabled do not suffer because of this caring , which is vital for the family and the community .
There must be proper social welfare provision for those women as they age .
I agree that the EU 's 2020 strategy must improve equal representation and participation in the labour market , and fully support reforms of labour and social policies to ensure economic and social equality for women .
I supported this report .
Poverty in the EU remains a huge problem and combating poverty is one of the Commission 's five measurable targets proposed for the Europe 2020 strategy .
The integrated guidelines of the Europe 2020 strategy ( promoting social inclusion and combating poverty ) are aimed at protecting people from the risk of poverty , and this particularly affects women , one-parent families and elderly people who face a higher risk of poverty than the general population .
Social security and employment policies play a very important role in reducing the poverty people endure .
The Member States and the European Commission must agree on more effective measures to guarantee the rights of the most vulnerable groups of society to a proper education with vocational training and university studies , which would allow them to integrate better into the active labour market and halt the risk of poverty .
I voted in favour of this text .
This report proposes several measures for combating poverty among women in the European Union .
I support many of them , such as encouraging the introduction of flexible working hours for women or narrowing the gender pay gap for the same work carried out .
Women are in a difficult situation .
They must look after the home , their children and husband , while working at the same time .
Women are very often victims of discrimination in the workplace or of violence , major problems which are still widespread across the EU .
The reality is really awful , especially in rural areas and for Roma women .
In these circumstances , the Structural Funds must be used to set up programmes which will improve women 's chances of entering the labour market .
This action must be backed up by increasing access to micro-finance , as well as by encouraging and developing women 's entrepreneurial skills .
Despite the efforts made in the struggle for equality between women and men , women today are still at greater risk of poverty ( 17 % ) than men ( 15 % ) ; this difference is greater in the case of older people ( 22 % of women compared to 17 % of men ) .
The greater risk of poverty affecting women is , in part , due to the disparities in wages between women and men .
This pay gap continues to be around 18 % in the European Union , which has repercussions on income throughout life , on social protection and on pensions .
This report , which deserved my support , calls on the Member States to take into account the gender dimension in their plans for recovery from the recession by promoting and boosting the employment of women , the targeted inclusion in the labour market of flexible hours , wage equality , and the review of tax and pension systems .
The recent economic and financial crisis has resulted in a series of negative consequences that have affected the standard of living and the working lives of citizens and of women in particular .
The situation of women emerges clearly from the statistics : nearly 17 % of European women live in poverty .
The year 2010 has been proclaimed the ' European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion ' so I believe that the activities undertaken during this year should also take into account the risk of social exclusion experienced by women compared with men .
I also believe that the promotion of a work-life balance , to allow women who wish to pursue their careers or to work full-time , should be a key element in combating women 's poverty and in reducing the risks to which women are exposed .
The Structural Funds and , in particular , the European Social Fund , are key instruments in helping Member States combat poverty and social exclusion .
Therefore , I draw the Commission 's attention to the opportunity to cofinance either specific programmes to promote the active integration or reintegration of women into the labour market or training courses aimed at the attainment of specific professional qualifications .
I do not intend to vote in favour of this report , not because of its objectives , but because of the methods described by my fellow Member .
Poverty is a systemic plague for Europe in 2011 .
Faced with the global economic crisis , some groups have surely been harder hit than others .
However , I am not convinced that an approach based on gender or on separate groups represents the ideal solution to this .
On the contrary , a problem of this magnitude needs to be addressed by building virtuous circles , which do not favour the few but include all interested parties .
I voted in favour of this report because we must overcome female poverty that has deepened as a result of the recession .
Although the economic and financial crisis has had a significant impact on the level of unemployment of both sexes , this crisis has affected women worst .
During the recession , salaries fell dramatically in sectors dominated by women , or women lost their jobs altogether .
Furthermore , due to lower salaries , women reaching old age receive lower pensions and consequently , often face poverty .
Female poverty that has become particularly widespread during the recession , especially poverty among single mothers , has a direct impact on child poverty , because now , around 20 million children in Europe live in poverty .
Unless specific measures are adopted to help reduce female poverty , it will be impossible to reduce child poverty .
I would like to stress that we must take the gender dimension into account in both European and national legislation .
The European Union Member States should develop special programmes for the inclusion of women and to aid their return to the labour market .
Furthermore , maternity leave must be guaranteed for all women .
Unfortunately , at present , both motherhood and work in the home , caring for children and elderly or disabled people , are completely denigrated .
I hope that , in future , the Member States will take appropriate measures to overcome female poverty and value women 's contribution to the development of the family , society and the economy .
I voted in favour of this report , which was approved in this House on the day when we celebrate the centenary of the day dedicated to women .
According to recent data , even today , 17 % of European women still live in poverty and , to make matters worse , they suffer disadvantages in the labour market and in social protection .
At the same time , women 's contribution to the development of the family , society and the economy are regularly undervalued and underpaid .
According to the annual report of the Commission , women are more exposed to the risk of poverty and , as a result , of social exclusion , particularly older women , 22 % of whom were at risk of poverty in 2008 , compared with 16 % of elderly men and 35 % of single parents and other categories of women such as those with disabilities or from ethnic minorities .
In particular , I agree with the request made by the rapporteur , Mrs Nedelcheva , for a work-life balance or for further measures to be taken to support single mothers .
I voted for the resolution adopted to combat female poverty through labour and social protection policies .
However , I would point out a number of repetitions in the text , as well as my disagreement with the points on joint taxation and grants for caring for dependents , which are against the position of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
in writing . - The ECR Group recognises that a number of points in this report are necessary in order to encourage women into the labour market , for example , flexible working , childcare provisions and maternity leave provision , and we welcome the calls to eradicate the gender pay gap .
The ECR Group , however , believes that these are policy areas which should be addressed at national level , not EU level .
The ECR Group does oppose an unnecessary and bureaucratic Women 's Charter and any moves towards the harmonisation of social security systems across the EU .
We have therefore decided to abstain on the final vote on this report and have voted in favour of specific paragraphs which we feel are important , for example , paragraphs 34 , 58 , 60 , 65 and 69 .
I voted for this report because I believe that the authorities need to focus more attention on the vulnerable social groups , which also include women .
The economic and financial crisis has affected the entire population .
However , some of its toughest effects have been felt by elderly women , women in rural areas and single mothers .
The European Union and Member States must consider these factors and help improve the social conditions of these vulnerable groups .
In this respect , the target of reducing unfair gender pay gaps by 1 % every year is justified and must be implemented effectively using a variety of instruments at national and EU level .
One of the five major objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy is combating poverty and , as such , it was necessary to analyse poverty amongst women in the EU .
This report highlights the causes and consequences of poverty amongst women and stresses the importance that achieving gender equality has for sustainable growth , employment , competitiveness and social cohesion .
At the moment , 17 % of women in the Union live in poverty , and this figure has increased dramatically in comparison with poverty among men in recent times .
Therefore , in line with the report , poverty has become feminised .
The Union and the Member States urgently need , in accordance with the subsidiarity principle , to find ways of combating poverty in general , and that of women in particular .
Efforts need to be made with a view to labour and social protection policies based on gender equality , and with a view to efforts to reconciling family life with work .
Dialogue needs to be undertaken with social partners and civil society , contributing to achieving an increasingly egalitarian society .
In 2008 , the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union , aware of the need to raise awareness amongst the public and the Member States of the problem of combating poverty , adopted a decision considering 2010 the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
In times of crisis , in war and in genocide , women and children are the ones who suffer the most , so they deserve particular attention from society in general , and from the institutions in particular .
The European institutions and the Member States are obliged to fight to improve women 's living conditions , and to raise awareness in companies so that women are offered better opportunities , as they are a fundamental element of the labour market .
I welcome the adoption of this report , which has confirmed that combating poverty and social exclusion continue to be political priorities of the EU , and I hope that the Structural Funds will be strengthened , in particular , the European Social Fund , so as to combat poverty and exclusion , in line with the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
When pointing out a historic date associated with women 's struggle for their rights , the series of social problems faced by women cannot be ignored , particularly those of working women : worsening unemployment and insecure jobs linked to low wages , the pay gap , and discrimination based on motherhood .
Situations of loss of income are on the increase and women are getting poorer .
The situations of disabled , immigrant , unemployed and retired women , and of low paid women workers , are particularly critical .
The impact of austerity measures in some countries , such as Portugal , Greece and Ireland , is having repercussions on the lives of women as workers , citizens and mothers .
That is the case with wage reductions , the freezing of admissions to university courses , and the blocking of collective bargaining ; and with the cuts to healthcare , education , social security and a variety of forms of social support .
Detailed words and declarations of good intentions regarding the day being pointed out today are not enough .
What is needed is a real change in the content of the policies from which this situation originates .
I think that debate , discussion and finding common solutions to the problems of the world of women is always worthwhile .
However , the report by my fellow Member , Mrs Plumb of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , is a constant reference to the Roma community .
I do not find this tone appropriate and it will certainly not benefit European working women by dealing solely with Roma women .
I have therefore voted against the report .
I voted in favour of this report , because we must overcome female poverty that has deepened during the financial and economic crisis .
Almost 17 % of European women are classed as living in poverty ; considering the indicators relating to the labour market and social protection , the structural causes of poverty have a disproportionate effect on women .
During the recession , salaries fell dramatically in sectors dominated by women or women lost their jobs altogether .
Furthermore , due to lower salaries , women reaching old age receive lower pensions and consequently often face poverty .
Female poverty that has become particularly widespread during the recession , especially poverty among single mothers , has a direct impact on child poverty , because now , around 20 million children live in poverty in Europe .
As the contribution made by women to the development of family , society and economy is regularly underestimated and underpaid , it is crucial to adopt measures to reduce female poverty .
In spite of ubiquitous efforts and information campaigns , women continue to be poorer and discriminated against more frequently than men .
Such situations occur even in our democratic European Union , which upholds human rights .
Women earn less than men doing the same jobs and , in addition , they are more likely to be molested .
They are more likely to be the ones who look after children and , as a result , do not have their own separate source of income or money which they could use for their own development or for a treat in reward for a hard day .
The people who are bringing up future generations and educating the young people who , in the future , will govern us , provide us with medical treatment , build our bridges and look after us in hospital are not fairly paid .
First and foremost , legislation should be amended to ensure free access to crèches and nursery schools and opportunities for young mothers to better themselves , and to make it impossible to dismiss women immediately after giving birth or returning from maternity leave .
Women in rural areas are in the worst situation .
They live in areas where incomes are much lower than the average for the EU , or even for the country they live in .
They have no access to cultural services and goods .
Their work is hard , and they do not always have the opportunity to take a holiday , for example .
The terrifying spectre of the demographic crisis should mobilise us to take measures without delay in order to improve the situation of women on our continent .
On such an important day that reminds us how significant the role of women is in modern society , supporting this report can be nothing less than our moral duty to the thousands of women who live in poverty .
Poverty line , insecurity , inadequate pay , sexual discrimination in the workplace : these are , unfortunately , recurrent expressions which , not only today but every day , we would prefer not to hear and see associated with women .
Unfortunately , the reality is different and the numbers speak for themselves .
In all professional fields , in whatever economic activity , one comes across developments that continue to marginalise women through low salaries , social exclusion and a marked difficulty in accessing a normal social life .
Elderly women , women with disabled children , disabled women , women who cannot find work : they have my support and that of my fellow Members who voted for this report , so that in future , we will not see the expression ' feminisation of poverty ' continue to crop up in the media and in European statistics .
I believe that the Plumb report on female poverty is a huge step towards improving the situation of women in the modern world .
I therefore voted in favour of adopting the document .
The issues raised in the report include not only the feminisation of poverty , combining family life and a career , the fight against poverty among elderly women and the impact of violence on the situation of women , but also , and I regard this as extremely important , the use of funding guarantees , employment policies and social protection as ways of fighting poverty .
in writing . - Although women 's poverty is a long-lasting reality , the issue has only relatively recently started to be tackled in a systemic way .
The current economic , financial and social crisis that affects the European Union , as well as the rest of the world , is generating a series of specific negative effects , directly influencing women 's living and working conditions , and their place in society in general .
This context projected to the top of the European Parliament 's agenda the necessity of a gender approach to poverty , in the report on the face of female poverty .
At global level , women are poor by comparison with men .
This is also the reality in each and every EU Member State , although one can identify specific differences depending on the country .
Almost 17 % of European women are ranked as living in poverty .
Considering the indicators relating to the labour market and social protection , the structural causes of poverty have a disproportionate effect on women .
At the same time , one can say that women 's contribution to the development of family , society and economy is regularly underestimated and underpaid .
The current financial crisis produces specific negative consequences that directly affect the lives of women , their work and their place in society .
Today , nearly 17 % of European women live in poverty .
Before any political strategy , there should be a comprehensive analysis that considers all aspects of gender : we believe that their integration into the labour market is crucial to tackling poverty and their social exclusion .
The promotion of a work-life balance , to help women who wish to pursue their own careers or to work full-time , is one of the fundamental factors in reducing female poverty and the risks they face .
We are asking for further measures to support working mothers , either by making it easier to find flexible forms of work , in terms of working hours , to enable them to fulfil their greater family commitments , or by providing adequate services for children , the elderly and other dependent family members .
We are convinced that the Europe 2020 strategy will achieve gender integration to improve representation and equal participation in the labour market , breaking the pattern of segregation and ensuring the presence of women in jobs at a higher level .
On the day when we celebrate the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day , we are voting on two reports that address issues why women are still too frequently marginalised and excluded from society .
Women are traditionally at a higher risk of poverty , especially single mothers and women over the age of 65 .
Among the five measurable objectives proposed by the Commission for the Europe 2020 strategy , there is the fight against poverty , which makes this report extremely topical , especially in terms of gender policies in the light of the economic and financial crisis that is crushing Europe .
The real vulnerability of the individual woman exposes her to a greater risk of poverty and social exclusion and therefore of isolation , making it incumbent on the institution that we represent to put in place the specific strategies and programmes mentioned in Mrs Plumb 's report .
I voted in favour of this report .
All indicators show that , at global level , women are poorer than men on average .
In times of economic recession , people who are at risk of falling into poverty become more vulnerable , and the majority of these are women .
The report acknowledges that the austerity measures being applied throughout the EU will have particularly devastating effects on women , particularly those already facing numerous disadvantages .
The pensions of a considerable proportion of European women aged over 65 are a pittance .
Poverty among women is not just the result of the recent economic crisis , but is also the consequence of other factors resulting from discriminatory gender stereotypes , from the pay gap between men and women , and from barriers to proper reconciliation between family and work life , which is particularly serious in the case of single-parent families .
These result in the ' feminisation of poverty ' , which urgently needs to be combated .
I voted for this report because I find it very difficult to accept that 17 % of women still live below the poverty line in Europe .
The unprecedented economic crisis that has just hit the European Union has only served to make this sad situation worse .
Time has come , therefore , to underline the importance of this problem and to adopt a package of measures to combat this scourge .
The European Union and its Member States must put a stop to the poverty and social exclusion of women in Europe , in particular , by ensuring they have access to quality education and jobs , by helping them find a balance between their family life and work life , and by helping to combat the violence to which they , sadly , all too often , fall victim .
I therefore support this own-initiative report , which highlights one of the failures of our modern democracies : discrimination against women .
Poverty and equality are two inverse variables in an economic projection .
Actions aimed at making women fully active also produce a reduction in overall poverty .
In Europe , more than 17 % of the female population lives in poverty .
The economic and financial crisis has affected - and may further affect - these data , which are already striking .
The fight against poverty is not always considered part of gender politics and this weakens its importance .
The work of the relevant committees underlines the importance of taking account of these connections and , on that basis , analyses the possible actions .
They are located conveniently within the EU 2020 strategy , which defines poverty as one of its five measurable objectives .
Starting from the three dimensions of poverty - gender , generational and geographical - the report by Mrs Plumb reveals its extraordinary solidity and especially its innovativeness in planning a process that will anticipate the adoption of austerity measures to combat the effects of the crisis .
The seven areas of interest to facilitate the required systematic approach outlined in the report are well framed in this regard .
The positive nature of the proposal cannot leave the Commission , the Council or the Member States unmoved , and I expect a well-coordinated response from them .
Poverty amongst women is a really serious problem that the EU needs to solve .
The crisis situation that we are facing does not help to tackle this serious problem , but we need to make an additional effort in order to solve it .
As combating poverty is one of the main objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , everything possible must be done to achieve it , specifically as regards women , less advantaged and older women especially .
Therefore , what are needed are labour and social protection policies that are concerned with finding solutions for women to be able to reconcile family life and work .
Dialogue also needs to take place with social partners and civil society in order to achieve a fairer society without differences .
Today , 8 March 2011 , is International Women 's Day .
I voted in favour of this report because preventing and reducing the poverty endured by women is a vital component of the fundamental principle of social solidarity , to which the European Union is committed .
Female poverty is not only the result of the recent economic crisis , but also the consequence of a variety of factors such as stereotyping , the gender pay gap , the obstacles created by the failure to reconcile family life and work , the longer life expectancy of women and , more generally , the various forms of gender discrimination , which mostly affect women .
The report urges EU Member States to implement mechanisms to fight poverty , which has a woman 's face , and I therefore voted in favour of the text .
Even though female poverty is a long-standing fact of life , the economic , financial and social crisis has greatly exacerbated this situation and we are witnessing the feminisation of poverty .
Poverty is one area where gaps between men and women remain .
The participation of women in the labour market is one means of combating poverty and social exclusion .
Furthermore , it should be noted that we must , at the same time , encourage equal pay , equal access to positions of responsibility and also the granting of personal rights to pensions and social security .
Violence against women , including human trafficking and sexual exploitation , is a serious problem that must be eradicated by any means available to us .
This type of violence is all too often one of the causes of female poverty , after health problems and job loss .
We must maintain , both at European and at national level , a strong commitment to gender equality and to fighting social exclusion by specific and lasting measures supported by adequate financial resources .
The problem of poverty in Europe is a persistent negative phenomenon affecting many Europeans and particularly women .
Ever more women are in need , and up to 17 % of women live below the poverty line , according to the latest surveys .
The position of women in Europe remains unsatisfactory , and the situation is even deteriorating due to the economic crisis and the restructuring of the public sector , which employed the largest number of women before the crisis .
Within the framework of the EU 2020 strategy , which is principally aimed at reducing poverty by 25 % , there should be a greater effort , in my opinion , to look for and develop specific solutions relating to the issue of female poverty .
I would like to highlight the priceless contribution of women to the healthy development of the family and the raising of children , which must not be unfavourably influenced by discrimination against women , because such undesirable phenomena also have a heavy impact on society itself .
I therefore support initiatives leading to a reduction in unjustifiable differences and an improvement of the position of women in society , not only within a legislative framework , but also in everyday life .
in writing . - I have examined the report thoroughly .
I would like to highlight the main directions in the fight against poverty among women : combating poverty among women by means of employment policy and social protection ; the importance of social dialogue and civil society in combating poverty among women ; the importance of financial aid in combating poverty .
It is highly important that on 8 March , Parliament adopted such important resolutions , which give a beam of hope in overcoming injustice !
I voted in favour .
I support the report on the face of female poverty in the European Union as it shows the extent to which women are the first victims of poverty .
I call on Europe to take practical measures to reduce the pay gap between men and women .
How long will we have to carry on accepting that women should have lower pay than men ?
Why should a woman have to work for five years to earn what a man earns in four years , and , above all , why should she end up poorer on the pretext that she has brought up her children ?
This is not a society I would wish to leave to my children and grandchildren .
The uncertainties of women 's working lives weigh too heavily on them , especially when they reach retirement age .
Europe must be careful not to further impoverish women by promoting a genuine equal pay policy .
I am particularly struck by the poverty among lone elderly women .
They have worked a whole lifetime , contributed to raising a family ; if they worked , they receive inadequate pensions ; if they only benefit from a state pension , that is even worse .
Pension schemes have not been kind to them .
Perhaps they interrupted their careers to raise children and part-time work has reduced their income over the course of their entire working life .
They could have had to support family members who were sick , elderly or disabled and welfare was not up to the task .
This is certainly not an enviable condition .
With the help of the European Social Fund , we need to establish programmes to provide assistance and support .
Local government - either directly or through non-governmental organisations - should take responsibility for these issues and collaborate with regions to better target their quotas from Structural Funds .
The fight against poverty should not get stuck on the desks of statistics offices but should go down to the administrative level closest to the women who need them .
In Europe , there are still too many women with a lower salary than men , in search of work and of services that can help them to raise their children , too many women are victims of violence , too many immigrant girls suffer genital mutilation and there are far , far too many women who are alone , elderly and forgotten .
Poverty among women is a tragic problem , particularly in developing countries .
Nonetheless , the indirect approach espoused in this report should not be used as a way of relaxing the migration policies of the Member States .
I therefore voted against this report .
The European Union needs to take a clear stance and have plans than can be brought in to combat the economic crisis .
In this case , it is a matter of protecting women from the risk of poverty , stopping them from remaining a basically more vulnerable part of society than men , and therefore less able to respond to the employment crisis .
To achieve the goal of the Europe 2020 strategy on the fight against poverty , we need to ensure that women are offered greater availability of resources , improved labour policies , increased funding from the European Social Fund and the possibility of achieving a work-life balance , without having to give up their role as mothers .
As I have already said about other reports voted on today , I do , however , believe that when implementing these recommendations , it is appropriate to respect the principle of subsidiarity and certain typical national characteristics which must be defended and protected .
I voted in favour of the report on female poverty in the EU .
In the present period of economic crisis , the austerity measures being applied are also having an adverse impact on women , putting them at a disadvantage on the labour market .
In Greece , the risk of poverty at work for women is 10 % , which is much higher than for men , while in Europe , female poverty is 36 % , compared with 11 % for men .
The basic objective is to eliminate the pay gap between the two sexes and the equalities caused by it and to take measures to support working single mothers by making working times more flexible .
The Member States are now being called on to create new jobs for women , where possible , and to facilitate their access to high-level education , so that they can acquire skills and qualifications and claim high quality jobs .
Enough study has been done and we have data sufficiently rigorous in order to categorically state that , in general terms , poverty affects women first and most severely in all societies , from the richest - and none has yet been able to successfully eliminate poverty within itself - to the poorest , in which poverty expands like a contagious disease that steals life expectancy and hope of life .
However , we need a deeper and more specific understanding of this reality in the various Member States of the European Union so as to act in a better adapted and more effective way , with a view to the common goal of preventing and reducing poverty amongst women .
It is worth stressing poverty amongst women in that we also have specific general indicators that point to its high impact on a community 's social fabric : because of women 's fundamental and permanent role in the family , it has been proven that the more that is invested in their education and social promotion , the more the community develops socio-economically .
Combating poverty amongst women is a moral obligation but also a social investment .
For these reasons , I voted for this report on the face of female poverty in the European Union .
in writing . - The EU is confronted with a major economic , financial and social crisis that affects us all , men and women .
But it particularly harms women in the labour market and in their personal lives , since they are more likely to be in insecure jobs , more likely to be made redundant and less likely to have social security .
The austerity measures implemented across the EU have a particularly damaging impact on women , who dominate the public sector both as employees and as beneficiaries of services .
Preventing and reducing women 's poverty is an important component of the fundamental principle of social solidarity to which the EU is committed by Article 3 of the Treaty on EU .
This implies equality between women and men , social justice and protection and combating social exclusion and discrimination .
The Commission and the Member States should take the necessary measures to eliminate gender inequalities in employment as part of the EU 2020 strategy .
I strongly encourage establishing as an objective the reduction of the gender pay gap by 1 % each year in order to achieve a target of a 10 % reduction by 2020 .
I would also stress the need for positive action to increase women 's representation in political , economic and corporate decision-making bodies .
I voted in favour of this report .
All indicators show that , at global level , women are poorer than men on average .
In times of economic recession , people who are at risk of falling into poverty become even more vulnerable , and the majority of these are women .
The report acknowledges that the austerity measures being applied throughout the EU will have particularly devastating effects on women , particularly those already facing numerous disadvantages .
The pensions of a considerable proportion of European women aged over 65 are a pittance .
Poverty among women is not just the result of the recent economic crisis , but is also the consequence of other factors resulting from discriminatory gender stereotypes , from the pay gap between men and women , and from barriers to proper reconciliation between family and work life , which is particularly serious in the case of single-parent families .
These result in the ' feminisation of poverty ' , which urgently needs to be combated .
in writing . - The Plumb FEMM report was adopted by majority .
We supported many paragraphs for which a separate vote was requested by S & D / PPE / ALDE .
These paragraphs were mainly repetitions . The final result is also OK .
Positive because adopted : eliminate gender inequalities in EU 2020 strategy ( para .
38 ) ; full pay for maternity leave as adopted in Estrela report on 20.10.2010 ( para . 39 ) ; increase female representation in political , economic and corporate decision-making bodies .
Public services of high standard ( para . 43 ) should also be compatible with full-time working hours .
But also negative because gender dimension in recovery plans ( para . 15 ) not adopted .
I endorsed the report on female poverty in the European Union .
Over the past 10 years , the number of women living in poverty has increased disproportionately in relation to men .
Over 84 million EU citizens live in poverty , and women account for over half of this figure .
This is a result both of the economic crisis and of the differences which exist between women 's and men 's pay , difficulties in reconciling family life with a career , a longer average lifespan and various types of gender-based discrimination , the victims of which are mainly women .
I would call for decisive measures to be taken at the level of both the EU and all the Member States to combat pay-related discrimination and to ensure access to attractive job offers .
I would stress the need to strengthen legal instruments aimed at eliminating pay differences between women and men .
Marked discrepancies continue to exist in this regard , with men earning 20 % to 25 % more than women on average , and this results in high levels of poverty among single women , retired women and widows .
It is essential that EU programmes be adopted within the framework of the Europe 2020 strategy in the field of lifelong learning and professional training for women , with the aim of increasing employment levels among women .
These programmes should concentrate , to a large extent , on occupations which will be important in the future and eliminate the stereotypes which exist in terms of areas of education dominated by women or men , as well as eliminating traditional models in teaching programmes .
The feminisation of poverty is a phenomenon which is observed and encountered ever more frequently both within Europe and outside its borders , and it occurs as a result of age , family responsibilities , ethnic origin and violence against women , among other factors .
The high percentage of women employed in low paying or part-time jobs means that more women than men live on the verge of poverty .
Research should be stepped up at European level into this phenomenon , since research will make it possible to establish precise and effective methods for combating poverty and social exclusion among women .
The basic method used to help women break out of poverty should be the addition of a corresponding focus to employment policy ( flexible employment methods , career guidance , ensuring the provision of training to obtain higher qualifications and measures aimed at women living in rural areas ) .
Education also plays a very significant role in combating this problem .
The EU 's financial potential should be exploited to this end , and particular emphasis should be placed on linking gender issues to plans for exiting the economic crisis and effectively implementing the Europe 2020 strategy .
EU measures in this area should be an expression of social solidarity .
in writing . - I supported this report which recognises that across the EU , women are more impacted by poverty , and that we need to work together to address this .
I was disappointed that again , British Conservatives opposed this report on the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day .
Combating poverty is one of the objectives proposed by Europe in the 2020 strategy .
Female poverty is due , in large measure , to discrimination against women .
The recent recession has lowered their position in society , increased discrimination against them and pushed them towards poverty .
In her report on female poverty in the European Union , Mrs Plumb has tried to find effective solutions to improve the position of women in society as a whole , which is why I voted for it .
in writing . - Women in the EU earn , on average , 17.5 % less than men , and this rate has remained constant for the past fifteen years - it is time for action to be taken to cut this pay gap .
Equal pay for equal work must be properly implemented in Member States in order to get a fair deal for women .
It is vital we look at the effect the gender pay gap has on pensions for women ; in many cases , a woman 's right to a pension results from her marital status .
Equal pensions for women should be guaranteed , and it is for this reason I supported the proposal to ensure the same rights for women in the case of pensions and social security .
Around 17 % of all women in the EU are living below the poverty line , and it is essential that social and labour market policies are adapted to guarantee a minimum income and social justice for women .
I agree with calls for the EU to provide more funding through the ESF in order to help combat poverty and social exclusion - it is vital that women are fully integrated into the labour market .
I voted in favour of the report on the face of female poverty in the European Union .
The Commission 's Annual Report for 2010 on equality for women and men shows that poverty is one of the areas where gender-specific differences are obvious .
The economic , financial and social crisis has led to the ' feminisation of poverty ' .
The successive budgetary cuts and the restructuring of the state sector have particularly threatened jobs in which women are primarily employed .
At the same time , the measures supported by governments to combat the crisis are primarily focused on areas of the economy dominated by men .
The analysis of the phenomenon of the ' feminisation of poverty ' called for by the rapporteur is therefore urgently needed , so that appropriate countermeasures can be taken .
The two resolutions tabled by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and debated on the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day indicate that Parliament promotes and supports equal treatment for women and men .
The President of the legislative assembly actually commented that there are too few women in national parliaments , even if the situation is changing when it comes to the European Parliament .
I can confirm that this is also the case in Romania , which sent a higher proportion of women to the European legislative , compared to the representation they have in their national parliament .
However , apart from dealing with this situation , which can be treated only as the tip of the iceberg , it is necessary to eliminate the gender pay gap , have more women appointed to decision-making posts , and increase the level of employment among women , as they are affected more by unemployment , using dynamic and realistic policies .
Analyses show that we are not just talking about the need for equal treatment for men and women , but that these policies would have a major impact on economies , with a 30 % rise in GDP .
The average gender pay gap is still 18 % in the EU .
I welcome the call made to Member States to implement the equal pay legislation .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Preparation of the Eurozone summit of 11 March 2011 ( debate )
The next item is a statement by the President of the Commission on the preparation of the Eurozone summit of 11 March 2011 ( 2011 / 2615 / RSP ) ) .
Madam President , honourable Members , we are currently experiencing one of those incredible moments when the historical process seems to speed up .
On our doorstep , on the other side of the Mediterranean , a wind of freedom has started to blow .
This is such an important and urgent matter that I should first of all like to tell you that the College has just approved the Commission 's contribution to assist the countries south of the Mediterranean in their transition process and to breathe new life into our relations with our Mediterranean neighbours .
I shall present this contribution with Baroness Ashton during the Extraordinary European Council next Friday .
The men and women on the southern shores of the Mediterranean , especially the young people , are currently demonstrating their rejection of authoritarian regimes and their aspiration to political freedom and social justice .
Although we are aware of the extreme complexity of the situation and the challenges and difficulties that it presents , the European Union cannot afford any ambiguity .
We must stand shoulder to shoulder with those who are demanding political freedom and respect for human dignity .
We cannot countenance any ambiguity on the part of the European Union .
A regime which fires on its own people has no place within the concert of nations .
We are offering these peoples a ' partnership for democracy and shared prosperity ' founded on three pillars : democratic transformation , involvement with civil society and mutually supportive development .
We are aware of the challenges that await us .
Saying no to dictatorship does not automatically guarantee the rule of law and democracy .
The road to democratic transition is never an easy one .
It can sometimes be winding and it is always demanding .
However , Europe must stand shoulder to shoulder with those who aspire to political freedom and social justice .
Honourable Members , I would now like to turn to the other meeting to be held on Friday 11 March , the informal summit of Member States in the euro area .
The crisis has shown just how interdependent our economies are .
It has shown up certain structural weaknesses .
That is one reason why we must strengthen our economic governance .
The Commission has long fought for more coordinated national economic policies and stronger governance in Europe .
Our proposal is to further develop the economic pillar of our Economic and Monetary Union .
We highlighted this point in our report on the 10 years of the euro , EMU @ 10 .
However , the truth of the matter is that some governments were extremely reluctant to espouse a development of this nature .
Today , everyone admits that there is a need for genuine European economic governance and , moreover , the markets are continually reminding us how essential this is .
This is the reason why the Member States , in the conclusions of the work of the task force , presided over by the President of the European Council , arrived at a very broad consensus on the proposals presented by the Commission on strengthening economic governance - proposals that are currently under discussion here in Parliament and in the Council .
Furthermore , we came to an agreement on the implementation of the European semester , which will help to extend economic governance , by including in the early stages not only budgetary policies but also economic policies and structural reforms for each of the Member States .
It was within this context of strengthened economic governance that recently , the idea of a ' competitiveness pact ' emerged , inviting Member States in the euro area to make additional efforts , largely on the basis of their national competences , to become even more competitive .
It is true that whilst the economies within the European Union are indeed extremely interdependent , those of the euro area are particularly so .
Gaps in competitiveness are a genuine problem for those countries which share the same currency .
Their competitiveness and the convergence of their economies are essential in ensuring the viability of a strong and stable euro area , which will be to the benefit of the entire European Union .
Having said that , we must recognise that this idea has raised a number of concerns : fear of a two-speed Europe ( the euro area and the others ) , the danger of losing sight of certain aspects of the economic recovery that are just as important as competitiveness , and also possibly the calling into question of the Community approach .
These are all legitimate questions and we must respond to them unequivocally .
This is a question of mutual confidence and credibility .
Honourable Members , I was also a little surprised to have to point out , at the last European Council on 4 February , that any specific initiative for competitiveness and for the euro area had , quite obviously , to be in accordance with the Treaty .
In its conclusions , the European Council decided that ' in taking their inspiration from the new framework for economic governance , the Heads of State or Government will take additional measures with the aim of enhancing the quality of the coordination of economic policies within the euro area in order to improve competitiveness , and this would lead to a greater degree of convergence without harming the single market ' .
Moreover , I was very happy to see that , in the end , these conclusions contained explicit reference to the need for these additional advances to be made ' in accordance with the Treaty ' .
You might think that this goes without saying , but it is better that it is said .
The European Council therefore gave the President of the European Council a mandate to lead , in close collaboration with the President of the European Commission , consultations with the Member States of the euro area in order to determine the concrete means needed to press ahead with this .
These consultations clearly showed that , in general , Member States are in favour of adopting the Community approach .
Now I would like to be very clear on the principles that , in the Commission 's view , must necessarily be abided by for such a competitiveness pact , which it might be better to call a ' convergence and competitiveness pact ' , since it involves measures aimed at reducing differences within the euro area , and indeed within the European Union .
The first principle is that this pact must be carried out under the conditions laid down in the Treaty and within the existing system of economic governance .
We can , in this way , be sure of a truly Community approach .
Because history , and notably the experiences with the Stability and Growth Pact , has shown that it is only through the Community method that we can produce results which are democratically legitimised at European level , and which are binding and can be controlled .
The pact must , of course , also respect the role of the Commission .
This is essential in order to guarantee objectivity and independence in monitoring the efforts of Member States , the integrity of the single market and of all the acquis communautaire , and the clearance between the initiatives taken in the euro area and those pursued in the European Union as a whole .
I will also insist on the role of the European Parliament in monitoring the convergence and competitiveness pact because the Commission , of course , will fully inform the European Parliament .
The pact must also remain open to other Member States which might wish to take part in it and that are not members of the euro area .
I think it is important to avoid any kind of stratification in our Union ; that stratification will go against the very principles of solidarity that are at the core of our common project .
To justify such a pact - which involves national measures - it must contribute added value to what has already been laid down in the context of economic governance proposals put forward .
I would remind you that under Article 121 of the Treaty , Member States must coordinate their national economic policies .
Such a pact must also take care not to affect adversely the integrity of the single market and should even help to enhance it .
In addition , it must respect social dialogue and link measures on competitiveness to our central goals , which are growth and jobs , exactly as we have stated in the Europe 2020 agenda .
Competitiveness is indeed an essential element for our economies .
It is a necessary condition for entrenching job-creating growth .
It is therefore important to ensure that this pact delivers real added value and does not take us away from the essential goals of growth and employment .
My bottom line is growth and employment .
That is why I emphasise growth , the sort of inclusive sustainable growth which lies at the heart of the Europe 2020 strategy .
That is why I insist so much on the social dimension , since the efforts required must be shared fairly .
On this point , the Commission continues to work on a proposal for the taxation of financial activities .
Similarly , if budgetary consolidation and structural reforms are essential for competitiveness , investment in sectors of importance for the future like research and innovation is just as necessary .
We should also bear in mind that this pact is but one part of our overall response to ensure the stability of the euro area .
Progress must be made in all the other areas of our response , that is to say , in enhancing the effective financing capacity of the existing European Financial Stability Fund and broadening its scope , in preparing the establishment of a permanent mechanism as from 2013 and in implementing over the coming months tighter stress tests for banks .
All of this will contribute to greater transparency , greater confidence and greater credibility .
The convergence and competitiveness pact could thus make a significant contribution if we interpret it as one measure among others within the framework of all the efforts which have been undertaken to ensure the stability of the euro area and which we hope will start to take effect as of March .
It could constitute a major additional effort towards fair and sustainable growth in Europe if it is coherent with the Community system of governance .
If that is the case , if this measure is effectively carried out following a Community approach , as is the wish of the Commission and this Parliament , then I believe that the convergence and competitiveness pact will deliver added value and could help to strengthen the economic pillar of economic and monetary union .
That is what this Parliament and the Commission want .
The Commission will spare no effort to that end .
I thank you for your attention .
Madam President , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , what lessons have we learnt from the financial crisis ?

The lesson we learnt from the Second World War was that our nations should work together and stop tearing each other apart .
From the fall of the Berlin Wall , we learnt lessons about authoritarian and communist regimes and we were able to reunite our continent around the values of freedom , democracy and the social market economy .
From the terrorist attack of 11 September , we learnt that we had to strike a new balance between security and freedom .
From this financial crisis , the lesson we must learn is for our Member States to stop treating as a taboo subject any cooperation in the budgetary , fiscal and social fields .
I know exactly how far we have come .
The establishment , this year , of cooperation between the 27 on their budgetary priorities constitutes , in itself , a major shift in attitude .
The regulations that we have provided ourselves with to make the financial markets more ethical are , also , exemplary , but they do not suffice .
My group would like to call for an agreement to be reached between Parliament and the Council , before the summer , on strengthened economic governance .
My group would also like to call for efforts to be pursued on the coordination of social and fiscal matters .
That is the thrust of the competitiveness pact , the initial version of which has already been revised to be in greater accordance with Community values .
However , we must go even further still and ensure that both Parliament and the Commission exercise all the prerogatives that they enjoy in this respect , and in this , we are counting on the President of the Commission .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) welcomes and supports these proposals as did the national leaders of the party in Helsinki .
Ladies and gentlemen , how can we explain to our fellow citizens that , at the same time as we are in a delicate financial situation in mid-July each year , most of our Member States should continue to spend as if nothing were amiss ?
How can it be that the over-indebtedness of our States is more acceptable , more tolerable and more bearable than that of households or businesses ?
I have witnessed this at company level .
The crisis has led to job losses and family trauma ; the least we can do is to learn lessons from this and tell things as they are .
The first lesson is that we should no longer treat lightly the obligations placed on States - whatever their size - to respect budget limits .
The second lesson is this : European solidarity can only operate if , and only if , our social and fiscal regulations are at least comparable .
They do not necessarily need to be identical - just comparable .
At the moment , this is far from being the case .
The third lesson is that Europe must provide itself with a European stability mechanism to protect our social market economy .
The fourth and final lesson is that even in a storm , Europe is standing firm and European integration is becoming stronger .
Our American and Japanese partners have debt ratios far in excess of ours , without , it must be said , being excessively worried by it .
However , that will probably not always be the case .
For our part , now is the time to consolidate our economy and our competitiveness .
Now is the time to work on creating jobs for the future .
Now is the time to tell things as they are .
Let us not miss this opportunity !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen - the few of you who are still here , for weeks , we have been discussing a paper from Chancellor Merkel and President Sarkozy that , apparently , never existed .
Despite the fact that the paper was non-existent , a press conference was held on the subject during the European Council summit .
We now know for sure that the paper did exist and made for some interesting reading .
In the meantime , however , the content of the paper has somehow got lost .
The key elements of this paper will never see the light of day .
Nonetheless , in the end , we shall have a result , namely , an expansion of the safety net .
So , a non-existent paper with elusive content , presented at an artificial press conference , has led to an expansion of the safety net .
This is great .
However , the situation is Kafkaesque to put it mildly .
This is no way to rescue the euro .
I would like to tell the President of the Commission that I found his statement to be good .
It was good because you have revealed the lack of social balance in these proposals .
I am sometimes a little surprised : Germany with its Chancellor , like President Sarkozy , France 's prince of the opinion polls , is demanding measures that Germany itself has never taken in this form .
The Greek budget , and in fact all budgets , wherever they may be , are to be cut .
Are you in agreement with this , Mr Rehn ?
What did Germany do in its hour of deepest crisis ?
It came up with a so-called scrapping premium , in other words , it used the national budget to finance a scheme to stabilise the automobile industry .
The subvention for reduced working hours , which helped keep unemployment in Germany under control , was an interventionist measure by the state .
Why should other states be prevented from implementing similar measures to deal with their specific situation ?
Rating agency Moody 's recently downgraded Greece to a ranking below Belarus and Egypt .
One really does begin to wonder whether there are any signs of green shoots in the economy .
I do not know .
The country is ranked even lower than Vietnam .
This particular drama is always played out three days in advance of a European Council summit .
Something like this always happens three days before a European Council meeting .
However , people listen to what Moody 's has to say .
Do you know what Moody 's says ?
It says it is going to downgrade the country because it is no longer able to invest as a result of the cuts and therefore cannot generate economic growth .
So what we are talking about here is a ' hair cut ' .
If you look at me , you will realise that I am well qualified to tell you that a hair cut will not solve every problem .
Quite the opposite in fact , because what actually happens as a result of the hair cut ?
The aim seems to be to improve a country 's credit rating by telling those who are to provide the credit that they will lose all write-downs .
Where will this eventually end ?
In the safety net , of course .
That is why it makes sense to increase the safety net and to do everything that we can to stabilise the euro .
That is why the pact itself makes perfect sense .
However , an imbalance exists there .
Commissioner , if your ideas are incorporated in this pact , and the economic and social balance is restored as you suggest , then the pact will be on the right path again .
That is why I welcome the excellent proposal you have brought forward .
I do not want to spend any more time talking about the issue of the institutions .
In institutional terms , the entire concept was wrong from the start .
If it is now restructured in such a way that all operational decisions will be made by the appropriate responsible authority , in other words , the Commission , ensuring democratic legitimacy through the involvement of the European Parliament , then all is well and good .
So , although we got off to a bad start and there have been a few alarms and excursions along the way , the safety net is to be extended , which is wonderful .
The German Free Democratic Party has also come onboard , which is welcome news .
Madam President , I am sure that your party in Germany will also support this pact , so that we have also gained ground here .
If we can now succeed in giving the pact an appropriate name , namely the ' Pact for the Euro ' , then we may perhaps finally have achieved something worthwhile .
Madam President , first of all , I think that we can now say that after years of not accepting the idea of economic union , we are finally accepting the idea of an economic union alongside monetary union , which does represent a step forward .
Naturally , this is not the case for Mr Farage , but for everyone else , it does represent a step forward .
Nevertheless , Madam President , I do not think that the term that has been used is the right one .
What does the word ' pact ' mean ?
A pact is an agreement between States .
An agreement between States is not what we need .
What we need is a Community act , an initiative at the level of the European Union , and not a pact between Member States , which is , by its very nature , an intergovernmental pact .
Therefore , this is not the right term to use as it is misleading .
Secondly , there is the approach .
There is no need for anything at intergovernmental level .
Intergovernmentalism has never worked within the European Union .
The Lisbon strategy was intergovernmental and it failed .
When Germany and France failed to respect the rules governing the stability pact in 2003-4 , this proved that the intergovernmental approach was not the right one .
We must use the Community approach .
Thirdly , I believe , Mr Barroso , that what is on the table is not enough or it focuses rather on very specific measures .
Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy 's competitiveness pact comprises six specific measures .
For example , in the case of pensions , it focuses on pension age .
However , the pensions system is much more complex than that .
It is not only a question of pension age , there is also the number of years of pension contributions , pre-pension schemes , and the existence or not of a second pillar .
Therefore , what we need are not six specific measures in an intergovernmental pact , which will never come into being or work .
What we need is broad economic governance ( pension schemes , labour market , wage policy , fiscal policy ) within the European Union which is decided upon by the Commission and which , through a convergence code - that is the term you used - is provided to Member States so that they can apply the rules from the convergence code .
That is what we must do as quickly as possible .
My request is a very simple one .
I saw the paper of 25 February that you prepared with the President of the Council .
I think that it is now for the Commission to prepare its own initiative .
This must be done now .
There is still time in the weeks to come for you to prepare these Community acts for economic governance and convergence and to table them at the Council and the European Parliament .
It will then be up to us to decide and to support you in this respect .
However , what I think we are doing at the moment is being reactive .
In this document of the 25th - I have it here - I can read that
' monitoring by the Heads of State and Heads of Government ' , ' the concrete commitments undertaken by the Heads of State and Heads of Government ' .
( FR ) That is not how it is going to work .
The States and the Prime Ministers are not going to regulate themselves !
It has never worked in the past , and it will not work in the future !
Finally , and this is my last point , I also think that it is time , Mr Barroso , to present , at the earliest possible opportunity , an initiative on a crisis mechanism for banks , not at national level , as stated , but at European level .
You have the right to do so as you are , in effect , the guarantor of competition rules within the European Union and you are in a position to suggest such an initiative .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I no longer feel compelled to say anything about the somewhat embarrassing history of the competitiveness pact .
It was quite bizarre to hear that the paper does not exist , even though this paper was distributed in the corridors of Council Headquarters in Brussels .
As I have already stated in Brussels , the way in which the facts have been disputed in the Council 's buildings bears all the hallmarks of a socialist or communist regime in its dying days .
From my point of view , the fact is that for months now , we Europeans have been experiencing more than a currency crisis , but also a crisis in the capabilities of our national governments to accept shared responsibility for the problem and to follow a joint strategy that could lead us out of these difficulties .
If we now make the crisis mechanism permanent , however we may have achieved it , then we will have taken one step forward .
However , if one looks at Greece , then I would say that we may be deluding ourselves if we believe we have the crisis under control .
It is equally clear in Greece that the one-sided nature of the measures , exclusive concentration on austerity measures and cuts , is not working .
The country must also be in a position to make investments .
When a country like Greece cuts expenditure so radically , then it needs to know where its income is to come from .
I am annoyed by the fact that , in advance of this week 's meeting of the European Council and in statements relating to the Council meeting in 14 days ' time , we are hearing from Germany that it will not be prepared to discuss conditions for Greece or for necessary changes .
The same old mistakes are being made again : this unilateralism and insistence on a single method .
If we are to follow the model described by Mr Verhofstadt , as well as decisions in relation to specific consolidation measures , economic union also requires a readiness for genuine solidarity .
Hence , Greece should expect more from us than we have given so far .
I completely agree with Mr Schulz and the previous speakers and I would like to state clearly on behalf of all those in my group who have been working on this issue for many months : the Community method is something special .
We need genuine , understandable decision-making processes in Brussels , so that citizens from Greece to Denmark , in Germany and in Spain , trust in us .
If we really were to establish this ' closed shop ' proposed in the competitiveness pact as contrived by a small number of Heads of Government , we will lose the debate about trust in the European Union .
This is really what the crisis is increasingly about .
I can only hope that we will be delivered from this stupidity and that this Council meeting will show more sense .
Since you mentioned sustainable growth , Mr Barroso , let me add one more thing .
I cannot understand why a Commissioner for Energy in Brussels would say that ambitious climate protection targets would mean deindustrialisation in Europe .
The German Minister for the Environment was in Brussels 14 days ago and presented a study that predicted six million jobs for the European Union if we set a 30 % climate target .
This would mean sustainable growth .
Mr Barroso , you must stop Mr Oettinger .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , in a crisis , one sometimes has to act quickly - and it is clear that the eurozone is not out of its crisis - but one also has to act intelligently .
The UK restored market confidence by reforms to control spending and reduce national debt .
These are now core suggestions under the competitiveness pact .
Parliament 's procedures do not allow it to make rapid decisions , but there are suggestions tabled by MEPs that perhaps the European Council could find helpful .
On the Irish interest rate , those of us who have lent another country money deserve an interest rate which reflects the risk , but we also want our money back .
I have suggested a pre-payment incentive , a bonus to reward early repayment .
Under the economic governance package , Member States will have to be more transparent with their own budgets .
I would suggest the same thing should happen for taxpayers contributing to the EU 's budget .
I hope that despite this crisis , our national governments will be able to listen to suggestions from this House and work together in a constructive manner .

Madam President , Mr Barroso , I was pleased to note that you have appreciated the social dimension of this issue and have supported a social settlement .
This will certainly be necessary .
There is no need to repeat much of what my fellow Members have said as I am in complete agreement with them .
I am extremely sceptical of the pact that has been presented by Chancellor Merkel and President Sarkozy .
Why is this ?
Because their reasons for presenting it are not very clear .
The fact that it has no validity is quite a different issue .
They are both clever strategists .
I cannot accept their claim that things simply happened this way .
I believe that they mean things precisely as stated there .
This is the point I would like to return to once again .
I believe that this is a very serious issue .
Although they believe that this clause on the indexation of wages and salaries is the right answer , I am not so sure .
In black and white terms , increasing the pensionable age can also be described as a reduction in pensions .
It will be extremely hard to reduce debt .
After all , even countries like Germany find this very difficult .
I can imagine that Ireland or Greece will find themselves in huge difficulty here .
I am a little sceptical about what the proposed solution is supposed to achieve .
I expect transparency in this matter .
You will receive support from Parliament if you play your part in promoting greater transparency and ensuring that games like this are not played out behind Parliament 's back .
If these people want to make social security cuts , they need say so clearly , rather than taking countless detours to reach an objective that you , Mr Barroso , do not share and that we certainly do not share .
We are prepared to discuss the concept of coordinated European economic governance with you provided that this economic governance is worthy of the name , in other words , that it is democratic in structure and that it will help establish a sustainable , socially responsible European community .
We are also willing to discuss amendments to the Treaty , for example , in relation to a social progress clause .
However , we expect more detailed and earlier information and consultation .
This is the only way that Parliament can monitor this process .
It cannot be done without information !

on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , I enjoyed Mr Barroso 's view of the world today , but it was perhaps rather more ironic than he had intended .
He talked about the events in Egypt and elsewhere , saying that it is wonderful that people are rising up seeking democracy .
I would remind him that democracy is a method whereby you vote for people who govern you and then , if you do not like what they do , you can get rid of them , turf them out and put somebody else in .
It was ironic because his next sentence was ' and that is why in Europe , facing the euro crisis , we must reinforce the Community method ' .
For the public watching in on this - which increasingly they do - the Community method means that laws are proposed in secret by unelected bureaucrats - people like you , Mr Barroso .
I know the European Parliament voted for you , but you were the only candidate that was offered to us .
That is not democracy !
So Mr Barroso is saying , on the one hand , that democracy is good , but on the other hand , that we cannot have it in Europe .
That was reinforced by Mr Verhofstadt , who comes from Belgium and who thinks all nation states should be abolished - well , perhaps his own will be very shortly .
He is saying that we want an economic union .
Nobody has voted for that .
Nobody has been asked whether they want it .
He may vote for it but the peoples of Europe have not voted for it .
What should be discussed at the summit on Friday is Portugal .
After the bailouts in Greece and Ireland , it is pretty obvious that the markets are sending a message - ' Come in number 3 , your time is up ' .
Portuguese bond yields hit 7.6 % on Monday .
Mr Barroso knows that himself .
It was when yields reached 7 % that Ireland had to be bailed out .
In April , we also have a massive rollover of Portuguese debt - another EUR 20 billion that has to rolled over .
Let us remind ourselves that , in the last six months , 80 % of Portugal 's debt has been purchased by the European Central Bank .
We cannot go on as a European Union buying our own debt .
If we do , the next debt crisis will not be in a country , but will be a debt crisis of the European Central Bank itself .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , I am assuming that you will not know the answer , Mr Farage , but I have question for you .
You constantly refer to Belgium as a non-existent nation .
You have said this to Mr Van Rompuy and now you have mentioned something similar to Mr Verhofstadt .
Do you know on what basis the Belgian state was founded ?

Madam President , I am pleased that Mr Schulz has asked me that .
The difficulty is that when you form an artificial state that has within it more than one language group - which is clearly the case in Belgium - you may , for a period of time , be able to hold it together , but whether it is Belgium , whether it is Yugoslavia or whether it is the European Union , if you have entirely different languages and cultures , it will not hold together .

The reason you are so upset about Belgium , and Mr Van Rompuy got terribly upset about it and Mr Verhofstadt never likes it , is that - is this not the truth , Mr Schulz ? - Belgium is a microcosm for the whole European project .
( DE ) Madam President , I will only be 30 seconds .
It is interesting that the representative of a party which calls itself the United Kingdom Independence Party does not know that the Kingdom of Belgium was founded at the suggestion of the United Kingdom .
( Blue card question to Mr Farage under Rule 149 ( 8 ) ) Madam President , I hope Mr Farage is not offended by a question from a citizen of the Irish Republic .
Could I ask him what is the basis of the United Kingdom ?
I understand it consists of the nations of the English , the Scottish , the Welsh and the Northern Irish .
Is this not a Union of nations ?
A very proud one , I might add ?
Madam President , that is a good question .
Mr Schulz , you are quite right that Belgium was a British invention , and a British mistake .
We have made many over the years .
We have got some things right and some things wrong , just as your country , Germany , has .
Germany 's history has not been whiter than white , I think you might agree .
You are quite right .
Actually , holding together the United Kingdom has been something that has been deeply troubling .
Indeed , Ireland went its own way , back in 1921 , I think , when independence for Ireland was established .
You are right .
It is very difficult to hold together different cultures .
I do think that the Union of England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland works , at the moment , because it has consent .
If it did not have consent , then there would be popular calls for referenda and those nations would be able to break away .
But my point is that in this European Union , nobody is being given that opportunity .
( NL ) Madam President , the Council wants to see more ambition so that we can strengthen competitiveness and increase convergence .
That is only to be applauded , of course .
I would like to join in the tributes paid to President Barroso for the way in which he has picked up the gauntlet and come here to give us an explanation about the competitiveness pact , something which has even managed to keep Mr Martin Schulz sweet today .
That should not go unmentioned .
You have picked up that gauntlet , together with President Van Rompuy .
However , the pact seems to be having some difficulties getting off the ground , because Parliament , in particular , is having to deal with a sizeable legislative package .
This is the first time Parliament has found itself in the role of colegislator when it comes to economic governance .
That is why it is so important to link things together , because there is some overlap .
In this House , ladies and gentlemen , we have tabled 2 000 amendments and , if we look at this , we will find almost all the matters covered by the competitiveness pact reflected in those amendments .
This Parliament also wants to see more ambition and that is the very thing that worries me .
How are we going to link the competitiveness pact with the EU 2020 strategy ?
Moreover , President Barroso , are you going to use our right of initiative actively , to establish a link between the competitiveness pact and the legislative package ?
If you fail to do that , then this House will pick up that gauntlet itself , in its role as colegislator .
( PT ) Madam President , I come from a country that has existed for eight centuries and , despite this , is interested in the existence in this globalised world of a strong Europe and a Europe that is capable of dealing with China , India and the United States on equal terms .
The crisis that we are living through is not a crisis in the euro area : it is , as someone was saying , a crisis of the euro area .
This is because a single currency can only function when there is reliable and persistent work on convergence between the various areas comprising it , in terms of growth rates , of yields and of employment ; when there is real convergence .
Until now , we have been working on indicators of nominal convergence , which is in no way the same thing .
As such , Europe urgently needs to finish what it started .
To finish what it started - the single currency in particular - it in fact needs to create a robust Stability Fund : a fund that enables countries in difficulty to undertake this convergence with interest rates that are acceptable and not prohibitive , and does not force them to cut the strategic investment enabling this convergence , so that they can use their growth to pay back what they borrow in times of crisis .
Mr President , we need a Commission that is active ; a Commission that participates in building this Stability Fund , but also in the Eurobonds , and that listens to the message that Parliament has given it again today via the new source of own resources , which will have to be an effective reinforcement of a budget that is clearly insufficient .
We have just adopted the Podimata report , which clearly advocates a financial transaction tax .
In order to survive , Europe has to change course now .
It needs a strong Parliament , but it also needs a Commission capable of acting rather than simply reacting : of taking the initiatives that we are awaiting anxiously , so that this experiment is not lost and so that this experiment bears fruit .
( FR ) Madam President , Mr Barroso , Commissioner , much has been said with which I agree .
I should just like to use three words .
The first word is ' respect ' : it was not this Parliament that made the European Parliament colegislator with regard to economic governance .
It was governments that decided this in the Treaty of Lisbon .
As rapporteurs , we do not think it is right to be informed of important discussions relating to the governance package through Google or the English-language press .
The first thing that I would ask of you , Mr Barroso , and I also ask it of Mr Van Rompuy 's colleagues present in this House , is to respect us and to let this Parliament get on with its work .
The second word is ' democracy ' .
Never , since the eighteenth century , have we seen a democratic system deny the separation of powers in the way that the European Council is doing now .
In the separation of powers , there are those who decide and those who control .
The Council , with your collusion , Mr Barroso , is currently taking upon itself the right to both decide and control , in other words , basically to do nothing .
The third word is ' effectiveness ' .
If we continue to water down the content of our proposals , we will arrive at the lowest common denominator and we know what that is .
That is the Lisbon strategy !
That is the 10 years that have led us nowhere .
We will get on with our work .
This Parliament demands to be respected and will defend democracy and effectiveness .
( PT ) Madam President , two weeks ago , the international press analysed your declarations on the possibility that Portugal would turn to the European Financial Stability Facility ( EFSF ) , and interpreted them as constituting , or having constituted , encouragement .
As President Barroso is certainly the person in the Commission who best understands the reality of Portugal , I would put three questions to him for three frank answers .
The first question is what does Portugal gain through recourse to the EFSF , and the International Monetary Fund , as it currently exists .
The second question is what changes to the EFSF do you consider indispensable to prevent the repetition of the shameful situation that occurred in Ireland ?
A loan at prohibitive interest rates , with decreased salaries and continued fiscal dumping in terms of large companies .
The third and final question is how do you think we will get back to a situation of trust when all monetary policy decisions - and the last obvious ones by the European Central Bank - continue to damage the most vulnerable countries by mortgaging growth ?
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I cannot but endorse what has just been said by Mrs Goulard on the basic presuppositions that mean that while we are well aware of the need for effectiveness and speed in the decision-making process , it is essential for Parliament to be involved .
This is the only way in which our fellow citizens , of whom we are the elected representatives , can understand what is happening and explain it to them .
I would like to raise one very specific point .
We are buffeted , on a daily basis , by the financial markets , these financial markets , which stand for everything and for nothing , are most often inhabited by young people who have moved from Game Boy to computer without thinking too much about it , and yet who strike fear into the hearts of our countries .
The way to bring the markets under control is not to eliminate them .
I do not belong to a group that seeks to abolish the markets .
However , what do the markets seek ?
They seek to avoid risk and the rule of the game in the markets is to pass risk on to someone else .
This means that an operator will never feel happy as long as there is risk .
I feel that if we are to have an impact on these financial markets , Europe must be able to draw some very clear lines , not change direction every other day , and not bubble with hosts of ideas which are never , subsequently , put into practice .
If we want to bring this financial aspect under control , and this is vital for the economic stability of our countries , we need to be able - and it is your role , Mr Barroso , to provide this impetus - to set clear goals , clear measures and to show a clear determination in regard to good economic coordination .
Madam President , deliberate avoidance of economic governance and of banking regulation at both national and European level has delivered us into this crisis , and the crisis is obvious to everybody in terms of jobs , lack of growth , pensions lost , etc .
So , President Barroso , and indeed Commissioner Olli Rehn , you do not have to convince me that economic governance is necessary , that it must be strong , and that all Member States , and particularly those in the eurozone , must buy into it .
But we must convince the people of Europe that it is necessary , and the way we will do that is by ensuring that it is legitimate .
We ensure it is legitimate by refusing to accept any proposals which are not based on the Treaties and not based on the Community method .
It will not be acceptable if it is perceived to be in the interests of one , two , three , four or five economically powerful States .
That is the reality .
And so it is extremely important for the future of this Union that what is agreed at the informal Council on 11 March , and what is agreed at the end of March , can be supported by the public at large in Europe .
The Irish Government that has just been elected in Ireland has a strong mandate .
I quote from the programme which it has just agreed : ' We must step back from the edge of national insolvency ( ... ) the EU-IMF Programme of Support has - to date - failed to restore confidence in the Irish economy ( ... ) this reflects uncertainty over the affordability of the rescue package ' .
I want to conclude on this point if I might .
It is an important point .
The failure of the programme contributes to the wider eurozone financial instability .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , every week , the press is filled with news of a new or modified proposal from a country , the European Council and the President of the Commission .
I commend the President of the ECB because he has paid heed to the discussions and reports in the Parliament and recognises our direction and determination .
The competitiveness pact and its evolution is a case in point .
We already have a richer tapestry of ideas in our amendments to the economic governance package , so we will have little difficulty in moving into codecision to merge the outcomes of the positions that we take in Parliament and Council .
But we should not cherry-pick from the single market , nor continue to get it wrong .
The single market is not about a fortress with a level playing field inside .
It is about the external competitiveness that a large single market can generate , so it is intimately mixed with the recovery side of economic governance .
We also need a permanent financial stability mechanism capable of evolving over time , subject to governance and priorities .
To the German people , convulsed with the ' transfer union ' issue , I say ' look at what accompanies the demands of your own government - recapitalisation of banks and purchase of sovereign debt in a secondary market ' .
Germany 's banks will take ten years to recognise their impaired assets from the crisis , and that includes sovereign debt .
Germany 's banks will not meet new international rules for bank capital , so transfer to German banks should also be the issue on your lips .
That is why you need the mechanism , like all the eurozone .
Finally , on interest rates , there is a balance that has to be struck between sustainability and moral hazard .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) Madam President , difficult times require brave political decisions .
That is exactly why we do the jobs we do , and also why I would congratulate President Barroso on the ideas he has told us about here .
The European Parliament has also already taken clear positions in a number of reports on the issue of the euro and the need for stability , as well as on the problem of growth .
We cannot just look at one side of the argument .
Emerging from the crisis requires , for example , that the workings of the permanent fund take into account the specific situations of Member States that are currently paying increasing interest rates on their public debt .
This is a policy that must also be committed to competitiveness , to better credit , to a tax policy that can be positive for attracting investors ; in essence , to anything related to wealth creation .
However , it is also for this reason that we need more European institutions .
The European Parliament 's positions have been set out clearly and not via the media .
This is not the time for ideological decisions , but to think of the public .
What they demand of us is sensible and quick decisions .
Madam President , what we are facing is not a crisis of the eurozone , but a crisis of public finance in some Member States who happen to be in the eurozone - it could equally well be Hungary .
Why then is there to be an exclusive meeting of eurozone Heads of State - 17 of them - without others being invited ?
Why create unjustified dividing lines , which we abolished six years ago through enlargement , and why create a two-speed union ?
The European Commission under you , President Barroso , is the guardian of the Treaty .
What is the Treaty basis for this exclusion ?
Why exclude the willing and able ?
Why not apply Articles 5 and 121 to deepen fiscal and social policy ?
Why not apply Treaty-based enhanced cooperation within the Treaties , with a central role for the European Commission ?
The single market includes 27 Member States , as does the challenge of competitiveness .
The President of the Council and the European Commission should be a leader of the EU of 27 and not the secretariat of a select group of Member States .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , yesterday evening , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , by a large majority , adopted Parliament 's opinion on the amendment to the Treaty to introduce a stability mechanism .
The text proposes a change to the amendment to the Treaty of Lisbon , setting out a procedure which , while safeguarding the intergovernmental nature of the fund , justifies the inclusion of the rule in the Treaty .
It also contains some clear proposals regarding the operation of the mechanism , designed to make it compatible with the duties that the Treaty assigns to the European institutions and with the need to have real economic governance , which simply would not work if it were intergovernmental .
To use a metaphor which you , Mr Barroso , used in the last debate , Parliament proposes putting this intergovernmental wagon on the rails in a Union train and giving the Commission its due role in running this train .
How does the Commission view Parliament 's proposals ?
Is it willing to help push them in the negotiations over the coming days ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , my country , Ireland , is a small open economy with a heavy concentration on foreign direct investment .
The twelve and half per cent corporate rate is critical to supporting our economic recovery , retaining our jobs and employment growth .
As a result of establishing a low corporate tax rate , eight of the world 's top technology firms are based in my country .
Any move towards converging or harmonising the rate of company tax in the European Union would substantially damage Ireland 's ability to attract foreign direct investment and hence , our ability to grow to economic recovery .
It is important to remember that Ireland , like indeed other smaller countries , is geographically and historically a peripheral country in Europe and a low tax rate is a tool , a tool to address the economic limitations which come with being a peripheral country .
I want to pose a question to the President .
Can he confirm that under Lisbon , tax competence is a matter for each Member State ?
( PT ) Madam President , today , whilst commemorating International Women 's Day , everyone said fine words about women 's rights .
However , now , when we are talking about economic and financial matters , what is predominating is financial interests in so-called economic governance , with its insistence on deepening the criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact , never taking into account each country 's specific characteristics , the profound economic divergences , social inequalities , unemployment or poverty .
Therefore , what we will have with such a competitiveness pact is the worsening of all the existing social problems .
However , you will also be faced by the struggles of the workers , of women and of young people , as is already planned in Portugal for the coming weekends , in particular , the demonstration by the General Confederation of Portuguese Workers ( CGTP ) in Lisbon on 19 March .
That is the hope that we will have the necessary change .
( SK ) Madam President , I would like to begin by reminding my colleague , Vice-President Verheugen , that the EU was created through an agreement between independent sovereign states which voluntarily decided to transfer some of their powers to a new institution - the European Union - which they established together for the common coordinated administration of selected powers belonging to the sovereign states .
If the European countries therefore decide that they want to create a common economic administration within the framework of EU regulations , it must be their free and voluntary decision , and not a directive from Brussels .
If we are talking about a pact , and therefore an agreement between sovereign states concerning further cooperation under the aegis of the EU , then everything is in order .
If there is to be some form of closer cooperation in the area of economic management , it should quite naturally be attempted first and foremost by the euro area countries , which have made a commitment to use the common currency .
However , ladies and gentlemen , let us have no illusions .
Economic regulations and tax laws differ between these countries , and this process will therefore be very complicated ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , thank you , in particular , for being so fair as to announce the list of speakers in advance .
Alongside a uniform retirement age , the proposals for fiscal union require sales tax rates and wage policies to be harmonised .
This is a further step towards economic governance and represents a major intrusion into the tax sovereignty of the Member States .
It is made all the worse by the fact that the European Parliament will have nothing to say on these matters and that it was possible to fall back on Article 136 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy are likely to be able to force their proposals through , despite opposition from other countries in the euro area .
On the subject of reinforcing the rescue package , it is clear that speculators will continue to be able to exert pressure on the failing countries in the euro area without bearing any of the resulting risk .
If there is a crisis , the rescue package will be made available .
Profits will be privatised and losses will be borne by the public and circulated throughout the entire euro area .
Mr Barroso , you said that growth must be distributed more fairly .
I would like to ask you : What is the situation with financial liabilities ?
The rescue package will result in the burdens being distributed even more unjustly .
In addition , it will cause social problems and wantonly put the prosperity of the net contributors at risk .
Madam President , there were some specific questions about Portugal , which I will answer .
Whether or not Portugal should resort to the European Financial Stability Facility ( EFSF ) is a decision for the Portuguese authorities .
It is a sovereign decision for Portugal precisely because it has to do with sovereign debt .
What I can tell you , obviously , is that recourse to the EFSF and to International Monetary Fund aid was seen to be a last resort : ultima ratio .
It is obvious that if a country can avoid recourse to this mechanism , it should do so , as recourse to these rescue funds has costs , and not only in terms of reputation .
Therefore , if a country is able , it should be avoided .
However , I would repeat that it is a decision for the national authorities whether or not to resort to this rescue fund , or at least to request its activation .
Secondly , as regards what I would like to see in the EFSF , it is not a question of liking , it is a question of policy : we in the Commission are actively working with the Member States , specifically those in the euro area , to reinforce the EFSF 's capacity for lending in order to expand the scope of its activities , including greater flexibility .
Some of these issues are extremely sensitive from the point of view of the markets , so it does not seem prudent to me to be announcing intentions that have not become definite , but it is a work in progress in terms of the euro area .
Furthermore , as you know , the Commission has clearly set out its proposal for reinforcing the EFSF and expanding its activities , specifically in its annual growth survey .
As to whether this policy should or can be changed , I am telling you now that it cannot be changed with regard to the most vulnerable countries .
It would be absolutely irresponsible for countries with such a level of public or private debt to water down their efforts at budgetary consolidation and structural reforms at the moment .
When a country has such a high level of debt , the markets ' confidence has to recover , because if not , its economic situation becomes untenable .
Therefore , if we want to help the countries that are currently most vulnerable , we must not offer them mirages or something unrealistic : on the contrary , we must support any sensible efforts that they might make toward budgetary consolidation and structural reforms .
That is the only way to have the markets ' trust .
Naturally , this is not just the effort of the country in isolation , which needs a joint effort from the euro area .
That is what is being developed with , obviously , different levels of contribution from the various parties involved .
What I can tell you is that the Commission has been doing everything in its power to suggest greater ambition .
However , as the honourable Members know , the Commission makes suggestions , but in the end , the decision belongs to the Member States , specifically those of the euro area , particularly as regards matters that are strictly national competences , such as those not provided for in the Treaty , such as the EFSF .
( FR ) In any case , I would like to say to the entire Parliament that many of the criticisms that I have heard here today - even though most supported the Commission 's general approach - have been addressed , if I have understood correctly , to specific governments or specific Member States .
Consequently , it is not up to me to speak on their behalf .
What I have to say is that the Commission has presented a package of proposals for economic governance .
We have pushed to the limit our governments ' ambitions .
Even in the case of the governance package that my colleague , Mr Rehn , and I presented , the Member States were not willing to accept the initial level of ambition .
That is the truth of the matter , for we submitted legislative proposals .
Now what has emerged is a new idea , namely , the competitiveness pact which we are trying - and here I wish to be very transparent and show my respect for Parliament - to fit as well as we can within the Community approach .
I have reported to you , in complete transparency , the Commission 's efforts to make this idea regarding the impact of competitiveness useful and create added value , either in respect of growth and employment - which , as I have already said , remain a priority for the Commission - or even to strengthen the system of governance .
Of course , I do not need the Commission to be reminded of its role as guarantor of the Treaty .
We have unfailingly demonstrated this , be it in relation to issues of the internal market , competition or non-discrimination .
I can guarantee to you once again that the Commission would not hesitate to resort to all the means at its disposal if we were to believe that any principles or rules of the Treaty were being compromised by decisions taken either by the European Council , or by any other institution .
That is why the work we do is long-term in nature and , of course , it is serious work that we carry out with a sense of responsibility .
Obviously , this is an extremely delicate time for us , as you know , a time when the first thing that governments look at in the morning is the spread in their public debts .
Therefore , what we are saying does matter .
The hopes that we are creating do matter .
The Commission therefore owes it to itself to be ambitious and , at the same time , to be responsible in making its proposals , while knowing that they have , at least , a chance of coming to fruition , that it is not merely the case of a publicity stunt followed by a feeling of disappointment .
That is what I want to avoid and that is what the Commission must avoid .
We must avoid disappointment , or purely division , whether within the euro area , or even throughout the European Union .
That is why I can assure you that the Commission will keep its ambitions high .
The Commission is currently telling all governments that Parliament must be involved in this competitiveness pact .
The Commission is currently telling governments that it must retain a central role in this competitiveness pact , not out of institutional loyalty , not out of institutional egotism , but because I believe , needless to say , that the Commission , along with the Community approach , are a guarantee if we want to avoid divisions between the euro area and the rest of Europe .
They are the guarantee if we want to avoid attacks on the integrity of the single market , or if we want to avoid calling into question other mechanisms such as the Stability and Growth Pact .
They are the guarantee , indeed , that we remain European within the framework of the European Union with European solidarity .
Therefore , I was extremely frank and extremely open .
The Commission carries out its work in utter transparency , constructively of course , trying to save an idea that , if it is well presented and carried out within a Community approach , could contribute added value to our efforts at governance , unlike what some of you have said .
Indeed , the efforts that our governments have intensified , efforts to bring about economic political coordination , have always been part of the Commission 's general approach and that of most members of this Parliament .
This therefore gives us an opportunity .
If Heads of State or Government are now willing to become involved in the coordination of economic policies , and even in certain domains that were hitherto considered to be of national competence alone , I think that this should be welcomed insofar as it contributes added value to growth and employment , and insofar as it respects systems of Community governance .
That is what is at stake .
I think that , from this point of view , the debate has been very useful .
Furthermore , I believe that the message from this Parliament has reached the European Council .
President Buzek passed it on the last time he was at the European Council .
I think that on essential matters , both the Commission and Parliament will be firm in the defence of the Community approach , convinced that this is the only way for Europe to achieve the objectives we have set for ourselves in the euro area , for stability and also for growth and employment throughout the Union .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The drama that we are once again seeing unfold before our eyes is becoming painfully repetitive and revealing of the essence of this European Union : of who makes the rules in the end , and on behalf of which interest groups .
In this drama , as usual , there is no shortage of main characters , secondary characters and mere extras .
The so-called ' competitiveness pact ' , which was drawn up by Germany and France as a despicable imposition on all the other countries of the euro area , and which was initially denied by its creators , is now being presented and advocated in the European Parliament by President Barroso of the European Commission .
This after President Barroso had weeks previously criticised Chancellor Merkel for failing to acknowledge the role of the Commission .
It is now clear what , in the end , the role of the Commission and its President is .
The aforementioned pact , which President Barroso is now telling us not to separate from the goal of employment and growth , is a veritable revanchist crusade against labour and social rights through attacks on wages , through an increased retirement age , through attempts to destroy collective bargaining and through the levelling down of social rights .
It is also an attempt to impose a veritable sentence of economic dependence in the colonial style on countries like Portugal .
2010 progress report on Turkey ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the 2010 progress report on Turkey .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to say that it is a great pleasure for me that you have shown such an interest in the matter of enlargement .
Even though both the Member States and the candidate countries are facing noticeable challenges , I believe that the enlargement process must go on continuously and consistently on the basis of the performance delivered .
In order to achieve this , both parties must remain committed .
Knowing the activities of the European Parliament , it is clear that this is the forum where all participants are aware of the significance of our relations with Turkey .
These are long-standing relations , which are made even closer by the country 's candidate status .
At the same time , Turkey is also an important regional actor , and plays a crucial role in a number of significant areas , such as energy security and regional security , as well as the promotion of dialogue between civilisations .
Meanwhile , the dramatic international events taking place in our immediate neighbourhood highlight even further the extent of Turkey 's significance in the aforementioned areas .
Accession negotiations with the country are proceeding in line with the relevant conclusions of the European Council and the Council , as well as the negotiation framework .
Despite the negotiations , which are at an advanced stage and are also becoming increasingly complex , the Hungarian Presidency is committed to making progress with regard to all chapters where progress is possible .
The work is proceeding even now , and its main focus is currently on chapter eight , that is , competition policy .
I trust that our Turkish partners will continue with their efforts and that we will soon be able to see results .
In its conclusions adopted in December last year , the Council welcomed Turkey 's continuous commitment to the negotiation process , as well as its political reform programme .
The constitutional reform package adopted by Turkey in 2010 represents another important step in the right direction , as this package covers several priorities of the accession partnership in the fields of justice , fundamental rights and public administration .
The most important task at the moment is to ensure that the reforms are implemented in accordance with European norms and through consultations that involve the widest possible scope of participants , that is , all political parties and civil society organisations .
It is clear that continuing the work on the political criteria remains extremely important .
Serious efforts will be required in many areas , as has been underlined in the Council conclusions of 14 December 2010 , the draft resolution of the European Parliament and the Commission 's 2010 progress report .
Let me highlight some of these areas .
Turkey must further improve the respect for fundamental rights and freedoms , particularly the freedom of expression and the freedom of religion , in both legislation and practice .
Additional efforts will also have to be made in order to ensure full compliance with the Copenhagen criteria , in respect of property rights , trade union rights , the rights of persons belonging to minorities , the rights of women and children , the fight against discrimination , gender equality and the fight against torture and inhuman treatment , among other areas .
With regard to the freedom of expression , the areas giving cause for concern include restriction of the freedom of the press , insufficient protection of journalists ' rights , as well as the frequent and large-scale banning of websites , which is also highlighted in Parliament 's draft resolution .
Allow me to refer at this point to the events of the last few days .
On 3 March , the Turkish police arrested a number of journalists .
We must monitor this case very closely and we must continuously remind the Turkish authorities of the importance of the continuous assertion of freedoms .
Concerning the freedom of religion , Turkey must provide both the legislative and the practical conditions for it to be exercised .
To guarantee religious pluralism in line with European norms , a comprehensive legal solution is required .
Similarly , the Presidency is concerned about the large number of news reports about torture and inhumane treatment and specifically , abuse committed outside official detention facilities .
In order to prevent the violation of human rights , the strict implementation of the act on the scope of activities and powers of the police , as amended in 2007 , must be monitored .
As highlighted by the draft resolution of the European Parliament , the affirmation of the optional protocol to the UN Convention against Torture and the fight against impunity represent essential steps in this regard .
As regards Turkish-Kurdish relations and the issue of the south-eastern territories , we hope that the implementation and continuation of the process of democratic opening will soon deliver the expected results , and can ultimately lead to the economic , social and cultural development of the region .
Let me also recall that the Council strongly condemns the acts of terrorism committed in the territory of Turkey .
It must also be highlighted that the Kurdistan Workers ' Party is still on the EU list of terrorist groups .
Moving on to relations between the EU and Turkey , I note with deep regret that despite being repeatedly asked to do so , Turkey still refuses to fulfil its obligations on the full and non-discriminatory implementation of the additional protocol to its Association Agreement .
This is a core issue and therefore , the Council maintains its 2006 measures , which , on the other hand , clearly have an impact on the pace of the accession negotiations , as we all know .
The Council continues to closely monitor and review any achievements made .
Similarly , there has been no progress in relations between Cyprus and Turkey returning to normal .
The Council expects Turkey to actively support the negotiations under way under the auspices of the UN for the just , comprehensive and feasible settlement of the issue of Cyprus , pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the UN Security Council and with respect for the basic principles that represent the foundations of the EU .
Turkey 's commitment and contribution is indeed essential for such a comprehensive settlement .
Moreover , I would like to emphasise that Turkey must make a clear commitment to good neighbourly relations and the peaceful settlement of disputes .
Turkey is a key country of origin and a transit country in illegal immigration to the EU , and we therefore welcome the fact that the negotiations for a readmission agreement between the EU and Turkey have been concluded .
The Council is looking forward to the agreement being signed as soon as possible and then implemented successfully .
We are well aware that this took place at the latest Justice and Home Affairs Council , and we are now expecting Turkey to sign the treaty .
Until that happens , the Council stresses once again the obligation to fully and properly implement the existing bilateral readmission agreements .
In connection with the customs union between the EU and Turkey , I would like to note that it is time for Turkey to finally fulfil the large number of commitments it has failed to address so far .
These include the technical and administrative barriers to trade , the registration requirements , the import licences , state aids , the assertion of intellectual property rights and other discriminative practices and provisions .
These are all issues that need to be resolved urgently .
Furthermore , Turkey must lift all the restrictions that affect trade and transport between EU Member States and Turkey .
Thank you for your patience and I will be pleased to entertain any questions .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank the Parliament , and , in particular , Ms Oomen-Ruijten , for her report on Turkey .
This debate and your resolution come at an important time for EU-Turkey relations , and the draft resolution underlines a number of issues of great importance for the Commission .
The Commission remains committed to the accession process with Turkey .
The enlargement process encourages political and economic reform in the country .
The EU-Turkey relationship is strong .
Turkey needs the European Union and the European Union needs Turkey - this balance has not changed .
The European Union is , and will remain , a key player for Turkey .
The relationship is based on deep economic integration : 40 % of Turkey 's foreign trade goes to the EU and 80 % of foreign direct investments in Turkey come from the EU .
The European Union efficiently contributes to Turkey 's modernisation through technology transfers , Turkey 's participation in EU education and research programmes and our pre-accession financial support .
At the same time , accession negotiations have slowed down .
Moreover , the negotiating chapters that Turkey can aim to open under the present circumstances require significant reforms and adjustments .
Against this background , I welcome all the more the progress made recently , in particular , as regards the competition chapter .
I am confident that we can soon open this chapter , provided Turkey fulfils the last remaining conditions .
Obviously , the Cyprus issue weighs on the negotiations .
Positive steps on the implementation of the additional protocol to the Ankara agreement or in the settlement talks would have a positive impact on the accession negotiations .
Let me turn now to the reforms in Turkey .
I welcome last year 's constitutional reform and the subsequent legislative amendments as a step in the right direction .
Getting the laws right is important .
However , only objective and impartial implementation of the new laws will ensure the success of the constitutional reforms .
Turkey should continue with the constitutional reform .
The process should be as inclusive and transparent as possible with the active participation of different political parties , civil society , non-governmental organisations and the general public .
The Commission is following with concern the recent actions against journalists .
Independence and freedom of the press is of utmost importance for democracy .
In its 2010 progress report , the Commission has already highlighted the high number of court cases against journalists and undue pressure on the media which undermine this fundamental right in practice .
Freedom of the press entails that dissent and opposing points of view need to be heard and - more importantly - tolerated .
Freedom of the press means guaranteeing a public space for free debate , including on the Internet .
The European Parliament 's draft resolution rightly underlines these issues .
As for the right to freedom of religion , we welcome the initiatives taken in favour of non-Muslim religious communities in Turkey .
However , further and systematic efforts are needed to address the problems of non-Muslims and the Alevis .
Let me turn to the issue of migration .
Two weeks ago , the Council endorsed the EU-Turkey readmission agreement .
This agreement is beneficial for the EU Member States , as Turkey is an important transit country for migration flows to the EU .
The development on the readmission agreement also opens up for the first time new and concrete perspectives for further cooperation with Turkey in the area of visa and migration policies , with a view to improving mobility and contacts amongst our citizens and businesses .
Turkey and the European Union have a shared interest in working closely together in this area .
There are many good reasons to increase the ability of Turkish citizens , businessmen and students to travel to Europe : to familiarise themselves further with European standards ; to enhance EU-Turkey trade to the benefit of both European Union and Turkish businesses , and to give a much-needed boost to our cooperation with Turkey .
Madam President , I assure you that the European Parliament will be duly involved both on the issue of the readmission agreement and the visa dialogue , in line with the Treaty requirements .
Relations with Turkey have also to be seen in a wider context .
Turkey 's active foreign policy is a strong potential asset for the European Union , provided it is developed within the framework of Turkey 's EU accession process .
The European Union stands ready to intensify its existing dialogue with Turkey on foreign policy issues of mutual interest .
Speaking about Turkey today , we cannot ignore the major developments in its wider region .
The events in Tunisia and Egypt have highlighted Turkey 's stability , prosperity , and democracy .
Citizens in these countries look at Turkey , as they look at the European Union , as examples to follow .
They watch Turkey advocating standards and values that they are now fighting for themselves and that are associated with Europe .
Let us be clear : while an example to others , Turkey has still a lot to do .
Many of these challenges ahead are outlined in your report .
This is the occasion for Turkey to move even closer towards implementing fully the European Union political criteria .
The government has a very important responsibility to uphold such a privileged position and to lead by example for the benefit of its own citizens , but also for the region as a whole .
Madam President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this debate and the report on Turkey comes three months before the parliamentary elections in Turkey .
More so than in previous years , I have therefore done my best to ensure that the tone of the report is very objective and constructive .
The 22 compromise amendments for the vote in the Committee on Foreign Affairs are evidence of that .
On the basis of the developments over the past year , we , as the European Parliament , want to set our priorities , priorities for the new Turkish parliament and for the next government .
There are six priorities , it seems to me .
First of all , a heavy responsibility lies on the government and opposition to seek a compromise and consensus for further reforms .
The opposition , and the government too , have indicated that they want a complete reform of the constitution and I expect this to happen .
Secondly , checks and balances are the basis of any democratic system .
Further steps need to be taken to strengthen an independent and impartial judiciary , parliament 's supervisory role and , in particular , freedom of the press and freedom of expression .
I am particularly concerned about freedom of the press , but I will come back to that .
Thirdly , minority rights .
I congratulate Turkey on the symbolic steps it has taken and on the dialogue which the government has explicitly sought .
However , dialogue alone is not enough .
The people in the southeast of the country , the Alevis , the Christian minorities , they expect something concrete .
The statement on Mor Gabriel , in particular , proves that plenty of work still needs to be done and I suspect that it would be damaging for the Turkish Government if this case had to be settled by the Court of Justice once again .
That is why something must be done about providing a democratic opening .
Fourthly , women 's rights .
Much has been done in the past year , but laws alone are not enough .
I have visited women 's shelters .
I have spoken to Turkish women 's organisations .
It is clear that efforts have been made ​ ​ by both the Turkish Government and parliament , at national and local level , but things seem to grind to a halt when they reach the police and the courts .
That has to change .
Laws are all very fine , but enforcement is also important .
Today , on the hundredth anniversary of International Women 's Day , I would like once again to make a stand for better representation of women in the Turkish parliament .
Things have to change in that respect in the coming elections .
Fifthly , the Ankara Protocol is vital , in my opinion .
Here , the responsibility lies with Turkey .
That , in particular , is the source of deadlock in the negotiating chapters : let me reiterate that .
Sixthly , foreign policy .
We Europeans are in favour of Turkey playing an active role in the region .
Having said that , I would point out that Turkey will only be able to play a bridging role in that respect as long as the pillar of that bridge remains firmly anchored on the European side of the Bosporus , too .
Madam Ashton will , on that point too , have to seek very active coordination with Turkey , more active than has hitherto been the case .
By the way , these are not just my priorities .
Everything I have mentioned has been under discussion in Turkish society as well .
It is now up to the politicians to translate this debate into a consensus and a compromise .
Briefly , just two more areas of concern .
We are alarmed by PKK 's announcement that it wants to end the ceasefire .
The Commissioner has spoken about this .
Freedom of the press : last Friday , I received an open letter .
Let me say once again that anyone who restricts the freedom of expression in a particular country attacks that country 's culture .
A free and tolerant debate is of crucial importance to any country .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , the continued consolidation of democracy and respect for human rights in Turkey , which should lead to full membership of our European Union , becomes even more important as Arab and Middle Eastern countries just beyond Europe 's borders stand in crisis .
We should welcome the fact that momentum has returned to the reform process in Turkey and , recognising the controversies of last September 's referendum , call for it to be a platform for fundamental constitutional reform with all-party support in the future .
I warmly endorse Commissioner Füle 's work in this respect and his uncompromising words this afternoon on freedom of expression , particularly as I , with fellow European representatives , were prevented from acting as legal observers to the KCK cases in the Diyarbakir court only last month .
But I also ask the Commissioner to make progress on the visa issue , particularly for businesspeople , and on holding Turkey to its promises for the draft trade union law .
Our Socialist and Democrat Group believes that the accession talks are threatened , not by a train crash , but by death through strangulation .
No new chapter has been opened for eight months , the longest period since the talks were first launched .
We will vote tomorrow for the opening of the chapters on fundamental rights and judiciary and on the common foreign and security policy , not because we want to be weak on these issues , but because we want to be strong .
We do not do so because we want to alter the pressure on all sides to achieve reconciliation on the island of Cyprus .
Just as momentum is needed in the reform process for Turkey , momentum is needed in its membership talks with the European Union too .
Madam President , Mr Füle has just made it completely clear that Turkey and the European Union need one another .
We are important neighbours , we are allies in NATO , and many people of Turkish origin live in Member States of the European Union .
We must show respect for one another .
I very much support visa facilitation for businesspeople and students , just as you have said .
I am also in favour of integrating Turkey much more closely into the structures of the common security and defence policy .
I would like to see Cyprus bringing an end to its blockade in this area .
When we look at North Africa , it is clear that Turkey is a role model for many countries in the region .
All of this is very good .
Then we come to the accession process and we find that many chapters are blocked .
It is extremely difficult to open new chapters .
There are only three chapters left and the competition chapter is almost at the stage of opening .
What will happen when the last chapters are opened ?
Will Turkey and the European Union no longer have anything to say to one another ?
That surely cannot be the case !
Therefore , we must consider very carefully how to progress with the accession process and whether or not we can retain the current procedure , which involves Parliament commenting on the Commission 's progress report by means of a resolution .
Our 2010 report is highly critical , but also constructive .
It deals with fundamental rights which are self-evident , particularly for Liberals : freedom of the press , freedom of speech , expression and assembly , student demonstrations , trade union rights and freedom of religion .
For years , we have been calling for improvements in freedom of religion , but far too little progress has been made .
The arrest of Ahmet Şık and Nedim Şener and the interference in the work of political foundations in Turkey are giving us great cause for concern .
This is covered by the first Copenhagen criterion .
It is a central issue , because it is the political criterion .
If Turkey cannot move forward with its internal democratic constitution , I believe that we will still have serious problems in some areas , quite apart from the deadlock in the Council .
In diplomatic terms , we need Turkey and Turkey also needs us .
In democratic terms , there is still a great deal to be done in Turkey .
Madam President , I would like to take this opportunity to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for her work in providing rigorously detailed documentation and in drawing up a report in the utmost good faith with the aim of sending clear political messages , particularly on the eve of the legislative elections in Turkey , and I endorse this work .
This report - unlike you , Minister , but that is understandable - stresses freedom of expression and freedom of the media .
Unfortunately , this is obviously very necessary and current events serve to remind us of this with the recent arrests of the journalists Nedim Şener and Ahmet Şik in the context of the enquiries into Ergenekon and Sledgehammer .
I tabled an amendment on this subject and I would invite you to support this work to put our Parliament in a position to exercise the greatest vigilance it can over this crucial issue of the freedom of the press , which also affects the question of the independence of the judiciary and the drawing up of the new constitution .
However , I would ask you the following political question : when we observe the stranglehold on the process of accession and the standstill on those chapters that are crucial if we want to make progress on issues of fundamental freedoms , the independence of the judiciary and the new constitution , is it not the case that our decision and that of the Council to punish by closing chapters , and the impossibility of opening and closing chapters , are today totally counterproductive factors ?
There is no sense in the European Union depriving itself of one of the main levers for action in Turkey , that is to say , negotiations - in particular , on chapters 22 , 23 and 24 - and I would wish to ask the Council to examine this situation once again because , obviously , it looks today as if the accession process has been taken hostage with these sanctions which , at the end of the day , can only have an effect if the accession process remains on the burner .
Now , everyone can see that it is not .
We therefore find ourselves in an extremely worrying political situation at a time when Turkey is seen by all the countries to the south of the Mediterranean as a source of inspiration for their own democratic transition .
I am not asking for there to be a decision on Turkey 's accession .
I am asking for the decisions that we take at all levels to be absolutely consistent with the reliability , credibility , seriousness and loyalty of our process of negotiation .
Today , this is very clearly in question .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I recognise that there are differing views on Turkish accession both between and within the political groups in this Parliament , my own included .
My personal view has always been very supportive of Turkish aspirations towards Europe .
Of course there are concerns , but I would say that , given the turbulence we are now seeing in North Africa and the Middle East and against the background of a continuing threat from Islamist terrorism , never has it been more important for us to send a positive signal to Turkey that she is welcome in the club of the European democracies .
I would ask our Greek Cypriot and Greek friends in particular to give up their unilateral approach to the Cyprus problem , to be more even-handed , and to reach a comprehensive settlement with the Turks before it is too late .
We criticise Turkey over the Additional Protocol - we have heard the same again this afternoon from the Presidency-in-Office - yet no mention is made of the failure to implement the EU Council decision of 26 April 2004 .
Turkey is a key member of the Atlantic alliance , a democracy with a pivotal role at the interface between West and East , and a country that is changing fast with a growth rate that puts her among global leaders .
Let us get moving !
Let us not lose Turkey at this stage !

Madam President , I shall refrain from commenting on Mr Van Orden 's arguments , firstly , because I do not want to use up my time and , secondly , because he has - and not for the first time - confused the perpetrator with the victim in Cyprus .
We are in favour of Turkey 's accession , if that is the will of its people and provided that it satisfies all the accession criteria .
In order for this to happen , Turkey needs to find a real political solution to the Kurdish question and to release the hundreds of Kurdish mayors and town councillors being held in its gaols , and it needs to work to establish the rule of law , recognise the Armenian genocide and resolve its problems with Greece , especially in the Aegean .
On Cyprus , it must stop hiding behind what happened in 2004 .
It is already 2011 .
It must immediately hand the town of Famagusta over to its inhabitants - we are talking about a European town with a European history dating back several thousand years , a town which has been left to the ravages of time for nearly four decades - and it must start withdrawing its occupying troops from Cyprus immediately .
To close , I would remind you of the protests by Turkish Cypriots calling , Mr Van Orden , for Turkey to give them a say in their own affairs .
Instead , Eroglu has called for the protesters to be brought to trial .
Turkey needs to respect the wishes of the Turkish Cypriots , by allowing a census to be taken in the occupied area and by putting an end to colonisation and allowing the names of the towns and villages to be shown on the map as they were for thousands of years .
Madam President , my congratulations to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on the text which she has presented , which gives a balanced and accurate picture of the situation in Turkey .
I particularly appreciate the position taken by Mr Füle .
The message to come out of Mrs Oomen 's report is that Turkey must discharge its obligations towards the European Union in full if it wishes to accede to the Union .
If it does not wish to accede to the European Union , it should say so because , for a large country such as Turkey , I am against batting the issue back and forth and only talking in diplomatic terms .
However , despite Europe 's clear message to Turkey , it is acting in a contradictory manner .
It is as if there were a problem between the political leadership and the military regime .
At the same time , it demonstrates good intentions towards its neighbours one minute and makes a ' sieve ' out of the Aegean the next , with Turkish aeroplanes and ships passing through and violating Greek land and air borders on a daily basis .
We respect Turkey and the Turkish people , but we feel that it is high time that Turkey showed some respect for its neighbours and for the European idea set out in the Treaty of Rome .
( NL ) Madam President , we are talking about Turkey here , but Prime Minister Erdoğan would rather have a Turkish-Arabic Union .
Turkey is a great friend of dictator Ahmadinejad .
Turkey does not want to be a secular country any longer .
Turkey continues to occupy Northern Cyprus and Turkey is no longer a friend of Israel .
Instead , it has opted for the Muslim brotherhood of Hamas .
Turkey is increasingly focusing on the Islamic world .
Ladies and gentlemen , when are we going to stop this sham ?
Europe does not want Turkey and Europe does not want Islam .
Mr Sarkozy has already said that .
Mrs Merkel has already said that and the majority of European citizens do not want Turkey as a member of the European Union , either .
Turkey has been humiliating itself for years in exchange for money from the European Union and the promise of EU membership .
However , a backward Islamic culture has no place in Europe .
Prime Minister Erdoğan , are you a real man or a subservient coward ?
How much longer will you continue humiliating the Turkish people ?
Take the honourable way out and stop doing that .
Madam President , those who support Turkey 's accession to the European Union , or some of them in this Parliament , feel duty bound to support amendments against Cyprus .
Turkey is running out of chapters and the accession process risks stalling .
Fourteen chapters are frozen because Turkey stubbornly refuses to extend the Ankara Protocol .
A successful outcome to the current negotiations on solving the occupation of Cyprus will automatically make 14 chapters available .
Ban Ki-moon urged all international actors to focus on the efforts for such a settlement .
Voting in favour of amendments like the one on direct trade of 26 April in a divided Cyprus , unnecessary though in a united one , encourages intransigence , the failure of efforts for a solution and perpetuates the freezing of chapters .
Picking on Cyprus leads Turkey nowhere .
( ES ) Madam President , I think it will become clear tomorrow that the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has sought the broadest possible consensus in Parliament , because we want there to be a predominantly unified approach in all institutions of the Union .
For years , this negotiating process has been useful in carrying forward political and economic reforms in Turkey : it has had its contradictions , setbacks and steps forward , but overall , it has been helpful .
This could now be the moment of truth , and we are reminded of that by the changes that are currently taking place in the Mediterranean .
In his recent appearance before the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Commissioner Füle called for a new realism that avoids a strictly short-term vision .
This new realism is precisely what we need in the negotiating process with Turkey : the utmost caution , but also all the commitment and seriousness needed to avoid momentum and credibility being lost , and excessive insinuation ; and to say clearly that agreements and commitments must be respected .
That this requires a firm approach from everyone involved .
Hopefully , in the next report , we will find that another step forward has been taken in this negotiating process .
Madam President , people in Islamic countries today are doing something rather similar to the Turkish people 's ousting of the single-party dictatorship in 1950 .
As Egypt , like Turkey , may yet discover , overthrowing the deep state is much harder and that is why the Ergenekon case and similar investigations are so important .
Liberals in this House wish Mr Erdoğan and his government every success in creating a true democracy and anchoring it in our European club of democratic nations .
The customs union has been a great success and Turkey 's membership of the European Union can be equally successful .
We regret the stalling of the accession process and , while Turkey must bear part of the blame , the bad faith of certain Member States - as revealed by WikiLeaks - is an embarrassment to our Union .
Mr Sarkozy no more speaks for Europe on Turkey than he does on his Union for the Mediterranean .
His visit to Ankara was inflammatory , and it is a pity that German Christian Democrats do not take Max Fischer 's advice and look in the mirror , because the AKP today is the mirror image of the German CDU in 1950 - not Christian Democrat , but Islamic Democrat - and that is no doubt why the Commissioner says that he understands and shares Turkey 's frustrations .
This report is honest - too honest for some .
Turkey has much to achieve , but we have much to lose if we do not welcome and work with Islamic democracies like Turkey and Indonesia .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on an interesting and balanced report , although I have my doubts regarding certain matters .
I have my doubts , for example , as to whether emphasis should be placed on increasing Turkey 's involvement in the Southern Caucasus .
This is a region which requires particularly delicate and well-balanced policies .
It should be said , however , that the change in attitude to Turkey 's efforts is what matters most .
Everything resulting from the implementation of the Association Agreement , which is a good harbinger of the extension of Turkey 's cooperation with the European Union , should be regarded with the hope that it represents an opportunity for the future , and that the doors to Europe are open , for Turkey as well .
This should be stated very clearly in this House today , particularly since we expect that the consultations and cooperation on events in North Africa may prove to be a key aspect of good cooperation with Turkey .
The fundamental goal we must achieve today is therefore to show Turkey 's value as a partner for the EU in energy matters , and as a political partner for the EU in the future .
( EL ) Madam President , the recession has got worse and this has given new impetus to the fight between the imperialist centres for control of the markets and energy sources and the channels used for their transmission .
Developments in Libya and the recent discovery of oil in the Mediterranean , and the friction which this has already caused , prove this .
At the same time , NATO and the European Union are stepping up their interventions in the area .
Turkey , on the other hand , is trying to improve its strategic position in an area in which conflict is rife and resistance is escalating .
This purpose was served by the recent reform of the Constitution , which was welcomed with such gusto by the European Union and the United States .
At the same time , however , Turkey continues with its occupation of northern Cyprus , its violations in the Aegean and its blatant disregard for basic human rights and democratic freedoms .
The workers in Turkey know that there is nothing positive to be gained from the European Union , because basic rights of the workers and the people are being taken away in the European Union and because the European Union continues , as in the past , to support a series of reactionary regimes in the area .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if the Turkey issue were purely an economic one , I seem to understand that there would probably not be a problem .
However , there are indeed serious problems , because the Turkey issue is clearly not just an economic one .
In particular , we would like to highlight the issue of religious tolerance , which unfortunately does not exist in Turkey , not only because we could mention the murders of some priests , including Italian ones such as Monsignor Luigi Padovese and Don Andrea Santoro , but also because the Turkish delegates at a recent Council of Europe meeting sadly voted against a motion condemning attacks on Christians around the world .
We find that astounding and wonder how we can accept a country that does not consider religious freedom to be a fundamental value .
We also wonder how Mr Erdoğan 's deputy , Mr Babacan , could possibly have said that the European Union is a ' Christian club ' .
What was he expecting to find ?
Apart from that , does he not think that the problem perhaps is not the ' European Christian club ' but the lack of religious rights inside Turkey ?
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Füle , there is a Turkish proverb which says : ' People are reflected in their actions .
Words do not mean much ' .
However , the supporters of Turkey have allowed themselves to be deceived by positive-sounding , empty words .
The 2010 progress report is , in reality , a fault report .
It shows that Turkey is many things , but it is certainly not ready to join Europe .
Fundamental rights often exist only on paper and there are significant restrictions on freedom of speech .
This has been confirmed by the recent arrest of two journalists .
There have been no changes in the discrimination against ethnic and religious minorities , such as the Kurds and the Christians .
Prime Minister Erdoğan hypocritically accuses European countries of Islamophobia , despite the fact that Muslims are free to practice their religion here , in contrast to the Christians in Turkey .
The land dispute over the monastery of Mor Gabriel is one more demonstration of this .
Despite claiming the opposite , the Erdoğan government is pushing forward with the process of Islamification .
We know that this is what is happening .
A recent survey shows how the Turks really see the EU .
They are in favour of joining the EU , but , at the same time , they regard Europeans with a great deal of mistrust .
We should break off the accession negotiations as quickly as possible .

( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Győri , Mr Füle , your historical comparisons could not be more wrong , Mr Watson .
You should not compare the Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) with the party which returned Germany to democratic government and the rule of law at the end of the Nazi era .
This is really alarming , particularly as the German party in question was in cooperation and in coalition with the Liberals during the 1950s .
I am in favour of strong links between Turkey and the European Union .
Turkey is strategically important to us , but not at any price .
Firstly , we cannot abolish the conditions for accession , including freedom of speech , an independent judiciary , rights for minorities and freedom of religion .
This has been made clear in the Commission 's reports and in the report by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
Secondly , we must not put the integration capacity of the European Union at risk .
We need to find other methods .
Thirdly , it is Turkey 's responsibility to ensure that this process is not obstructed and , at last , to keep the promises that it has made in the context of the Ankara Protocol , for example .
Turkey is in a position to make it clear that integration within the European Union is possible .
However , when Mr Erdoğan says in a speech in Germany that Turks who have German nationality owe their primary loyalty to Turkey , we have a serious problem as far as integration is concerned .
This is the expression of a particular mindset and also a means of establishing it .
Therefore , I am of the opinion that Turkey is not yet ready .
However , we have invited Turkey to work constructively with us in the context of the Berlin Plus agreement and in other areas in order to forge closer links .
The example of Mor Gabriel forms part of this issue .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , around two or three million Germans and British people live in southern Spain , Mr Brok .
What would these people say if the Spanish Government demanded that their children learn Spanish before they learn German or English ?
They would , of course , be opposed to it .
You cannot simply say in Germany that people have to learn German first .
Of course , they should learn both languages , but Germany still has a long way to go to establish a genuine integration policy .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Watson , people who live in Germany and intend to return to their home country will , of course , have their native language as their first language .
However , people who want to take German citizenship and remain in Germany permanently must first learn German , so that they have a chance of doing well at school , getting an education and , therefore , having a successful career and becoming integrated into society .
In this case , the language question takes priority .
We need to distinguish between people who go abroad on holiday for the winter and those who want to remain permanently in another country .
The distinction here concerns integration .
You cannot compare people who go to Majorca on holiday with those who want to take the citizenship of a country and live there permanently .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the process of Turkey 's accession to the European Union continues to be of strategic importance , both for Europe and for Turkey itself .
This process is a measure of Europe 's credibility and of Turkey 's intentions to carry out the necessary democratic reforms .
However , the government 's stated intention of making democratic changes is belied by the facts .
We have been following the successive arrests of journalists over the past few days with concern .
On 20 February , the journalist Nedim Şener , known for his criticism of the police 's approach to the murder of the Armenian journalist , Hrant Dink , was arrested along with six of his colleagues .
They were all gaoled on charges of belonging to a terrorist organisation , thus bringing the number of journalists in prison to well over a hundred .
What ultimately appears to be the real offence in these cases is their criticism of the Erdoğan government , rather than any criminal activities .
The Union supported the government 's efforts to stamp out the para-state .
However , this cannot be used as an alibi for restricting personal freedoms , especially freedom of opinion .
I call on Commissioner Füle to tell us how the Commission intends to react to these events .
Madam President , I greatly regret that the Turkish accession process is stalled .
Turkey fails to make the progress that we want , the Cyprus problem remains intractable , France and Germany are implacably opposed to Turkish membership , and there is clearly a great prejudice against Turkey inside this Parliament .
We face a giant strategic crisis .
Europe loses Turkey , and Turkey loses Europe .
What we need to be doing is to devote 2011 to a genuine new partnership built on a radical reappraisal of where the true interests of both parties lie .
( CS ) Madam President , the report on Turkey 's progress in 2010 is surely one of the most complex that we have discussed here .
Despite all the complexity , however , we should not allow ourselves to be influenced by historically-based prejudices .
Recent events in Turkey indisputably constitute factors that are unacceptable from the perspective of European democratic principles .
We must intensify negotiations with Turkey all the more .
Turkey is of fundamental geopolitical importance to Europe with regard to the complex region of the Middle East .
This position must not , of course , be abused .
If we have an open and principled dialogue with Turkey , however , this can lead to an improved understanding of democratic rules .
The economic development of Turkey over recent years has been truly remarkable , and its industry is becoming a significant partner of European firms in many areas .
It is therefore important for these economic relations to be matched by corresponding political relations with the European Union , with a clear perspective on the future .
If Turkey is genuinely interested in joining the EU , it cannot take steps such as those we have seen recently .
I strongly support , for many reasons , the continuing process of Turkey 's approximation to the EU .
( NL ) Madam President , we have to stop using the term ' progress report ' when we are talking about the negotiations with Turkey .
It is a misnomer , because Turkey has made no fundamental progress in terms of meeting the conditions for joining the EU .
We are completely stuck with the Cyprus dossier because the Turks keep refusing to comply with their obligations and because they are continuing with the illegal military occupation of the north of the island .
No progress has been made in the sphere of democratic rights , either .
People are being persecuted for expressing their opinions , websites are being blocked and Christians and other non-Muslims are being undermined in every way imaginable .
When members of this House ask questions about that , time and again , the Commission responds that it is following the situation in Turkey closely and with concern .
However , it has not taken any specific actions and negotiations keep dribbling on indefinitely .
It is an open secret that , in private conversations , many proponents of Turkey 's accession within the Commission , within their own Member States , and within Parliament , admit that the whole idea is a disaster .
Let us therefore stop deceiving ourselves , let us stop deceiving public opinion in Europe and the Turks , and let us finally put a stop to negotiations with Turkey .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the honest and , therefore , critical evaluation of the accession negotiations in the current progress report on Turkey .
Many promises have been made since the start of the negotiations , but very little concrete progress has been achieved .
Given the pronounced Islamic nature of the country , all Christian and other non-Muslim faith communities must have equal rights , which means the freedom to practise their own religion without having to suffer discrimination .
As far as I am concerned , this is essential .
Turkey must undertake to bring about a complete separation between state and religion and to accept non-Islamic religions .
The case of the monastery of Mor Gabriel is one example of the problem .
I would like to remind the Member States of the European Union of their obligation to call forcefully on Turkey to uphold universal human rights and , in particular , freedom of religion in all their negotiations with the country .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is true that we are negotiating with Turkey about its accession to the EU , not on any other subject , and I am in favour of Turkey joining .
I welcome the reforms that the Turkish Government has initiated over the last year .
However , Turkey must also finally fulfil its obligations and implement the Ankara Protocol , so that progress can be made in the negotiations .
It must not constantly hold the EU or Cyprus responsible for the deadlock , as you , Mr Erdoğan , are so happy to do .
Turkey must finally put an end to the practice of arresting journalists who are critical of the regime .
Ahmet Şık , Nedim Şener and others need protection from the arbitrary nature of the justice system .
These are just some of the requirements for opening chapter 23 .
Mr Erdoğan , you need to make a clear statement on this and not speak out against the integration of your fellow countrymen and spread your pan-Turkish world view , as you did in Düsseldorf .
That is what we expect from you .
Of course , the EU must also make a contribution to the success of the negotiations and show that it is ready to accept new members .
Both sides have their homework to do . However , one thing is clear .
The ball is now in your court and it is your turn to take action .
Madam President , I am conscious that this report is very controversial and that striking a compromise within this House can , at times , become extremely difficult , yet we should still try to keep our debates balanced and factual .
Firstly , let us remember that the Ankara Agreement provided for the four freedoms of movement and for the customs union between Turkey and the EU .
Also , several ECJ rulings , as well as existing visa regimes for other candidate states , have proved the point that visa liberalisation for Turkish citizens , especially businesspeople and students , should be clearly endorsed in this report .
Secondly , we should call for new momentum on the stalled situation in Cyprus .
Implementation of the Council decision of 26 April 2004 would greatly encourage Turkey to implement the EC-Turkey Association Agreement .
This would not only lead to economic and political gains for both sides , but would also allow all the inhabitants of the island to trade freely , and it would eliminate the current double standards in the EU .
It is time to show that the European Parliament can make a difference .
( NL ) Madam President , Turkey 's accession to Europe would be one of the greatest historical mistakes ever .
We would have a country of 80 million joining us and making claims on the European budget , European decision making and foreign policy .
What this would lead to can be seen from Turkey 's relations with Hamas , Hezbollah and Iran .
Turkey 's accession would have a detrimental effect on integration , too .
We are already witnessing that .
Prime Minister Erdoğan has recently called on Turkish migrants in Germany to learn Turkish , first and foremost .
To me , however , it makes sense that , if you are living in Germany , you should prioritise learning German .
Mr Erdoğan 's agenda is that of an Islamic party and , on that point too , the balance would shift if Turkey joined the EU .
We would have to deal with millions of people who , unfortunately , are not familiar with the Judeo-Christian fundaments of Europe and who would want to change them .
Let us therefore make sure that the 2010 progress report is the last one .
Let us stop these senseless negotiations !
A privileged partnership - that would combine the best of both worlds .
( NL ) Madam President , progress and mutual trust will only come about once both Turkey and the European Union have met their respective commitments .
The opening of new negotiating chapters will result precisely in the kind of new dynamism , as regards progress on human rights and justice , that we want to see .
Press freedom is a major concern .
Protection of this freedom , which has seen some difficult times , is a valuable asset .
In a democracy , the press has an important role in putting checks on those wielding power .
Obviously , there is a great onus on Turkey itself to implement EU legislation , but Europe has responsibilities , too , such as delivering on the commitments in the Association Agreement about the free movement of persons and on the conclusions of the Council of April 2004 on Cyprus .
Finally , on this hundredth anniversary of International Women 's Day , I would give some thought to women 's rights in Turkey .
There have been many improvements legally , but I call on the Turkish Government to do absolutely everything to ensure proper implementation of these and - in view of the upcoming elections - respond to Parliament 's call for quotas to increase the number of women in representative positions .
( PL ) Madam President , I think it is obvious that Turkey will offer huge potential benefits in terms of our own policy towards the region , with regard to both the Caucasus and the Middle East .
The new and unusually active Turkish policy towards the region obviously poses the question of whether it will be a Turkish policy under a European flag or whether it will , in fact , be a European policy with help from Turkey .
Either way , it is a valuable perspective .
It is my impression that this cooperation should be placed on a much more pragmatic basis as soon as possible , and that very protracted discussions on membership are - entirely unnecessarily - frustrating for both parties .
There are various reasons why they have lasted so long , and the prospects for their completion are not particularly good at present .
Today , I would like to express my thanks for the report tabled by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , which is a well-balanced document , as usual .
In particular , I am grateful that issues relating to the religious freedom of Christians in Turkey have been dealt with so well .
This issue continues to be a problem , involving the legal personality of the Christian community , the return of property and opportunities for the training of clergy .
We should remember this .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Oomen-Ruijten who , once again , has drafted a very comprehensive report on Turkey 's progress .
Every year , the European Commission adopts an ' enlargement package ' , and we draft a report assessing the progress towards accession to the European Union made by each of the candidate countries over the past 12 months on the basis of this package .
In the Commission 's assessment , Turkey fulfils the political criteria sufficiently .
Recent constitutional reforms have provided opportunities for improvements in many areas , such as the judiciary and fundamental rights .
The package of amendments to the constitution approved in last year 's referendum is a step in the right direction , but the drafting and adoption of these reforms were not preceded by a consultation process involving the political parties and civil society .
It is very much to be welcomed that the reform creates a basis for appointing an Ombudsman and creating a national human rights institution .
It will now be of key importance to ensure that these new proposals are implemented transparently and on the basis of democratic procedures in accordance with European standards .
Unfortunately , Turkey 's relations with its neighbours cast an ever-present shadow over the negotiation process .
I believe that if Turkey shows good will , creates a favourable climate for the ongoing negotiations on Cyprus and supports these negotiations , and if the country makes a tangible contribution to a comprehensive resolution of the problem , Turkey will have a warmer reception on the European and international stage .
Thank you .
( EL ) Madam President , I wish to comment in particular on the Cyprus question , as presented in Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's motion for a resolution .
One year on and the colonisation continues , the presence of the occupying army continues in Cyprus and , not only that ; for about a month now , we have seen Turkish Cypriots protesting against the presence of Turkish troops on the island and against the economic situation in the occupied area caused by the presence of the Turkish occupying army .
How did the Prime Minister of Turkey respond ?
By saying that it is in Cyprus not for the benefit of the Turkish Cypriots , but for Turkey 's strategic interests .
The moral values and principles of the European Union will not allow it to sacrifice Cyprus on the altar of Turkey 's progress towards accession and I must say , as a socialist colleague reminded the House - and it makes the hair stand up on the back of my neck - that it was not Cyprus that invaded Turkey ; it was Turkey that invaded Cyprus .
Let us not forget that .
( Applause )
Madam President , I would like to join those who have congratulated the rapporteur on a very comprehensive and balanced report , but I join with those who have already mentioned that it is scarcely one of progress : this should be more of a situation report .
To underline that this is a catalogue of very little progress on the major issues under discussion , she has very carefully listed in paragraph 40 the need for the withdrawal of Turkish troops from Cyprus ; in paragraph 47 , as other speakers have done , she deplores Turkey 's non-implementation of the Additional Protocol ; and then , as others have not mentioned , she refers to the blockage of NATO-EU strategic cooperation beyond the ' Berlin Plus ' arrangements .
I believe it is very important that the Union does not give way on any of the issues or open any more of the chapters of negotiations until such time as we see that Turkey is a willing partner in this discussion .
Or perhaps in the end , when you look at this whole process , you wonder whether there is the leadership on both sides to complete this or whether it was just an idea of the 20th century , which , in the 21st century , makes no sense at all .
( EL ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , Turkey is a large country of strategic importance , but is it ready for Europe ?
No , not yet .
Is Europe ready for Turkey ?
No , not yet .
Has Turkey abandoned its aspirations to accession ?
No , no yet .
Three questions and three answers , Commissioner , which realistically set out the critical turning point which Turkey has reached on its path towards accession .
They also summarise the complicated relationship between Turkey and Europe .
For historical , political and cultural reasons , this relationship has always oscillated between trust and suspicion , between attraction and repulsion .
The political expression of this reality is Turkey 's long and painful journey towards accession .
Despite the noteworthy progress that Turkey is making , it is still giving cause for concern on human rights issues .
It is still haggling over every tiny obligation towards the European Union .
It refuses to normalise its relations with a Member State , the Republic of Cyprus ; it maintains the threat of war against another Member State , Greece , and it refuses to recognise and apply the Convention on the Law of the Sea .
Recently , the arrogance of the Turkish leadership has even angered the Turkish Cypriots .
For its part , Europe is still sending ambiguous messages about accession , which are doing nothing to help .
We therefore need a clearer position .
Only Turkey 's full compliance with the undertakings it has made can and - it is only fair - must guide it towards accession .
However , if we are to be fair , we must also be strict with Turkey .
To close , my congratulations to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on her report , which I shall be voting in favour of , and I call on my colleagues to do likewise .
Madam President , I am proud to stand up and welcome the progress made by Turkey in its accession to the EU .
I have long been a supporter of Turkish accession .
It is in the EU 's interest and , indeed , it is in Turkey 's .
We can take a narrow , populist view or we can show leadership and vision .
That leadership and vision is to bring Turkey into the EU , where it belongs .
There have been some positive developments , but equally there is more to be done .
I will offer some constructive suggestions .
There needs to be more done to combat discrimination and to promote equality on the base of sex , gender , racial or ethnic origin , religion or belief , age and sexual orientation .
This should be guaranteed by law .
Therefore , I ask the Turkish authorities to reinsert the reference to sexual identity into the draft law on combating discrimination and inequality .
Time is running away .
I could speak about this issue for a long time .
It is worthwhile recalling that Turkey is a modern , secular country and that in Turkey , women got the vote long before women got the vote in some parts of the EU - something we should remember as we look back over one hundred years of feminism .
( SK ) Madam President , the transformation of Turkey into a genuine pluralistic democracy based on the protection of human rights and basic freedoms appears to be a continuing challenge .
Turkey has not made any significant progress compared to last year in implementing reforms and fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria , full compliance with which is an essential precondition for EU membership .
Shortcomings persist , above all , in the judiciary , where the right to a fair and rapid trial is still not secured , in the area of minority rights and women 's rights , and also in the issues of freedom of religion , expression , a free press and the fight against corruption .
The lack of religious freedom is particularly evident .
Turkey must improve the coordination of its foreign policy with EU foreign policy , and thus show that it shares common values and interests with the EU .
A specific instance could be support for EU efforts to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons , for example , and signing the statute of the International Criminal Court , which Turkey evidently continues to postpone .
I also expect Turkey to be much more active in resolving the Cyprus issue - as we say in Slovak - by pulling its military forces out of this occupied territory .
( DE ) Madam President , thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to ask a question .
Unfortunately , it is now a little too late .
As you have seen , Mr Cashman has already left the Chamber .
I have a few important questions which I would have liked to put to Mr Cashman .
I would ask you to ensure that when a Member takes the opportunity to put a question under the blue card procedure , he or she is given the floor immediately .
Otherwise , the Member who is being asked the question may leave the Chamber , as has just happened .
However , perhaps I will have the chance to take the floor under the catch-the-eye procedure and I would like to thank you in advance for this .

( EL ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , as Mrs Oomen-Ruijten quite rightly says in her report , Turkey cannot join the European Union until the Cyprus question has been resolved , until the occupation has been lifted , until the army leaves Cyprus ; it is Turkey itself that is tightening this noose around the accession process .
That is why , Commissioner , anyone wishing to help Turkey should ultimately listen to what is being said by the Turkish Cypriots , who are currently protesting , not for direct trade or for its translation , as we heard today in the decision dated 26 April , but for Cyprus to be released from the occupation and for them personally to be released and rescued .
I do not think , Commissioner , that Turkey can accede via a process to destroy Cyprus and anyone who wants to help Turkey needs to stop taking it out on Cyprus .
This is a basic element that we all need to respect because , if the Cyprus issue is not resolved fairly , it will be disastrous for the European Union itself .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have to admit that the excellent , outstanding work done by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten sees us engaged in a debate that is , however , still accompanied by a good dose of hypocrisy when we talk about the subject of Turkey .
We are not managing to overcome this hypocrisy , but perhaps we could deal with it better if we considered a few general background factors .
The first is that we must recognise the fact that we have utterly failed , or perhaps we have never even tried , to initiate a real strategy in relation to the countries on the southern shores of the Mediterranean .
The Turkey issue is closely linked to that .
When we went on our mission to Tunisia a few days ago , the only Islamist party , al-Nahda , told us quite sincerely that it found inspiration in Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 's AKP , and so in some way , people look to Turkey to be able to have a frontage towards Europe , but they do not know whether the opposite frontage , Europe , is willing to take it into consideration .
We must ask ourselves what it is worth doing with regard to Turkey : is it worth being thoroughly sincere and moving quickly towards forms of privileged partnership that involve the whole Mediterranean area , or is it worth continuing to play for time and putting off our decision indefinitely , so that the Turks themselves , with their great pride , end up saying ' no ' to us once and for all , thus further complicating the situation in the Mediterranean ?
I believe we are the ones who should decide and not wait for the others to make a decision .
We have specific responsibilities and we must assume them in their entirety .
We must have the courage to say ' yes ' or ' no ' , and then we will see that this situation will have a positive outcome .
( BG ) Madam President , I congratulate Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for the fine job she has done .
We regard Turkey as an important Euro-Atlantic partner .
This is why I am sure that , in spite of our contradictions , we all agree that we need a reformed , democratic , secular and European Turkey .
I personally feel deeply uneasy about the risk of Turkey 's domestic and foreign policy taking an Islamic slant .
We can see that part of Turkey 's political establishment clearly has no desire to adhere to the principle of strict separation between religion and politics , as handed down by Atatürk .
Europe needs to help Turkey overcome the internal division in Turkish society , which includes improving the situation of minorities and relations with its neighbours .
We cannot , of course , point an accusing finger only at Turkey .
Its neighbours also need to make their move in this direction .
I expect us to work in partnership on all the common issues of general interest , especially cooperation in NATO and the energy infrastructure .
Finally , I hope and expect Turkey to sign as soon as possible the anticipated readmission agreement with the European Union , without any delay and without imposing additional conditions .
( SK ) Madam President , the possible entry of Turkey into the EU would entail extensive economic , political and cultural consequences such as the EU has never faced before in any expansion .
Despite the differences compared to European culture , tradition and values , however , Turkey is not a fundamentalist country and religion is the free expression of every individual .
It is not possible to deny Turkey an attempt to fulfil the criteria for joining the EU , even though it is desirable , of course , to take more intensive measures to help settle the disputes between Turkish Cypriots and Greeks .
A solution to the Cyprus question might then also bring greater stability , prosperity and security to the Eastern Mediterranean , and might help to speed up Turkey 's EU accession process to some extent .
However , I would like to say one thing in conclusion .
We are here , ladies and gentlemen , just like our colleagues in the Commission and the Council , in order to be honest , and if we affirm that Turkey is gradually fulfilling the criteria , then we must not talk in advance about a privileged partnership .
It would be better to tell Turkey directly that , despite fulfilling all the criteria , it will not achieve full EU membership .
In my opinion , that would be honest on our part .
( SL ) Madam President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , the dramatic and profound political changes we have seen are a reminder that , while a democratisation process is under way in the Arab world , we are becoming more aware of the vulnerability of energy supply and our energy dependence .
Turkey is our most valuable , obvious and persuasive example of a functioning democracy in the Arab world and , of course , an example of a booming economy .
However , both the European Union and Turkey are still being held hostage by the unresolved issue of Cyprus .
Some important chapters remain blocked for Turkey .
Today , we need to highlight the urgency of the energy chapter being opened as soon as possible and we need to send a strong message to our Cypriot friends in Nicosia that opening this chapter would be to both our benefit and to the benefit of Cyprus and Turkey .
Blocking this chapter is detrimental to Cyprus , Turkey and the entire European Union , to stability in the region , and to stability on the world markets .
In addition , if we opened this chapter this year , we would demonstrate with our actions that we in the European Union are fit for purpose , able and effective in recognising the challenges and pitfalls of the past and future .
If we fail to unblock this chapter , we will continue to be merely powerless and ineffective bystanders .
Madam President , Turkey 's momentum towards EU accession continues to falter .
One reason , of course , is the non-compliance with the Ankara Additional Protocols and non-recognition and continued occupation of Cyprus .
The refusal by the Turkish Government to open its ports and airports to trade from the Republic of Cyprus is unacceptable , but I would also like to mention the fact that they could also have a more constructive approach towards their neighbour Armenia , including the reopening of the shared border with Armenia and an acknowledgement of the deliberate mass killing of Armenians in 1915 .
Furthermore , Turkey 's thinly disguised political support for Iran risks impeding the EU 's efforts to stop the Islamist theocracy in Tehran from building a nuclear bomb , and that is deeply regrettable .
I am also concerned by its increasing hostility to Israel , our ally , as witnessed by the Gaza flotilla episode and Turkey 's officially published findings .
Turkey continues to maintain the Greek Orthodox Monastery at Halki closed for no apparent reason , and to deny its ancient Syriac Christians full community rights .
There can be no doubt in my mind that Turkey must now redouble its efforts if it wants to make further progress towards the EU and its values .
( EL ) Madam President , of all the problems which Turkey faces on its path towards accession , as set out in the report by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , whom I thank , such as the Kurdish problem , the Armenian problem , freedom of the press and the need to respect women 's rights , the Cyprus problem is the most tangible .
A candidate country cannot occupy European Union territory .
If it wishes to continue on its path towards accession , it needs to withdraw its troops from Cyprus and end the occupation of Turkish and Greek Cypriots .
( SK ) Madam President , I would like to begin by applauding the effort of the Turkish administration to approximate its political structures to a European value system .
On the other hand , it is impossible to ignore persistent problems in the area of respect for human rights , especially the rights of minorities and women , and the suppression of freedom of religion .
However , the most serious problem appears to be the fact that Turkey still occupies almost 50 % of the territory of one of our Member States - Cyprus .
The EU is therefore indirectly involved in a military conflict with Turkey .
This conflict has cost many inhabitants of Cyprus their homes and so far , it offers no hope of a solution to this unlawful state of affairs .
I therefore think that the dialogue between Brussels and Istanbul requires more openness , so that our Turkish friends can understand that the path to the EU leads only through criteria which cannot be circumvented .
If it seems to our Turkish friends that they are not prepared to fulfil the demanding criteria of the EU , it would be proper to acknowledge this honestly and put forward a sensible alternative for our common coexistence .
Madam President , the report is rather given to understatement .
I quote , ' significant efforts are needed on fundamental rights ' .
The author , Orhan Pamuk , escaped prosecution for a heretical view of Turkish history only because of his international fame .
The law is still in place .
Could the EU possibly tolerate the suppression of heretical academic opinion in a Member State ?
Later , the report says that there is no progress towards normalisation of relations with Cyprus .
In plain language , this means that Turkey still occupies , with force of arms , the northern part of that country , expropriating the property of Greek Cypriots and desecrating and plundering their places of worship and burial .
Until Turkey withdraws its troops unconditionally , returns property and repairs damage , there should be no relations with Turkey at all , let alone negotiation for its EU membership .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it has indeed been a good and useful debate , reflecting a number of opinions and views .
But , as many of you underlined , if Turkey indeed fulfils all relevant accession obligations and we remain committed and serious , then we will be able to avoid most of the frustration some of you referred to and move forward .
I also agree with those who are saying quite clearly that moving on the Additional Protocol , the Ankara Agreement , and achieving progress on the comprehensive settlement talks on Cyprus , would create a momentum for the accession negotiations .
I also agree with those who indicated that the rules of the game should not be changed in the middle of the game .
But let me make it absolutely clear .
For me , this is not a game ; for me , this is a serious process .
I strongly believe that , at the end of this process , most European Union and Turkish citizens will see clearly the benefits of a new and modern Turkey being a Member of the European Union .
My second remark would be that this year 's report is indeed very balanced .
What I very much appreciate , and what the rapporteur has managed , to a large extent , to take into account , as has the debate today , is the need to look at the bigger picture and not just present this House with a list of incidents and problems .
My third point is that I also agree with those who are making it absolutely clear that the key to a number of the chapters is in the hands of our Turkish partners .
I am one of those who would like to see chapters such as Chapter 15 on Energy and , especially , Chapter 23 on the Judiciary and Fundamental Rights , opened .
This is very important , particularly Chapter 23 .
I think it would be in the interests of both Turkey and the European Union to work on establishing a track record on these important issues .
It has been said that 14 chapters are frozen because of the Ankara Protocol .
Let me make a personal comment .
I think there is a distinction between those chapters which are frozen unilaterally and those which are frozen based on the recommendation of the Commission , because of the non-commitment of Turkey towards customs union , and then agreed by the Member States by consensus .
Chapters 23 and 15 are among those being frozen unilaterally .
As a last point , let me also address an issue which is very much on our minds these days , and that is the situation of media freedom in Turkey .
Last Thursday , I issued a clear statement to make absolutely sure that a message is sent to our Turkish colleagues that Turkish law does not sufficiently guarantee freedom of expression in line with the European Convention on Human Rights and the European Court of Human Rights , and to make it absolutely clear that Turkey urgently needs to amend its legal framework to improve the exercise of freedom of the press both in practice , and in a significant manner .
I raised this issue in very much the same terms with Mr Davutoğlu , the Turkish Minister of Foreign Affairs , last Friday .
But let me also make the following comment .
I think it is important not to shy away from commenting critically where we see problems .
But it is also important to help Turkey put the legislation into such a form , such order , that it corresponds to the abovementioned Convention .
I am thinking about how to involve both the Council of Europe and the OECD in this process , and I will be informing the House about the results of these consultations and the way I recommend we proceed .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for this excellent debate .
A multitude of arguments , both for and against , have been put forward with regard to both Turkey 's preparedness and the whole accession process .
This , too , indicates the complexity of the situation and of how difficult the task of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten was .
I believe that she did an excellent job in creating a report which reflects very well how difficult it is to evaluate the situation and Turkey 's preparedness .
There are , however , points on which we are in agreement , and in my opinion , this was also reflected in this debate .
I believe that there is not only an agreement here between the parties but also on the part of both the Commission and the Council .
The first of these points is that we need a European Turkey and it is in our interest to assist with this process .
We are talking about a strategic partner here .
I cannot stress enough how important it is to have a country with a small area in Europe as our friend .
There is also no doubt that this is a process based on conditions , and that Turkey must comply with its obligations , all those it has undertaken , and in order to ensure that we can make progress in the negotiations , it must meet the benchmarks and expectations we have formulated .
There is also no doubt that Turkey must strive for good neighbourhood relations .
This is a matter which is not to be questioned in any accession negotiations .
We could see that there is a debate on how much progress there has been , and how many tasks Turkey has completed .
I believe that we cannot call into question the achievements of the constitutional reform and that there has also been progress in minority affairs , for example , albeit partial .
No one questioned the fact that there is still a very long way to go .
It is enough to refer again to the issue of the freedom of the press , the situation of women or the operation of the justice system .
If we are looking at how new life can be breathed into the accession negotiations , we should examine our scope of action .
As mentioned by Commissioner Füle , there are indeed 13 chapters that remain open and we only managed to close one , while 16 have been frozen , where we cannot make any progress at the moment .
De facto we can work on three chapters , namely , those on competition , public procurement , and social policy and employment .
The best prepared of these is the chapter on competition , and much has been done during the Belgian Presidency as well in order to enable us to open the chapter , and the Commission is working very hard , with our maximum support , to open this chapter at least during the term of the Hungarian Presidency .
Again , Turkey must meet a very large number of conditions to that end .
I trust that there will be progress in this respect , and I truly do not wish to see for months on end that we are still unable to open another chapter .
Many have asked or indicated that progress in the matter of visas would be welcome .
Let me be frank with you .
The Hungarian Presidency would encourage the Commission to commence the dialogue , but we all know that in the Council meeting , the situation was not entirely clear in this regard , and a number of Member States have expressed their doubts .
I believe , as does the Hungarian Presidency , that it would be in our interest to launch the dialogue .
There have been several references to the freedom of religion and the persecution of Christians .
The Council has received its share of criticism for not addressing this issue .
Although this falls under the competence of Lady Ashton as the Chair of the Foreign Affairs Council , let me tell you that the issue was added to the agenda of the Foreign Affairs Council in January .
At that time , there was no agreement , but the February Foreign Affairs Council did adopt a resolution in which the persecution of all religious minorities , and specifically Christians , was condemned , so the Council did actually address this matter .
Lastly , please allow me to also ask us all a question , because we have been talking about what Turkey has done , whether it has done enough and whether it is working properly towards accession .
However , let us also think about all that depends on us .
And if we want to be honest , we will see that Europe is not living a period of inclusion .
We look at what is happening in North Africa , but if you look at what is going on within the European Union or in our even more immediate neighbourhood , you will see that Turkey is one of the five candidate countries , but there are also four others .
To what extent can we support these processes ?
How prepared are we to conclude the accession negotiations with Croatia ?
How prepared are we to admit Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen Area ?
How prepared are we to uplift Europe 's hard-fated community , the Roma ?
Inclusion is on the agenda in a great variety of contexts .
Europe has now turned somewhat inward .
Let me state this with a great deal of openness .
There is an enlargement weariness .
We must deal with our own public opinions , with how open we are with regard to these issues .
I believe that maybe we should be thinking in a somewhat longer term .
If we consider the long-term interests of the European Union , that is , to retain its attractiveness to both EU citizens and our immediate neighbours , whether it be Turkey or all the North African countries , I believe that we should bring back a more inclusive Europe within ourselves , naturally , with the proviso that this can by no means be unconditional , and that we must not save on the work that is expected from all candidate countries .
It would , in my opinion , be a very grave moment for the European Union if Turkey lost interest in it .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to say once again that I - and we - drafted the report quite carefully .
The point of order I would like to make is the following : I want to ask colleagues not to come up with new amendments because , if we want to have an un-polarised debate on this , if we want a big commitment by the whole plenary ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
I have received one motion for a resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 9 March 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I welcome the steps which have been taken so far by Turkey , but I want to stress that there is still considerable progress to be made .
Specific measures need to be taken in areas such as freedom of the press , the status of women in Turkish society , dialogue between the political parties and , in particular , recognition of Cyprus , which is an EU Member State .
This conflict casts a huge shadow over Turkey 's EU accession negotiations .
This is why Turkey must demonstrate proper determination to resolve the dispute .
However , I think that Turkey 's accession negotiations must advance to encourage reforms in this country , bearing in mind that Turkey provides a model for the Arab countries .
Turkey would help spread stability in the volatile regions beyond its eastern and southern borders .
It is also worth mentioning how important Turkey is to the European Union as it is a key player in the energy sector .
Turkey 's integration into the EU can be beneficial to both sides , in the short and medium term and , most of all , in the long term .
I want to welcome the significant progress made by Turkey with regard to its accession to the European Union .
I believe that this country has shown that it is completely determined to meet all the criteria to become a full member of the EU , and our role is to support it .
Many of my fellow Members have raised today the discussion of the fundamental rights issue .
However , I would like to ask why this report does not call on the Council to initiate negotiations on the justice and fundamental rights chapter .
This chapter is blocked by the Council , even though it is the most important in terms of Turkey meeting EU democratic standards .
Fellow Members , tomorrow we must vote for the amendment requesting this chapter to be opened up .
Otherwise , the European Parliament will send negative signals to Turkey , which will affect our credibility .
We are two years away from an important anniversary .
This year , it is 48 years since Turkey became a candidate country for joining the EU .
It is beyond dispute that much has happened since then .
The economic development of the country , along with the opening up of EU markets , have certainly played their role .
However , the country still has a problem over a number of factors which hark back to the creation of the modern Turkish state .
The treaty of 1924 clearly declares that citizens professing the Islamic faith are Turks , while citizens professing another faith are regarded as Greek Catholics .
The treaty does not recognise other ethnic groups .
That which was progressive in 1924 , namely , recognition of the fact that someone could be of a religion other than Islam , has quite different connotations today .
It is by no means a simple matter in Turkey to declare an ethnicity other than Turkish , whether it be Kurdish , Circassian or any other of the nationalities that have clearly existed in Turkey for a great many years , but whose recognition in real life , including the promotion of ethnic rights , will take a long time yet .
The key issues in the problematic situation over the negotiations at the moment are the failure to resolve the occupation of Cyprus , inactivity over the UN resolution on Famagusta and a failure to fulfil the ' tasks ' arising from previous reports .
The reduced role of the army is positive , but only if secular forces remain in power .
If this is not the case , it could threaten the stability of the entire region .
I welcome the efforts made by my colleague , Ria Oomen-Ruijten , in drafting this report , but I reserve the right not to agree with its entire content .
Firstly , I think that accession negotiations should get under way in the case of the chapters for which the technical preparations have already been completed .
There is a simple reason for this .
It could enable us to have a dialogue which will force Turkey to adopt the acquis communautaire .
While recognising the progress made by Turkey in meeting the technical criteria for opening the negotiations on competition , we must also tell the authorities in Ankara that additional efforts are required in this area .
I also think that opening the negotiations on the chapter on justice and fundamental rights can provide the ideal context to encourage Turkey to progress along the path of reform in this area , which is our common aim , in my view .
I also think that we should ask the Council to step up the dialogue with Turkey on foreign policy as , particularly in the context of recent events in North Africa , this country can act as an ally which will encourage democratisation and development in the region .
Every year , we hold a debate on Turkey 's membership of the EU .
As a general rule , the problems raised are the same - Turkey makes a certain amount of progress in bringing itself into line with EU requirements , but the progress is never satisfactory enough to give a clear indication of an approximate date for accession , or to state whether the country will , in fact , ever join the EU .
The changes which have already been made are beneficial , but the EU 's failure to adopt a clear position on Turkey 's accession is a source of frustration for the Turkish authorities and the country 's citizens .
We cannot , of course , demand that the Member States take an identical view of the matter , but our indecisiveness means that the EU appears to lack credibility .
Support for EU membership is falling among Turkish citizens .
The country may start to look for new allies and turn away from the West , which would be disadvantageous to Europe .
Turkey is our strategic partner in economic , regional and energy matters , and it is also a significant military force and a key player in the Middle East .
The problematic areas are always the same - human rights and civil liberties , the rights of women and national minorities , the rule of law , reform of the judiciary , corruption , freedom of the press and freedom of speech - and they still fall a long way short of European standards , despite the efforts that have been made .
Whether the negotiation process can be accelerated depends on how quickly and how effectively Turkey can fulfil the conditions imposed on it , and on the form of membership that the EU proposes to the country .
There can be no doubt about the fact that Turkey 's membership of the European Union is a contentious issue , with many opposing accession and many supporting it .
There can , however , also be no doubt about the fact that numerous democratic reforms have been carried out as part of the process of Europeanisation in Turkey , as a result of which the negotiating framework for Turkey 's accession was agreed on 3 October 2005 .
The opening of negotiations can be regarded as a success not only for Turkey , but also for Europe , since the main motive for Turkey to carry out reforms was its European ambitions .
While recognising the significant progress made by Turkey to date , it should , however , be remembered that there are many problems which are hampering its integration into the EU .
Above all , these include constitutional reform , freedom of the press , women 's rights and the protection of national minorities .
A modern democratic state must be based on the principle of division of power and a balance between the executive , legislative and judicial authorities , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , and , in particular , freedom of expression and a legal framework which guarantees women 's rights and gender equality .
I welcomed the announcement by the Turkish Government and opposition that they are willing to carry out reforms to transform Turkey into a fully-fledged pluralistic democracy , and I hope that all political parties and society will be involved in the entire constitutional process .
Turkey plays a strategic role as a stabilising force in the region of the Caucasus and Middle East .
It is also an essential component of the plan for diversifying Europe 's fuel supplies .
Ankara 's policies may serve as a model for the Arab countries in the region .
The European Union should therefore continue to take an active approach to building positive relations with Turkey , inter alia , by increasing funding for joint strategic energy investments such as the Nabucco gas pipeline , and by means of greater support for the development of trade relations .
Brussels must show that it recognises the progress towards integration with the European Union that has been made by Ankara in recent years .
Nevertheless , many issues still require the EU to put pressure on Turkey , and further progress with negotiations is out of the question until they have been resolved .
I need only mention the reconciliation and reunification of Cyprus , acceptance by Ankara of responsibility for the Armenian genocide , and further development of the democratic system .
European integration process of Montenegro ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the European integration process of Montenegro .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , you will be voting on the resolution on the European integration process of Montenegro tomorrow .
I consider the commitment of the European Parliament to preserve the openness of the European Union very commendable .
At the same time , you will also have an important role in winning over the general public of the Member States to the cause of enlargement , of enlargement based on conditionality .
The resolution you will be adopting tomorrow also confirms the realisation of this responsibility .
Let me tell you that there is utmost commitment on the part of the Council as well .
In line with the renewed enlargement consensus approved by the European Council , the Council confirmed in its conclusions of 14 December 2010 that the EU firmly supports the continuation of the enlargement process in the Western Balkans countries on the basis of the principles and conclusions adopted .
The Hungarian Presidency of the European Council is also deeply committed to this objective .
I would like to thank you for the excellent work you have done , and for contributing through this resolution to the consolidation of Montenegro 's achievements , for which there is a great need throughout the accession process .
We have confirmed Montenegro 's European perspective on several occasions .
The stability of the country and its orientation towards Europe , which is supported by all political parties as well as the majority of the citizens , and the high degree of consensus between the various ethnic groups , are all features which make Montenegro a stabilising factor in the Western Balkans region .
Let us not forget that Montenegro achieved visa liberalisation , the conclusion of the stabilisation and association agreement , and obtained candidate country status within 12 months .
These are significant results , and prove that a European perspective acts as a driving force for the preparations of a country .
The EU must therefore acknowledge the commitment and achievements of the countries intending to join .
Thanks to the progress made , further steps can be taken in the country 's European programme ; new commitments can be made and new requirements can be formulated .
To this end , delegations of the EU institutions and the Member States , at different levels and in different fields , are meeting on a daily basis these days .
We therefore welcome the current steps taken by Montenegro , particularly the action plan just adopted by its government , drawn up in response to the recommendations formulated in the Commission 's opinion , and we also welcome the method employed , namely , that the government held extensive consultations with civil society before the drafting of the action plan .
Please allow me to give a quick list of the so-called key priorities where progress needs to be made .
These are also mentioned in the Commission 's November 2010 opinion .
These include the reinforcement of the rule of law , the continuation of the reform of public administration , as well as the strengthening of public administration capacity , the adoption of an electoral law that complies with the constitution , and increased media freedom .
This is not only important from a legal point of view , but also represents a touchstone for the political maturity of the authorities .
Furthermore , it is extremely important to guarantee the legal status of persons who were forced to leave their homes and to respect their rights , as is the fight to eliminate organised crime and corruption .
We are expecting serious progress from Montenegro in this respect as well .
In order for any subsequent step to be taken in the stabilisation and association process in general , and specifically in the commencement of the accession negotiations , it is very important for Montenegro to make progress in these areas and also to make further efforts .
It is essential for Montenegro to fulfil its undertakings and to be able to present tangible results .
Ladies and gentlemen , Montenegro plays an important part in regional cooperation .
It engages in close cooperation with its neighbours and we honestly welcome the constructive role it is playing in stabilising the region and promoting good neighbourhood relations , particularly as the country holding the Presidency of the South-East Europe Cooperation Process .
Moreover , Montenegro is home to the new workgroup on culture and society of the Regional Cooperation Council , the Cetinje Parliamentary Forum .
Integration is inconceivable without regional cooperation , and Montenegro sets an example in this respect .
The resolution to be adopted by Parliament represents an actual stocktaking of achievements .
It is an accurate account of the current situation and a useful guideline to the tasks of the candidate country .
I congratulate the rapporteur , as well as all those who actively participated in the creation of the document .
Finally , I would like to encourage Montenegro and the Montenegrin authorities to continue their reform efforts and to endeavour to meet the expectations of their own citizens .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it is an honour for me to address the European Parliament on the European integration process of Montenegro .
Let me start where the Presidency has ended in congratulating the rapporteur for Montenegro , Mr Charles Tannock , on his report , and expressing my gratitude to all honourable Members who have contributed .
Parliament plays a key role in enlargement policy .
I believe that , with the concerted action of all the European institutions , we can achieve more .
Montenegro 's overall progress towards fulfilment of the criteria for European Union membership has been remarkable .
There is a growing political consensus .
The country has made important progress in putting in place its legal and institutional framework .
It is also strongly committed to regional cooperation .
There is a solid record of structural economic reforms and progress in most areas of the acquis .
The European Council decision to grant candidate status to Montenegro is a recognition of these achievements and a strong signal which confirms the credibility of the European Union 's enlargement policy .
The country has entered a decisive stage .
Candidate status is a great responsibility for Montenegro .
Tangible results are needed in order for Montenegro to be able to move to the next stage of European integration .
I am confident that the European Parliament resolution will send the right message to Montenegro of acknowledging past achievements , but also the strong expectation that the reform process will be pursued with determination and that all the key challenges on Montenegro 's path to European Union membership will be thoroughly addressed .
I met the new Prime Minister of Montenegro , Dr Igor Lukšić , last week .
His commitment to pursuing the reform process and his strong determination to meet the key priorities set out in the Commission opinion are encouraging .
On 17 February , after public consultations with civil society and talks with the Commission services , the government adopted an action plan to address the priorities .
It is now crucial to focus on implementation and establish a solid track record .
The key priorities set out in the opinion are a significant , but achievable , challenge that requires the involvement and commitment of all actors in Montenegro .
Previous enlargements have shown the importance of addressing key issues under the political criteria , as well as Chapter 23 , early in the accession process .
Early solid achievements in this area in Montenegro , notably , in the politicisation of the public administration , the strengthening of the independence of the judiciary and the effective fight against corruption and against organised crime , will later ensure smooth negotiations and integration into the European Union .
Montenegro must improve its electoral framework , in line with the recommendations of the OSCE / ODIHR and the Venice Commission .
The Parliament needs strengthening , which is an important priority for both the Commission and the European Parliament .
Effective compliance with European standards in the field of human rights is essential , in particular , regarding freedom of expression and relations with civil society .
Further efforts are needed to strengthen anti-discrimination policy , notably , gender equality and the effective protection of vulnerable groups .
Sustainable solutions are needed for displaced persons .
Other shortcomings identified in the opinion and in your draft resolution also need to be addressed .
Montenegro needs to strengthen its administrative capacity and to upgrade its preparation in a number of areas of the European Union acquis .
The future of Montenegro undeniably lies in the European Union and we should act responsibly .
The credibility of our enlargement policy is based on the enlargement countries respecting the conditionality towards the European Union and the European Union respecting its commitment towards the enlargement countries .
It is in all our interests to ensure that the progress of Montenegro towards the European Union is based on solid achievements and concrete results .
Montenegro 's performance this year will be assessed in the enlargement package due in October 2011 .
Only when the Commission has established that Montenegro has achieved the necessary degree of compliance with the accession criteria , in particular , the seven key priorities set out in the opinion , will it be in a position to recommend opening negotiations .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I visited Montenegro twice during the past eighteen months , with my colleague Anna Ibrisagic from the PPE as shadow rapporteur , to form my own assessment of the country 's progress towards , first , candidate status and , now , the prospect of EU membership .
I have been extremely impressed by the diligence and commitment of the entire Montenegrin Government .
No matter how small it may be , it is certainly one that works extremely hard .
I would pay very special tribute to the former prime minister , Milo Ðjukanović , and his recent successor , Igor Lukšić , who have both been pragmatic and , at the same time , single-minded in their approach and in their quest to lead their country towards EU accession and NATO accession .
The onus is now on Montenegro to meet the EU 's expectations .
In particular , the Montenegrin Government needs to address the seven key priorities identified by Commissioner Füle in the Commission 's opinion .
I particularly emphasise the issue of corruption and organised crime , on which there are clear and well-defined benchmarks for measuring progress .
I am pleased that last month , the government adopted a very well formulated action plan aimed at responding to these priorities and demands .
In my view , Montenegro is now ready to start negotiating EU membership as an official candidate , and it is curious that the Commission should be insisting on a significant time-lapse between the granting of official candidate status and the opening of negotiations .
This delay has no real justification or apparent basis , according to my reading of the Treaties .
More importantly , it is hardly the most positive signal to send to Podgorica , or indeed to countries elsewhere in the region , such as Macedonia , working hard to obtain candidate status .
I only hope that this enforced wait , which now is inevitable and is frustrating to Montenegro , will not result in a weakening of the country 's commitment to an engagement with the European Union .
Montenegro should be judged solely on merit , facts and achievements .
Its case should not be tied to the progress in other neighbouring states in the western Balkans .
Montenegro is a small country but a beautiful country , which has enjoyed remarkable stability and economic growth since its peaceful divorce from Serbia .
It has few , if any , internal ethnic or religious problems , unlike some of its larger neighbours .
It has a minor border dispute with Croatia , which it will resolve peacefully before the International Court of Justice .
It has recently negotiated and ratified extradition treaties with both Serbia and Croatia in the fight against organised crime .
It is euro-based : it has the euro without being in the eurozone , believe it or not .
Its economy remains undiversified - sadly - relying mainly on tourism and one aluminium smelter .
It needs to create more jobs in hydroelectric power for export , and financial services may well be another solution .
Personally , I remain optimistic for what is essentially a very good news story in the western Balkans .

Madam President , as shadow rapporteur for Montenegro for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I would first like to thank Mr Tannock for his excellent cooperation and a very sound and well-balanced report .
I would also like to urge my fellow Members to give their support tomorrow to the report that we have before us .
I would like , in particular , to emphasise the fact that I have a very positive view of the European Council 's decision of December 2010 to grant Montenegro candidate status with the prospect of EU membership .
At the same time , it is important for us not to stop there , but to quickly continue towards the goal , which is EU membership for Montenegro .
The political and economic stability that Montenegro has continually shown right from the time it became independent is immense .
This country is often described as a success story - and we heard it today from the Council , too .
Like Mr Tannock , I also think it is regrettable that candidate status has been disconnected from the right to begin negotiations .
I therefore believe that the Commission should initiate membership negotiations as quickly as possible and set a date to start these negotiations with Montenegro .
It is clear that the reform process must continue , for example , within the judiciary and with regard to combating conflicts of interest in public administration , and that the priorities recommended by the Commission must be dealt with , but I would nevertheless like to praise the government of Montenegro for the positive reforms that it has succeeded in implementing so far .
Today , we have Montenegro 's ambassador with us here in the Chamber , and I hope and look forward to the day when we can welcome not only the ambassador , but the whole of Montenegro to the EU and the representatives of Montenegro to this Parliament .

Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Tannock for his constructive cooperation on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , too .
I am pleased that Montenegro can now pursue a path towards EU membership .
I agree that the Commission should initiate the negotiations as soon as possible , provided , of course , that Montenegro continues to move towards the EU 's targets .
The fact that Montenegro has now been granted candidate status sends out a strong signal about the EU 's commitment to the future of whole of the former Yugoslavia in the EU .
Like Croatia , Montenegro can show the remaining countries the way to EU membership .
Rapprochement to the EU is a key factor for both prosperity and stability in the region .
That is abundantly clear .
Montenegro is a small , new and peaceful country that is strongly committed to regional cooperation .
It has good relations with its neighbouring countries and , hence , good prerequisites for success in the forthcoming membership negotiations .
However , there are areas that require vigorous reforms .
The legal and administrative capacity to form a fully viable society based on the rule of law has been strengthened , but more is still required .
Corruption and organised crime are rife and the legal system needs a great deal of further enhancement in order to meet the EU 's requirements .
I have tabled a number of amendments in order to point out that Montenegro also needs to strengthen the position of women , secure freedom of the press , safeguard the fundamental rights of workers and minorities and , in particular , develop civil society .
We must not forget that these , too , are crucial areas in the forthcoming EU negotiations .
I welcome Montenegro 's membership of the European Union as soon as possible .

Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mr Tannock on his report and on the cooperation he has shown in formulating it .
If , by adopting the resolution on Montenegro , we wish to renew , in principle , the commitment towards continuation of the process of European Union enlargement and towards enabling all the states of our continent to develop under the aegis of Union membership , then we first need to ensure fulfilment of the following steps , first of all for Montenegro , and then also for Serbia , Macedonia , Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania , not forgetting Turkey of course .
For Montenegro , this would mean that the granting of candidate status and the decision , in principle , to start negotiations should be followed by the actual opening of negotiations .
Meanwhile , much more work awaits the Montenegrin Government in terms of harmonising legal systems and enabling administrative capacities .
The fight against corruption , in all its diverse forms , must continue and must result in the conviction of those who have engaged in corrupt practices .
Ensuring equality and respect for women is not a task that deserves to be highlighted today only .
Freedom of expression , media independence and protection of minorities are all values which any candidate for membership in the European Union must unconditionally respect .
The young Montenegrin democracy must provide an appropriate and prominent place in its society for NGOs .
Commissioner , I would like to bring to your attention a particular wish which I heard while staying in Montenegro and speaking to its politicians there .
It is important that relations between Montenegro and Serbia evolve without Serbia attempting to interfere with its neighbour 's development through ethnic Serbian parties .
That school of thought has already done great damage in the history of south-eastern Europe .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , Commissioner , I would also like to thank our colleague , Charles Tannock , for a very good and well-balanced report and I am glad we found consensus here in regretting the decoupling of the candidate status for Montenegro from opening the negotiations .
As previous speakers have said , I would also like Montenegro to move forward with negotiations and I hope the delay will not be too long .
I am happy also to hear from the Hungarian Presidency that they are strong supporters in the enlargement process .
So I hope there will be progress this year , at the latest , following the progress report .
Montenegro has achieved a lot in the past and in recent years , but there are still quite a few areas of concern .
I would like to mention three : fighting corruption , discrimination and ecological issues .
In the fight against corruption and organised crime , I am glad that in this report , we also demand from the state authorities that they refrain from pressurising NGOs and civil society organisations that investigate corruption and organised crime .
They should be free to do their work and support the state in removing corruption and organised crime .
The second aspect is anti-discrimination .
There are still lots of groups where , despite good legislation , anti-discrimination is not working : Roma , Ashkaeli and Egyptians , LGBT people ; we should also mention gender equality on International Women 's Day .
Finally , on ecological issues , Montenegro defines itself in its constitution as an ecological state , which is great .
The problem is , despite the beautiful coast and mountains , if good transparent progress is not made by having environmental assessments , then this beautiful countryside is in danger of being destroyed .
So , I hope that this country will move forward , involve civil society , and have transparent processes in its ecological areas , especially hydro-electric power plants .
Madam President , I agree with most of the speakers so far that Montenegro has made considerable progress towards EU integration despite a poor starting position .
In common with the other former Yugoslav republics , it has had to cope with the collapse of Communism , coming together with the collapse of the state , the war that followed , and then having to build a new system on the ruins of the old .
This is no easy task and some of the negative features of the previous system have lived on in new guises .
What is important , however , is the emergence of a younger élite that has committed itself to a European future , in which it was certainly helped by the unsuccessful union with Serbia .
Problems remain , of course .
We have heard about some of these , the usual ones that former Communist states have had to cope with : corruption , criminality , abuses in the administration of justice , a not particularly efficient public service , and the like .
The remedying of these and parallel flaws in the political , economic , legal and administrative systems will require a major effort on the part of the leadership , and it should be prepared for both active and passive resistance from the beneficiaries of the existing system .
Every former Communist country has had to face analogous difficulties .
The determination of both élites and public opinion to offer a European future is probably the single most important factor ensuring Montenegro 's eventual accession to the EU .
( SK ) Madam President , progress in the European integration process is one of the fundamental factors contributing to the further development of Montenegro .
From an economic perspective , the country has achieved a certain level of macro-economic stability , and has also advanced successfully in the sense of fulfilling the political criteria set out at the Copenhagen Summit , or the Copenhagen sitting of the Council .
However , we must bring more pressure to bear , especially in the area of strengthening the rule of law - including reforms to the judiciary - and it is also essential to continue the ongoing effort in the fight against corruption and organised crime .
It is also desirable to see progress in the reform of the public administration and electoral reform , and a stronger role for parliament
Emphasis must be placed on the implementation of freedom of expression and media freedom .
It would also be appropriate to cooperate with civil society , and to try and address discrimination and the social and economic integration of minority groups in the population , including the Roma .
Regional cooperation and correct neighbourly relations are undoubtedly one of the other preconditions for a successful Euro-integration process .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Montenegro has made a considerable effort in the attempt to fulfil the criteria set out for successful integration into the European Union , and it is therefore time to consider granting candidate country status .
I believe that this will be achieved .

Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank and congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Tannock , for the excellent report and very good preparation of the relevant resolution .
Montenegro has made good progress in the integration process .
The country also plays a constructive role in maintaining regional stability .
It is on the right track , which was confirmed last year by the Commission and the Council granting Montenegro candidate country status .
I hope that it will ensure that the remaining criteria for opening accession negotiations are fulfilled soon to enable those negotiations to be started .
Until that happens , Montenegro 's government needs to focus on progress in key areas , which have been clearly indicated .
Let me summarise them as follows : the rule of law , the fight against corruption and organised crime , election legislation , strengthening Parliament 's supervisory role vis-à-vis the government and broader involvement of civil society in interaction with the government , the reform of justice , with continual strengthening of the independence of the judiciary and prosecution , and tackling corruption , which undermines state institutions , economic and social development and the functioning of the public administration .
Finally , I am glad to see that Montenegro is continuously proceeding further in the integration process .
That is why I hope that the Council will decide to open negotiations with the country really soon .
( SL ) Madam President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner Füle , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Charles Tannock , on the achievement represented by the resolution on Montenegro , on which we will be voting tomorrow .
Montenegro is a major hope for the process of European Union enlargement across the Western Balkans .
Montenegro is a state and society without any objective problems which might prevent it from doing what is necessary to attain membership of the European Union .
However , its neighbours , Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia , have not been so fortunate .
The European Commission 's seven key priorities are clear and I would suggest that Prime Minister Igor Lukšić 's government addresses them in a determined fashion and in this way opens negotiations on Montenegro 's full membership .
In doing so , the government should rely on Montenegro 's civil society , free-thinking intellectuals and non-governmental organisations .
The critics are not Montenegro 's enemies , the independent media are not enemies , but a valuable asset for Montenegro .
Obviously , combating corruption and organised crime remains key .
In the words of a Montenegrin folk song : ' Montenegro may be small , but it is honourable and fair ' .
( RO ) Madam President , stability in the Western Balkans region will be strengthened even further with Montenegro 's recommendation as a candidate country by the European Commission .
At the same time , I wish to mention how important it is to comply exactly with the Copenhagen criteria , which are key to the progress of EU integration .
Although a great deal of progress has been made , the Montenegrin authorities still have reforms to implement in key sectors .
For example , I feel obliged to mention the report from the Commission on the spread of corruption and illegal tax transactions .
With this in mind , the most important measure is to create a specialist structure for combating these problems .
On the other hand , the rights of minorities , and I am referring here , in particular , to those of the Roma , still do not have the necessary legislative basis .
The reference to the status of minorities in the fundamental law , together with their rights , will be a positive sign for European integration .
I welcome the promotion of Montenegro as a state championing the green movement .
One of the EU 's key objectives is environmental protection .
On this point , I want to draw attention to the adverse impact which excessive , poorly managed tourism has .
One consequence could be to extend the future accession negotiations .
Finally , I wish to mention that Montenegro 's prospect of EU integration is helping Europe come to terms with its past in the Balkans region as a whole .
( HU ) Madam President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , I am pleased that the Hungarian Presidency considers enlargement in the Western Balkans region one of its priority tasks , and I trust that this will substantially contribute to Montenegro advancing from the stage of candidate country to finally commencing accession negotiations .
My fellow Members have already mentioned how important the fight against corruption is in the accession of a Western Balkans country , but there are two other key areas .
One is the quality of its neighbourhood relations .
In this respect , Montenegro has performed very well by signing agreements with Croatia and Serbia .
The other is minority issues .
Montenegro has an exemplary minorities act , which , in many respects , builds upon the experience gained from the local minority government model of my home country , Hungary .
However , I note with regret that at the moment , the electoral law fell through for the very reason of minority representation remaining unresolved .
I hope that our Montenegrin friends will solve this problem as well .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to start by congratulating Montenegro on achieving the status of candidate country for accession to the European Union in December 2010 .
The political dialogue between this country and the EU institutions is at a very advanced stage , despite the fact that it has not been going on for long .
Evidence of Montenegro 's high level of commitment and strong political will to make changes can be seen in the way that it has implemented reforms under the Bologna process , for example , or in the improvements it has made to the functioning of the labour market .
As emerges from the Commission communication on Montenegro 's application , however , continuing high levels of unemployment point to a discrepancy between the skills which are available and those which are required , thus revealing the education system 's weak points .
Montenegro should therefore make every effort to ensure that all social groups , including those at risk of social exclusion , have the opportunity to receive high quality general education and training , in order to equip its citizens with skills which increase their chances of employment .
( PL ) Madam President , this debate has shown that Montenegro is increasingly well-prepared for accession to the European Union 's structures .
It goes without saying that this is important for Montenegro itself , but I should like to draw your attention to the fact that there are also two other dimensions to this process .
The first is a European dimension , demonstrating that the principles and values governing the European Union 's actions are still attractive to the rest of Europe .
The second dimension relates to the Balkans , since this process shows the other Balkan states what path they can , and indeed should , follow .
It is a difficult path , but one which is not impossible .
I have one very quick question : would Commissioner Füle mind giving us a timetable for Montenegro 's future accession to the European Union ?
Thank you very much .
Madam President , as a citizen of Romania with a strong belief in the benefits of a prosperous multi-ethnic society based on peaceful coexistence and reconciliation between nations , I welcome Montenegro 's efforts to comply with the Copenhagen criteria , as regards the stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy , and to correspond to European and international standards .
Montenegro is a parliamentary democracy based on a constitutional and legislative framework for the rule of law , human rights and the respect for and protection of minorities .
However , there are serious gaps in the implementation of legislation .
Corruption remains prevalent , organised crime continues to be a serious problem and there are concerns over the efficiency of the judiciary .
I encourage Montenegro to continue its constructive engagement in regional cooperation and in strengthening bilateral relations with neighbouring countries .
( SK ) Madam President , last week 's visit by Commissioner Füle shows that the commitment of the Montenegrin Government to European integration is genuine and is the best path for a country that is moving towards the European Union .
The social and political changes that have taken place in Montenegro in recent years are a positive sign not only for the EU , but also for the country 's neighbours .
The Montenegrin Government has also won plaudits from the UN over the broad spectrum of problems it has managed to address .
According to the United Nations Development Programme report , Montenegro is capable of fulfilling the Millennium Development Goals , including the eradication of poverty , universal primary education and a reduction in infant mortality , by 2015 .
Montenegrin premier , Igor Lukšič , stated during his recent visit to Brussels that Montenegro 's priorities are EU and NATO membership .
I therefore personally consider Montenegro 's efforts enormously important , and I fully support the assistance and aid which the EU is providing to the country , and I believe that this country will join the EU in the near future .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although some excellent results have been achieved so far on the road towards European integration , there remain some gaps in fundamental areas for the development of a democratic system and full confirmation of the rule of law .
Despite the progress made with the amendments to the legislation on criminal procedures and other primary laws , some aspects are still substantially behind schedule .
I refer , in particular , to the urgent need to ensure the responsibility and efficiency of the judiciary , as well as its transparency , not to mention that of the public prosecutor 's office , and their independence from political interference .
To that end , substantial changes are needed to the system for appointing judges and public prosecutors , putting an end to the practice whereby their appointments only take place in parliament and within the government .
Lastly , ( ... ) to improve access to justice and to free legal assistance .
( RO ) Madam President , Montenegro 's gaining of accession candidate country status is the upshot of the open door policy promoted by the European Union , which has had a beneficial impact not only in Eastern Europe but also in the Western Balkans , as in this case .
Montenegro is at the start of a journey which will neither be easy nor simple , but it has a prospect of accession and a road map , and it can benefit from the experience of the countries in the region which have completed the path of accession not very long ago .
It is important that the next country report is positive and allows accession negotiations to actually begin .
I believe that the European Union has successfully made a crucial contribution to the process of reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia .
Once all the states formed from the disintegration of the Yugoslav Federation have been admitted to the European Union , this will also close the final wounds of a violent past , which is still an issue for the entire European community .
I wish the Montenegrin nation every success in its efforts to modernise its country in order to meet the accession conditions .
( DE ) Madam President , the expectation was that visa liberalisation for Serbia , Montenegro and Macedonia would encourage tourists and businesspeople to make greater use of this opportunity .
Instead , we have seen an increase in economic migrants .
In this context , information campaigns in these countries are undoubtedly important , so that we can make it clear that a visitor 's visa is not the equivalent of asylum or a job in the EU .
The fact that the EU had to exert pressure to close the so-called travel agencies which specialised in emigration to the EU demonstrates the lack of awareness of the problem .
We will have to wait and see how effective the planned early warning system for mass movements relating to the Roma problem will be .
Many people seem to believe that their future does not lie in their home countries in the Balkans , such as Montenegro , but want to make use of their newly acquired freedom of travel to enter the EU illegally .
However , they do not have the right to access Europe 's social security systems .
It is important for Montenegro to make greater efforts to introduce EU standards in areas such as justice , combating corruption and protecting minorities , in order to establish a European perspective .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , honourable Members , our discussion has proved productive in reconfirming the next steps necessary for Montenegro to achieve further progress on its European Union path .
As acknowledged in the draft resolution we discussed today and in the Commission opinion of last November , Montenegro has achieved a lot but needs to deliver substantially more .
The country has now entered a decisive stage .
Tangible results are needed in order for Montenegro to be able to move to the next stage of European integration .
The momentum created by candidate status should not be lost ; reforms should be pursued with determination .
The objectives are well known : it is up to Montenegro to meet the required priorities and , once ready , to engage in the negotiation process .
The pace of Montenegro 's progress towards European Union membership depends on its own achievements , and that should explain my hesitation in prejudging an enlargement calendar as many of you have invited me to do . But I am positive that with our support , but mainly with the determination of its people , Montenegro can make real progress towards the European Union .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank you for this extremely fruitful discussion .
It is encouraging to see that the European Parliament continues to support with all its heart Montenegro 's European integration efforts .
I would like to reassure you that the concerns and tasks you mentioned during this debate are on the agenda of the ongoing dialogue between the EU institutions on the European perspective of Montenegro , and we are making every effort to address them properly .
There have been multiple mentions and questions as to what happens in the time between the granting of candidate status and the commencement of the accession negotiations , that is , why we are not beginning the negotiations immediately , without delay .
Perhaps you , too , are aware , and both the Commissioner and I have mentioned it , that now that Montenegro has obtained the status of candidate country , the Commission has set out conditions it must fulfil .
There are seven such conditions , including the rule of law , taking action against organised crime , the fight against corruption , etc . , and the Commission will evaluate the progress made in these areas , which will then be tabled before the Council in autumn , after which we will be able to decide whether we have reached a stage where we can launch the negotiations .
Once again , thank you for this debate and I believe that this , too , proves that the European Parliament is ready to send out a positive signal to the Western Balkans region .
A signal which proves that the enlargement process is under way , that it still exists , and that it needs to be credible .
This means that the progress made with each country in the region is based on a personalised approach and is performance-related .
In the case of Montenegro , this refers to what has been said here ; in the case of Serbia , it means that the answers to the questionnaire received have been prepared and will now be evaluated by the Commission ; and in the case of Croatia , it means that the country must finish its homework and prepare in every possible way to ensure that the negotiations can be concluded during the term of the Hungarian Presidency .
This way , the process remains credible and we can ensure that our immediate neighbours , these true European countries , remain on the right track , and that they will ultimately be able to join the EU once they have reached the appropriate stage of preparedness .
I have received one motion for a resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 9 March 2011 .
EU strategy on Roma inclusion ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Járóka , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the EU strategy on Roma inclusion .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I would like to thank all my colleagues in the European Parliament and also in all the civil organisations for their support and valuable input in drafting this heavy report .
If you will allow me a personal comment , this is the place and time where I have to thank my colleagues in the office , my political advisor in the LIBE Committee who has been behind this strategy for years , and my head of cabinet in the last few years who has fought with me .
I also owe gratitude to my family who allowed me to be in the forefront of this fight , a fight which has , in the end , produced a result .
We have an agreement spanning six political groups , 27 Member States and five very important parliamentary committees .
In this way , I believe we are able to send a message to the Commission , the Council and the Member States that must be reckoned with and we have therefore made a great step towards an EU-level effort to alleviate the poverty and social exclusion of our continent 's largest ethnic minority .
A significant proportion of European Roma face such substandard conditions - almost totally disconnected from the economy resulting in their exclusion from basic human rights - that fostering social inclusion cannot be viewed within the framework of general policy ratification but must be handled as bridging one of the most enormous gaps in the fulfilment of constitutional and human rights in Europe .
The EU-level effort to alleviate the poverty and social exclusion of European Roma must therefore place its primary emphasis on the fulfilment and promotion of the fundamental rights to employment , housing , healthcare and education .
Let me briefly outline the most important principles and recommendations of my report .
Above all , the strategy must be an internal EU strategy , the general oversight of priority areas and objectives must therefore be within the Community structures and it should in no way be divisive for the EU , creating splits among the Member States .
On the contrary ; establishing a new body to coordinate and supervise the strategy would be unnecessary and would create a wasteful overhead .
The role of supervising , coordinating and monitoring must therefore be fulfilled by the Commission and , to this end , it would be worth considering retaining the Roma task force as a permanent body .
The Commission should report annually on the progress of the strategy , evaluate the results and submit its upgrading proposals to the Council .
In this regard , the European Roma strategy scoreboard , a mechanism similar to the single market scoreboard , could be developed .
The appointment of an administrative body or a government official to be the national contact point for the implementation of the strategy 's objectives , and furthermore to act as a source of advice and reflection for the Commission supervisory strategy , would also bring significant practical benefits .
The strategy must also take into account the territoriality of exclusion since the geographic distribution of social disadvantages is not uniform throughout the Member States , but poverty and social exclusion are concentrated in underdeveloped micro-regions , which , in many of the new Member States , are predominantly inhabited by the Roma community .
Common , comparable and reliable indicators are essential to present a realistic analysis of progress and to meet the requirements of effective monitoring .
I recommend adopting the Laeken indicators and their complementary components to measure social and territorial exclusion , as well as to evaluate progress .
An all-European crisis map is necessary to measure and identify the micro-regions by their distinctive attributes .
Part of the cohesion budget should be set aside in the next multiannual financial framework in a performance reserve for the strategy .
This could provide vital resources and devise incentives for implementation by allocating funds on a competitive basis defined by the criterion of how the proposed project or intervention supports and implements the objectives of the strategy .
This way , on the one hand , we could depart from the general practice of large contributions maximising their returns from the unabsorbed funds and , on the other hand , a direct link could be created between the allocation of financing and the reproduction of results .
These are the principles and the priorities that I believe the European Roma strategy must sustain and I am looking forward to your comments on my report .
( Applause )
Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the Hungarian Presidency attaches great importance to the issue of Roma integration and is grateful for the active support of the European Parliament in this matter .
Let us not forget what is at stake here .
We are talking about the life chances of millions of our fellow European citizens who have the right to the same opportunities as everyone else , and our societies cannot afford to ignore the potential that lies in them .
Therefore , please allow me to congratulate you on the excellent draft resolution you are about to adopt , and which I strongly support .
We share your ambition to ensure that promises are followed by deeds .
On 8 April , the International Day of the Roma is celebrated worldwide .
On that day , the Hungarian Presidency will be organising the fifth meeting of the Integrated European Platform for Roma Inclusion in Budapest , which I am sure many of you will also be attending .
As a central feature of this event , the Commission will present its strategic communication on the subject , and we ask Mrs Járóka to present the main points of the resolution there .
After that , the Hungarian Presidency will draw up draft Council conclusions , which we hope the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council will adopt at its meeting on 19 May .
These conclusions will exclusively deal with the issue of Roma integration , and we will endeavour to strengthen cooperation between the EU and its Member States in respect of the economic and social integration of the Roma .
Additionally , we are planning to organise exchanges of views on the Commission 's ideas in other Council formations as well , and at the end of May , the General Affairs Council will hold a policy debate in preparation for the June meeting of the European Council .
In order for us to be able to make progress , we must set aside all stereotypes , generalisations and prejudices .
We must be aware that the living conditions of the Roma are far from being homogenous everywhere .
Moreover , we must keep in mind the historic reasons for their social exclusion .
The benefits of the political changeover and the transition to a market economy that took place in Central and Eastern Europe are not enjoyed to an equal degree by all citizens .
A large number of Roma drifted to the periphery of society in this very period of the past 20 years .
Today , it is particularly important that we firmly condemn acts of aggression inspired by racist motivations , whoever the perpetrator is .
In a difficult economic situation , the vulnerable become even more so , and often seek the reasons for their misery in each other .
However , we possess shared values and means to defend them , as it has been more than ten years now since the Council adopted its directives prohibiting racial discrimination .
I particularly welcome the fact that special emphasis has been placed on the elimination of segregation .
Segregation forms a vicious circle and creates fault lines within societies .
I am also very pleased that the resolution covers gender equality as well .
Let me remind you of an earlier resolution Parliament adopted in 2006 , which deals with the situation of Roma women .
All women must be allowed to put their abilities to good use .
We need more Roma women in decision making as well .
Ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur for this subject , Mrs Lívia Járóka , can inspire us all in this regard as well - particularly the women , but also the men .
I would once again like to thank Mrs Járóka and all of you for participating in this vital process , and I would like to remind you once more that the Hungarian Presidency is determined to achieve substantial results in this area .
I ask all of you to assist with this effort .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , the European Union , as you know , is built on rights and values and these include the protection of minorities , the principle of free movement and the prohibition of discrimination - all these apply fully to the Roma .
The social and economic integration of Roma is , I think , a moral obligation , but also , as Parliament 's report rightly pointed out , an economic interest of our European societies .
It is a priority for the EU and it needs commitment and the joint efforts of national and local authorities , civil society and the EU institutions .
I would like to congratulate Ms Lívia Járóka on the wonderful work she has been doing .
She has been doing it by trying to integrate the whole House and getting a paper proposal which represents the meaningful input of parliamentarians from all political parties , and I think that is a real achievement .
This will help us , Ms Járóka , to keep Roma inclusion high on the political agenda .
It will help us to take the necessary steps to improve the situation of the Roma people and their social and economic integration into society .
Permit me to update you on where we stand .
As you might remember , on 7 April 2010 , the Commission adopted a communication on the social and economic integration of Roma in Europe , which was the first ever policy document dedicated specifically to Roma .
The communication contained a concrete list of actions to help Member States make their policies for Roma integration more effective and to define the main challenges ahead : discrimination , poverty , low educational achievement , labour market barriers , housing , segregation , and so on .
Then came the assessment of the Commission 's internal Roma Task Force , which was set up on 7 September 2010 , and which very clearly showed that there is no evidence that strong and proportionate measures are in place in the Member States to tackle the social and economic problems of a large part of the EU 's Roma population .
This situation is neither acceptable nor sustainable and therefore , the Commission is working on an EU framework for national Roma integration strategies which it will present in early April .
This House has called for an EU strategy and the Commission is responding to this request .
We all agree , I think , that we need effective policy planning and implementation , that we need a strategic approach .
We also agree , I think , that the primary responsibility for Roma populations lies with the Member States in which these Roma populations are moving , and it is for that reason that the Commission is drawing up this EU framework combined with national Roma integration strategies , because we need both : we need to know where we are all going together and we need to know where each individual Member State will go in order to adapt specific policies to the problems of the Roma in that Member State .
The EU framework to be presented in April will build on your resolution , Ms Járóka , on the work of the Commission 's Roma Task Force and , of course , on the wide range of contributions received from Member States and from civil society .
There is a need for concrete actions , for clear commitments , to make better use of the range of legal and financial instruments available in order to achieve a breakthrough .
I will not speak for long on this , because my colleague , Mr Andor , is responsible for this dossier , but the Europe 2020 strategy leads to a new path for persistent economic and social actions for those who are marginalised and we know that poverty is a very big problem in Europe 's largest minority .
Here , determined action is needed both at national and EU level .
The Commission also considers that it is very important to learn from the lessons of the past and to make sure that the efforts of all stakeholders , at all levels from the EU down to the local level , are very well coordinated .
For this coordination work , we do have the European platform for Roma inclusion , which is a unique mechanism for involving the stakeholders .
I think it would be important to reinforce the role of this platform in the future .
I also heard with great interest Parliament 's proposal to have a national contact point and we will consider this when we prepare the EU framework .
I would also like to assure you that in drawing up the framework , the Commission will pay special attention to the need to monitor developments and follow the process and the progress on the ground , and here I appeal to Parliament .
This must not be a case of a very good report by Parliament and then an interesting framework from the European Union ; this must be a work in progress and a measured work in progress , a monitored work in progress , so that we can see where we are going in future and , in this regard , we will continue to work closely with the Member States and with this Parliament , as well as with all the stakeholders .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would also like to thank the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs for its excellent work on the EU strategy on Roma inclusion and to congratulate the rapporteur , Ms Lívia Járóka , on the impressive support that this report has received from the House .
The report is both helpful and encouraging .
It is helpful because it contributes to the ongoing debate on how to further the integration of Roma people into the economy and society .
It is encouraging because it shows that the Commission and Parliament have moved in the same direction and that our views on the way forward largely coincide .
Firstly , the Commission agrees that the Roma issue is one of the most important strategic challenges that Europe faces and , at the same time , it provides one of the most promising opportunities for the continent .
When we speak of opportunities , we also mean economic opportunities .
There is indeed a social and economic necessity coupled here with a moral imperative .
Secondly , Parliament 's report makes a convincing case for the need to adopt a holistic approach to tackling the socio-economic situation of the Roma .
It suggests focusing on a number of priority areas , such as education , employment , housing and healthcare .
These are indeed areas of critical importance for the successful integration of the Roma people .
Thirdly , I welcome the focus in the report on the importance of using EU funds in the most appropriate way .
It is essential to underpin policies with sufficient financial resources .
Although we have made progress in this area , more needs to be done .
Fourthly , I agree with Parliament that we need to put in place a strong mechanism to monitor national strategies for Roma integration .
Lastly , I have taken good note that the report advocates focusing on the territorial dimension of poverty and , in particular , in underdeveloped micro-regions .
The Commission will carefully look into this interesting proposal .
It is clear that a number of Member States will not be able to make sufficient progress towards the Europe 2020 targets unless they take concrete steps to improve Roma integration .
It is , therefore , high time for determined action at both national and EU level .
Although Member States are primarily responsible for designing and implementing Roma integration strategies , the EU can indeed support them .
We need to ensure that efforts at all levels are part of a coherent and consistent policy framework .
I am confident that the EU framework for national Roma integration strategies - which , as the Vice-President has already said , the Commission will present in April - will provide the opportunity for the EU institutions and all stakeholders to join forces and make a tangible difference to the lives of Roma people in Europe .
Madam President , please allow me to begin by recounting a story .
In 2009 , József B and his wife were sentenced by a Hungarian court to 10 months ' imprisonment for the endangerment of minors .
Their crime was that their two children did not attend school .
While they had gone to school , however , the children had been sent home regularly because they turned up in muddy shoes and covered with dirt .
In the Gipsy colony where they live , there are no paved roads , and so every day , the children had to cross a meadow and by the time they got to the school , their feet were covered in mud .
They endured the humiliation of being scolded and sent home for as long as they could , and eventually chose to avoid school more and more often , for which their parents were sentenced to prison .
The children of József B and his wife did not miss school because they did not want to learn .
Rather , it was their circumstances that did not allow them to learn .
Without appropriate clothing and shoes , water and electricity at home , and without school supplies , they did not have a chance to finish even primary school .
Helping communities with multiple disadvantages to catch up is a complex process , which can only be achieved step by step , in keeping with local needs and over the long term .
Europe can assist in this by setting goals based on real data , providing the necessary tools , calling the Member States to account for the accomplishment of the goals set , and monitoring the changes in the situation of the Roma .
It is also designing less bureaucratic , quicker and more transparent methods than before , thereby supporting individual communities in the long run until they can truly provide for their own needs .
It is not enough to build a school for the children of József B. They also need work to make a living , and the parents need to be able to feed and clothe their children and have them educated .
Suitable housing conditions are required , where children can prepare for class , and where they have lighting and heating .
Passable roads are required , which provide access to school and the workplace .
And there is also a need for compassionate words , which can efface the humiliations .
The European Roma strategy will not bring about immediate change , but will give an opportunity for change .
The real question is whether we can create rules and conditions which can help those who are unable to compete for resources and who barely have the capacity to assert their own interests .
Non-discrimination must be guaranteed , and not only in the labour market but in all areas of social life as well .
Segregation in towns and schools must be eliminated , real opportunities must be created and Roma communities must be involved at European , Member State and local levels .
And , above all , political commitment is required from everyone who can contribute to the improvement of the current situation at European level as well .
It is not enough to provide a framework for Member States ' Roma strategies ; a proper European Roma strategy is needed , with European level responsibility , while , of course , not calling into question the responsibility of the Member States .
I call on the Commission and the Council to fully incorporate the contents of the Parliamentary resolution into their documents and to regularly report on any progress to Parliament .
Madam President , I congratulate Mrs Járóka on her excellent cooperation .
The integration of the roughly 12 million Roma in the European Union cannot be achieved without the desire to do so from both the Roma and the majority in the relevant Member State .
Responsibility for the Roma population 's integration lies with both Member States and the European Union .
European resources must be used to improve the engineering infrastructure , build new homes or repair existing ones , provide better education and improve access to the labour market .
There is no general solution which can be applied in the same way everywhere .
Different approaches may be required even within one Member State , in its different regions .
I believe that the beneficiaries of European funds should be involved in building their own home or environment so that they feel a sense of commitment to the solidarity which has been shown to them and they then obviously become good householders .
The political establishment and business community must rediscover the Roma and ensure better access for them to the labour market so that they can contribute to the European Union 's economic development and prosperity .
I truly hope that this report will be properly implemented and will help improve the Roma 's social and economic integration on our continent .
Madam President , it is quite difficult to get everything prepared in just one minute , but here are a few ideas from the Committee on Culture and Education 's point of view regarding this Roma issue , in connection with which Mrs Járóka has done an excellent job .
When I myself was rapporteur for this Committee , we agreed very strongly there and then that this was a matter of human rights .
We have 10 to 12 million Roma in the EU , of which they are full members .
They must also have full rights : human rights in the proper sense of the word .
That also means that they can participate in the decision making of societies and in the European decisionmaking process .
When we look to the future , we know that education is the key issue .
Education is also the right way to integrate the Roma minority into society and encourage them to be active .
Things need to be improved rapidly , with regard , for example , to housing and infrastructure .
Above all , it is most important to emphasise the need for a change in attitudes among us other Europeans .
Segregation and discrimination need to be eliminated .
We have to create proper opportunities and understand that every child and young Roma person is a unique individual , a unique citizen of the European Union , just like all the rest of us .
Madam President , today , we are discussing a European strategy for the Roma minority , which is an important step towards integrating the largest minority in the European Union .
The European Union must face up to the reality of the Roma problem , one which is dictated by the Roma 's economic situation in general , but especially by aspects of their own tradition : nomadic lifestyle and low education level and , by extension , a lack of professional qualifications .
Education represents an opportunity to gain a qualification , a profession and a job , which is an absolutely essential step towards Roma social integration .
Responsibility for integration does not lie entirely with the authorities .
The Roma community needs to understand that it has to make the necessary efforts and that it has to really want to become integrated into society , regardless of country of origin or residence .
The priority areas covered by the strategy must include increasing the level of civic education , adapting the Roma population 's culture and traditions to modern society and promoting vocational training and retraining .
I think that these areas , in addition to education , must be key objectives .
The Member States of origin must make the biggest contribution to the integration process , but an EU approach also has an extremely important role to play .
The future strategy devised by the Commission must propose framework programmes adapted to the nomadic lifestyle of some of the Roma community , which will be developed and implemented in a similar manner in all Member States .
Madam President , my group has visited several Roma communities in Europe and seen the horrendous conditions there .
It is hard to imagine the way in which these people live in some European capitals .
This is a vicious circle from which it is very difficult for them to escape .
I am grateful to both Commissioners for mentioning the issue of poverty .
I believe that the struggle on behalf of the Roma is , above all , a struggle against poverty and not only amongst the Roma .
We must make sure that we do not create a new divide , where the poor people outside the Roma communities are critical of the fact that the Roma are suddenly receiving large amounts of money or a great deal of attention .
We need to make sure that this is a joint struggle which , of course , also aims to combat all forms of discrimination .
The efforts made on a local level are also important .
Very often , it is the case that a lot is done by communities or regions , but unfortunately , not always with the support of the national government .
We need to find a way to introduce European funding at a local level .
Therefore , we have drawn up an alternative resolution , which I will be speaking about shortly .
This resolution has been introduced mainly at the suggestion of Mr Enciu , who will also be explaining his position on this subject , in order to highlight the problem .
I hope that the Commission can come up with a good Roma strategy .
As both Commissioners have rightly said , this is all about a process for monitoring the situation and providing support .
In their words , it is work in progress .
We need to find out what really happens to the funding , because for too long , we have sat by and watched while very little has been done .
I do not want to say that nothing has happened , but it has certainly been far too little and the funds have not been put to the best possible use .
We wish the Hungarian Presidency every success .
We will give you our full support on this issue , so that we can produce a new strategy and so that you can say that this is one of the successful achievements of your Presidency .
You have our support .
Finally , I would like to thank Mrs Járóka for her excellent report .
Because we want to support her report , we will be withdrawing our alternative resolution .
We simply wanted to highlight the problem relating to local authorities and communities .
However , we also want to support Mrs Járóka 's report as a clear statement from the European Parliament .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , we have finally come to the moment when we will have to vote on this report .
In my view , this is not necessarily a moment of celebration : I prefer to see it as a moment when we have to be wise and to look at what we have achieved so far and what we want to achieve in the future .
However , because I am aware of the huge amount of work that has been put into this report , please allow me to congratulate and thank not only the rapporteur and the other Members involved , but also the staff of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and our policy advisers .
When we first began discussing this issue , we were all hoping that the Union was actually moving towards an EU strategy on Roma inclusion .
Instead , we will have a framework , and then the Member States will decide whether or not to draw up their own strategies .
I am afraid , given past experience - and please allow me to be pessimistic here - that this may be a process that is very much money driven , funding driven .
In my view , people in the developed countries ' discovered ' the Roma not necessarily because they recognised the bad conditions in which Roma were living in their countries of origin , but because they were bothered by the presence of Roma in the streets and on the margins of cities .
This is about more than funding .
It is very much about the basic human rights of this population group .
The Commissioner spoke of work in progress .
I hope that we shall see not only work but also some real progress .
Madam President , unfortunately , every day in the press , we read accounts of discriminative or racist acts against the Roma .
Therefore , this communication from the Commission has been eagerly awaited by the Roma themselves , of course , and by all their supporters and anyone who attaches importance to the European Union 's fundamental values .
The Commission will therefore have to develop a framework , a European strategy , for the national action plans .
Its responsibility will extend far beyond the development of this European framework for the national action plans , because the Member States will make progress on this subject only if they are given a strong incentive by the Commission to commit themselves to it .
This will require - as the report explains very well - an extremely precise evaluation of the results obtained , with the use of benchmark criteria and indicators .
It will also require the involvement of all interested parties and Roma communities in the first instance .
I believe that it is very important to make the connection with the Council of Europe 's programme on the training of Roma mediators .
This is an essential condition if the inclusion projects are to be crowned with success at regional level .
Next , the European Commission also needs to get involved through its own projects , run by itself , pilot projects - that is what this report proposes - which could be run , for example , in the micro-regions that we have spoken about , so that exemplary , remarkable projects can convince all interested parties to become involved in this inclusion process .
I believe , then , that the European Commission should also be able to use its right to officially complain when the values , European legislation and national action plans are not as they should be , bearing in mind equal access to all rights , non-discrimination and freedom of movement .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , to get right to the heart of the matter , this is all about introducing a uniform , mandatory EU strategy , instead of the 27 individual , differing strategies in the Member States .
Only when we implement a uniform strategy of this kind will it be possible for the Roma and Sinti living in the EU to be treated as equal EU citizens .
What is it all about ?
It is about guaranteeing free movement for everyone .
It is about abolishing Roma special schools immediately and , if I can express it like this , ending the apartheid system for Roma in Europe .
It is about equal access to education , healthcare and social services .
We are not doing these people a favour .
We are granting them their legal rights .
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left strongly reject the idea of a separate policy for Roma and Sinti .
We need a policy which takes an integrative approach right from the start and which compensates for the disadvantages suffered by Roma and Sinti , for example , in relation to access to work , the right to settle or the use of EU funding .
There is , though , one thing I would like to add .
None of this will have any effect unless we resolve one problem which involves combating racism and the stigmatisation of Roma and Sinti throughout Europe .
We must see this as one of Europe 's central tasks and take ruthless measures to combat discrimination .
We must not tolerate a two-faced approach among the Member States and in the EU as a whole .
We must speak with one voice .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not agree with the report where it says that the Commission should dictate policy on the Roma to the Member States .
This approach does not obey the principle of subsidiarity , if it is true - as indeed it is - that these measures must be conceived and carried out at local , regional and national levels , since their impact is then on the regions and their native populations .
I completely agree with inclusion , not discrimination , but I am still waiting to hear from Commissioner Reding when Roma camps will finally be allowed in her country , the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg , for if I am not mistaken , they are not allowed there .
This report seems to be a little unbalanced , because so many paragraphs call for support for the Roma , be they men , women , children , the elderly ( ... ) .
None of them call for any measures to severely punish those Roma who show anti-social behaviour , for example .
Who stops Roma children going to school , if it is not certain Roma parents ?
I believe these are topics that we need to have the courage to spell out clearly , defying political correctness .
It is not the syrup of do-goodism but serious , surgical measures that will enable us to lance the boil of rackets , child exploitation and organ trafficking .
Madam President , the word on everybody 's lips , whatever the subject being discussed , is Roma .
I blame that Mr Sarkozy for pretending to expel them .
I took it for granted that they would feature in the debate on the financial transactions tax .
Every time a Roma horse dealer tried to charge an extra couple of euro a leg , out would jump a bowler-hatted tax-gatherer and sinner and demand one of the poor animal 's limbs as tribute to President Barroso .
When the time for the debate on the EU strategy on the Atlantic arrived , I fully expected it to be proposed that a stretch of that ocean should be reserved for the water-borne branch of that noble tribe .
They might sell fish hooks to passing boats and promise to cover hulls with a quantity of tarmacadam that they just had left over .
I think we should find a particular member of the Roma , preferably with disabilities and conflicting sexualities .
We could then make this person president of the Commission .
He would start by selling this place off and nobody would dare to complain .
( HU ) Madam President , first of all , I would like to congratulate Mrs Járóka .
Her many years of work have reached an important milestone today .
After a long struggle , it has now become clear that the issue of the Roma is a European issue , and this holds true even if - as my fellow Member , Mr Borghezio pointed out - we must look for the solutions at Member State level .
However , a single European area indeed requires a single strategy , too .
We cannot approach the Roma strategy solely from a cultural perspective .
This is not just a minority issue .
Similarly , it cannot be solved solely by means of social policy .
It is therefore important for the strategy to include comprehensive and targeted measures , and formulate focused objectives .
Of the key areas of the strategy , education and access to education must be highlighted .
The reason for this is that education is a fundamental aspect of employability .
In several Member States , there is a large number of Roma groups caught in the trap of poverty , and there will never be a sufficient number of jobs for them , because without qualifications , they are essentially unemployable .
The training of Roma girls merits special attention , because it would appear that they tend to become early school leavers more often , and also because girls are exploited to a much greater extent in work at home .
( SK ) Madam President , we are dealing with another highly sensitive topic and , in my opinion , the European Parliament must resolve it , the Commission must resolve it and the Council must resolve it , because Roma inclusion is now no longer possible at the EU Member State level alone .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats has been involved with this issue for a very long time .
In the past eight months alone , our working group has visited almost all of the Member States where the Roma situation is often very complicated indeed .
We were able to visit not only settlements where Roma live in extremely poor conditions , but also to see some good examples .
This includes examples where there has been very good cooperation at the local authority level with the Roma living in these settlements , and we also saw good examples where local politicians had made a real effort to resolve the situation to the benefit of the Roma .
Our problem is that we also encounter enormous levels of prejudice in our societies - and I mean now in those Member States where the problems with Roma are perhaps worse than in other Member States .
These are the prejudices of the majority section of the population , and I therefore believe that any action plan that you submit to us , Commissioner , will have to include a way to tackle this huge level of prejudice on the part of the majority population , to explain to the majority section of society that help for the Roma and the inclusion of the Roma in society benefits not only the Roma but the whole of society , and therefore the majority as well .
Madam President , I very much welcome the Járóka report because it gives us an opportunity to mention some specific points .
The Roma inclusion strategy must be guided by an insider approach that is designed by Roma for Roma , which means empowerment of Roma , inclusion in the decision-making process , hiring of Roma staff and mediators in key positions at local , national and EU level .
Unlawful practices which continue with impunity in EU Member States have to stop : violence against Roma , violations of their right to free movement , increasing activities of extremist political parties and politicians , systematic segregation of Romany children in education , widespread residential segregation of Roma , trafficking in human beings , denial of access to healthcare and social services , coercive sterilisation of Romany women .
Many reasons thus justify this report and many more reasons justify this strategy , so I welcome very much the report , the strategy and , as you say , Commissioner , let us keep up the work .
( DE ) Madam President , while mainstream society in the EU is ageing quickly , the Roma population is growing rapidly in size .
In Hungary , where the Roma currently make up around 6 % to 8 % of the population , they will exceed 50 % of the working population by 2050 .
Of course , this makes it all the worse that the life of the Roma in the EU is characterised , as it always has been , by unemployment , a level of education that is well below average , organised crime and prostitution , as well as a retreat into a parallel society .
This report addresses a few of the problems , but in a one-sided way .
Integration is not a one-way street .
The Roma must make a contribution to all of this .
They must send their children to school and become integrated into the labour market .
Women in Roma communities , which have old-fashioned structures , are often in a particularly poor situation .
Their lack of education and their exclusion from the labour market , which will only become worse unless we act now , will exacerbate even further the integration problems caused by demographic changes .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is with great pleasure and pride that we are discussing this strategy here this evening : pleasure because Mrs Járóka has done an excellent job , for which I thank her , and pride because it is an initiative that we in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) have very much wanted .
It is an excellent report because , of course , it condemns any kind of discrimination or racism against the Roma , and we like it because it promotes true integration by taking an admirable cultural approach .
We like it because it not only sets out rights but also highlights certain needs .
We also dealt with it in the opinion that we gave as the Committee on Culture and Education .
I am thinking , in particular , about the whole part relating to schooling for Roma children , in which we point out that schooling is both a right and a duty , in which the children 's families must also be involved .
I would also point out that the future strategy for the Roma minority should focus on education as the core instrument for promoting social inclusion .
Alongside the promotion of Roma culture , it is also important to recognise that the Roma should make an effort to learn about the customs and culture of the peoples with whom they live , so as to facilitate real integration .
Perhaps the only thing missing in this report is a reference to Directive 2004 / 38 / EC on the free movement of EU citizens .
In this regard , we have been waiting for a long time for the Commission to give us an interpretation of how to put it into practice , and we now need to know what it is right and fair to expect the Member States to do .
For everything else , I again thank the rapporteur for all that she has succeeded in doing .
( RO ) Madam President , I appreciate the particularly fine job done by Mrs Járóka in drafting this report , and I sincerely congratulate her on it .
However , I want to point out that the reason for the failure of Roma integration policies hitherto has not been for the want of strategies , published plans or even funds .
Proper integration can only be achieved through involving the Roma community , the Roma themselves , in other words , those people who , along with the local authorities , have the ability and , in particular , the desire to implement the programmes .
Who is better aware of this community 's deep-rooted problems , if not the community itself ?
Not to mention the local administration which handles the problems on a day-to-day basis .
Implementation of the future strategy must be based on structured dialogue and cooperation between the Roma communities , the local authorities and the non-governmental sector .
Roma must switch from the role of spectators to the role of players involved in turning these measures intended for them into a reality .
The time has come for us to turn words into actions .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Járóka , I very much appreciate your report .
You have worked very hard on it and you have also taken us on a number of visits to the area in Hungary where you come from .
Since then , the Committee on Regional Policy has been to Romania in order to witness the situation on the ground there .
Doing that really allows you to see the state of things .
You are given a warm welcome and people play music , but there is also another side to it : the backwardness and lack of integration .
For those reasons , I , as rapporteur , addressed that change at the beginning of last year in the Regional Fund .
It is now possible to allocate 4 % of regional funds to housing for vulnerable groups , in this case , the Roma .
We must admit that the funding falls short of what is necessary and that the programmes are not primarily benefiting the Roma 's housing needs .
Now , that is really crazy .
Europe is offering opportunities but , on the other hand , no one is making use of them .
That also applies to the Social Fund .
We should definitely conduct that debate together .
During the upcoming meeting of the Committee on Regional Policy , the Romanian Udrea will come to discuss this with us .
The Committee framework will offer the opportunity for greater governance when countries fail to support regions and local authorities .
I , indeed , have a lot of expectations on that score .
Sometimes you even have to resort to coercion , if the usual arguments do not work .
Your pilot projects would be a very good set-up .
( RO ) Madam President , I , too , join those who appreciate the efforts and work of those who have drafted the report which we are debating today .
At the same time , however , we must be realistic and realise how many documents we have about the Roma situation which are not always reflected in the concrete results visible on the ground .
Officially , none of the Member States have any legislative obstacles or discriminatory policies , implicitly or explicitly , which will affect the Roma .
However , forms of discrimination do exist and have been alluded to in this Chamber , if we refer to the values declared and adopted by the European Union .
We must also acknowledge that there are cultural differences which sometimes seem irreconcilable .
I believe that , more than any other policy aimed at social integration , education is the most powerful instrument for improving this community 's situation .
At the same time , we must bear in mind the particular characteristics of this ethnic group , which , on quite a few occasions , are the cause of their problems .
For example , Romania has implemented positive discrimination mechanisms , which includes reserving special places in secondary schools and university faculties .
However , many of these places , funded by public money , have disappointingly not been taken up .
The report puts forward important and necessary measures .
I hope that they will be implemented by all Member State governments .
At the same time , cooperation is required from the Roma community , which must assume its responsibility and change its situation for the better .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioners , to start with , I wish to thank , in particular , the rapporteur , Mrs Járóka , and the shadow rapporteurs for an excellent report , which presents Parliament 's robust guidelines for building a common Roma strategy for the EU .
The Commission should draft a strategy with reference to them , one that would supplement and support the Member States ' own actions , because it is the Member States that have , and will continue to have in the future , the main responsibility for their own citizens .
Any future strategy must be built on a comprehensive and concrete approach and cooperation between the Commission , the Member States and , in particular , Roma organisations .
My own country , Finland , has been prepared to offer its own national Roma strategy for common use .
It is also vitally important that the Roma should be able to participate in , and actually influence , the planning of measures aimed at improving their position .
They must not become objects of policy managed from on high .
Nor will any shortterm project to improve the socio-economic status of the Roma produce any structural social changes , and so the implementation of Roma policy must be closely linked to national developments in different areas of life .
Similarly , the EU 's financial systems must be closely tied to peer review processes .
I would finally like to propose to the Commission the notion that the monitoring of Roma policy should itself have a permanent monitoring system .
We need to develop a monitoring system for the Member States for the implementation of Roma issues , one that would have a permanent structure .
( HU ) Madam President , Secretary of State , Commissioner Reding , Commissioner Andor , first of all , please allow me to congratulate Mrs Járóka on her excellent report and on all the work she has been doing here consistently for the protection of European Roma communities since 2004 .
I would like to approach today 's debate from the perspective of children , because today , all children in Europe should be guaranteed access , in practice as well , to opportunities and upward mobility , whether it be children belonging to a majority community or to a minority one .
This means that all children should be given the chance of physical and mental development , which involves daily warm meals just as much as the right to education .
All this , which should , of course , exist today as rights of children , including Roma children , should , on the other hand , exist as obligations and responsibilities of the state and , I stress , of parents .
Today , the percentage of children living with multiple disadvantages in extreme poverty is 19 % at EU level , and a sizeable proportion of these children are Roma .
Using the Járóka report as its basis , a EU level Roma strategy must therefore strengthen Member States ' and social solidarity , for example , by means of crisis maps , and must also encourage local initiatives .
It is , after all , in the interest of us all to prove that it is possible to change our attitude to our environment .
I welcome the fact that the Hungarian Presidency treats the development of this Roma strategy as one of its foremost priorities and is in close cooperation with Mrs Járóka on this matter .
( HU ) Madam President , the issue of the social exclusion and the economic and social situation of the Roma has provided the grounds for debate since the accession of the Central and Eastern European countries .
However , this does not mean that this phenomenon had not been well known even before that .
I myself live in a Member State , Romania , where the otherwise diverse Roma community has lived side by side with Romanians and Hungarians for decades .
Although these relations were never entirely free of frictions , tensions have increased over the two decades since the fall of communism .
In the former communist countries , it was , in fact , the Roma who were the greatest losers of the transition to a market economy , because the types of activities from which these communities had traditionally been making a living disappeared or have been on the wane .
We have a shared responsibility ; all of us are responsible , but the Roma communities are responsible for their own fates as well , and so is Europe for not having acknowledged the problem until now .
The key message of Mrs Járóka 's report is that the prohibition and complete elimination of discrimination is far from being enough to solve this , I repeat , European problem .
( FR ) Madam President , I should like to commend the very honest commitment of the Hungarian Presidency and Commissioners Andor and Reding .
Nevertheless , Mrs Reding , we need to clarify the fundamental principles for protecting the rights of national minorities in Europe .
Firstly , the status of any national minority is not a purely national issue ; it is a European issue .
Secondly , national minorities could be integrated effectively on the basis of the mutual shared , but asymmetric , responsibility of the majority and the minority .
The majority has more responsibility , but the minority still has some .
National minorities should be integrated without the need for forced assimilation .
Finally , the ban on discrimination is not sufficient .
Only preferential treatment for positive actions can contribute to the real integration of national minorities .
( RO ) Madam President , the socio-economic integration of the Roma population poses a challenge in the majority of EU states .
This is a diverse population , which is large in number , but which needs to be treated as a whole .
The fate of this community has become an electoral campaign issue on quite a few occasions .
To be able to make a proper contribution to the welfare of Roma citizens , the main priority is to use and work properly with resources from the Structural Funds .
Building new houses and renovating existing ones , improving access to utilities , as well as education , healthcare and jobs , are viable solutions for enabling us to achieve our objective .
At the same time , we must utilise the particular qualities of the Roma population , their customs , culture and traditional handicrafts .
By designating a European Year of Roma Integration , we would help raise awareness about this community 's problems .
Grassroots and performance sport is also a definite way to integrate the Roma population .
Madam President , with about 1.5 million members of this minority , Romania is home to the largest Roma community in Europe .
The social integration of Roma lags behind , being considered Utopian by many , both in the administration and in the community .
Actually , the Romanian Government deals fully with the integration of this minority .
Therefore , we need a European strategy to frame the national efforts aimed at providing socio-economic inclusion for the Roma , education , training opportunities and job assistance , especially for women .
It is crucial to support efforts to help equip them for continued employment in order to avoid social exclusion and poverty .
I strongly support the idea that the Commission should present annually a follow-up of EU strategy on Roma inclusion .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Járóka and also Mrs Kinga Göncz , and I welcome the commitment of the Council and the Commission .
( RO ) Madam President , the fact that we are discussing today the drafting of a European strategy for Roma citizens is recognition at last that this problem comes under an EU and not only a national remit .
With a view to ensuring better implementation of this strategy , I support the idea of setting up a European Roma agency .
This will enable us to successfully put an end to discrimination on ethnic grounds , with all the consequences this entails .
If there is going to be a system for monitoring the strategy 's implementation , it must be applied to all Member States and not only to those with a large population of this community .
There is the risk that the EU funds managed by NGOs will not produce concrete results .
Public authorities should act as beneficiary organisations for the projects .
I also support the idea expressed in the report about creating a European crisis map , featuring the micro-regions in the EU hardest hit by poverty , social exclusion and discrimination .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am grateful for this discussion in Parliament .
I believe the Commission will benefit a great deal in the run-up to the delivery of the European framework , and it means a lot to me personally when we develop the future cohesion policy , especially the future of the European Social Fund .
I understand from this discussion that we have to go forward with simplification .
We have to go forward with making more room in the ESF for social inclusion .
We have to develop a territorial approach that suits the specific social conditions of the regions where most Roma live , and we have to do more to create employment for unskilled or low skilled people .
I want , however , to clarify two things very briefly .
Firstly , poverty plays a big role , but we should not believe that the situation of the Roma as a category is identical with that of poor people in general , because poverty and unemployment are much higher among the Roma than in mainstream society .
That is why I believe Europe 2020 is a good framework and will help in developing the appropriate strategies , policies and financial support .
Finally , we come to the question of why the Commission is working on a European framework as opposed to a European strategy as such .
I have no time to elaborate on this , but it is simply because of the diversity of the reality on the ground .
There is a common European problem but how it appears in various Member States , and how it should be translated into national strategies , differs from Romania to France or from Slovakia to Portugal , and we have to be aware of that .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , just to add to what my colleague has said , the discussion today was very valuable , as was most of what was written in your presentation .
It will be taken into consideration in the elaboration of the work that the Commission is doing at the moment .
The EU framework for national Roma strategies will first be presented to the European Platform for Roma Inclusion because we need - as many parliamentarians have said - to include the Roma population in our work and for them to take on their responsibility .
It is also very important - and here I look to the Presidency - that there will be a follow-up of the work we do in the coming months so that we can see how all the projects will be implemented in practice .
I agree with the Members who said that the regional funds are unfortunately not utilised as they could be and I also agree with those who say that the local authorities are sometimes the ones who can best find a solution .
We have to help them to move forward .
The Free Movement Directive has been questioned by some Members .
The analysis of the transposition by all Member States has been finalised .
In 2010 , we visited 21 Member States and six visits are planned .
A significant number of Member States have amended their rules or are in the process of amending their rules , so the Free Movement Directive will be much better applied than it was before .
Madam President , Commissioners , truly , the timing of today 's debate could not have been better .
This is the best possible timing , because in April , the Commission will publish its communication and we then wish to incorporate that communication into the work of the Council .
This means that after the debates conducted in the competent Council formations , we will also ask for the support of the European Council in the adoption of the conclusions .
That is to say , there must be commitment to the Roma issue at the highest level - at the level of Heads of State or Government , on the part of the European Union .
I would like to add a few thoughts to the debate about the question whether we are dealing with an ethnic issue or rather with some sort of social or economic challenge .
I would not , and cannot , resolve this debate .
I believe that we are dealing with both and that it is important that we maintain both approaches .
As Commissioner Andor has said , it is a social and economic issue in that extreme poverty still represents a general problem in many places in the EU Member States .
At the same time , there is an ethnic discrimination of sorts within extreme poverty , and we must therefore pay special attention to the Roma when providing opportunities .
However , if we do not provide any , there is no point in us demanding access , on a human rights basis , to the little to no opportunities , because then there is nothing to access .
However , if we do provide opportunities , then in the process of creating them , we must pay attention that the Roma , too , have access to them and are not elbowed out .
I believe that we all need to take a new approach .
It would be good if we could identify the opportunities inherent in this problem ; if we could shift our perception of the Roma issue from problem to opportunity .
Just imagine what a tremendous workforce base , what a workforce asset and potential this group of people , this crowd , has in terms of internal labour supply .
As has been said on several occasions , improvements in education are the best investment .
Indeed , education is investment in the future , and this is a key point when we are talking about people who are inactive , not just because they have no jobs and no opportunity to study , but who are inactive in a deeper sense of the word , because they have given up hope .
They believe that they would not stand a chance anyway , and therefore no longer expect anything from life .
Maybe they have reached a point where all they expect from the state is to provide them with aid .
It is very important to enable these people to change from objects of these measures into subjects , and to participate in this themselves , as partners .
Little has been said today about good practices .
I consider it important that we keep a record of good practices , and I believe it is just as important that we do the same with bad practices , because we can often learn more from the faults of bad practices than from good practices .
I also believe that the examination of funds , the examination of the use of funds , and here I am referring to European Union funds , indicates the presence of both good and bad practices .
And finally , it is indeed perhaps the most important task for us to convince the majority ; to convince the non-Roma majority in Europe , that integration does not exclusively represent some sort of humanitarian dictate , but it is also in their fundamental interest .
After all , Europe belongs to all of us , and the majority can only feel well if the minority feels well , too .
Thank you very much for this debate and I trust that we can continue to count on your support .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I will be very brief .
I would like to thank you very much for all your valuable comments .
They reinforce my and my very good shadow rapporteurs ' view that political slogans will never become a reality without a proper legal basis , financial support and incentives as well as an EU mechanism to coordinate the actions of the stakeholders , ranging from local governments up to the Council and harnessing the advantages of multi-level governance .
This will place the whole situation in a new light .
I firmly believe that , on the basis of the tasks , objectives , principles and instruments defined by all the Treaties and the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and furthermore based on the shared competences as well as the supporting , coordinating and complementary actions of the Union , a very strong strategy on Roma inclusion can come into existence .
To conclude , I would like to express the hope I have formed , over the past six years , that the upcoming Commission Communication will be able to endorse these points and provide a very good basis on which the Hungarian Presidency can pledge its commitment to launching this European Roma strategy .
I am very grateful for this .
I am aware that this European strategy is not going to solve the problem ; I know that a huge amount depends on us , the Roma .
Words and promises mean nothing without actions outside of Brussels and in the Roma settlements .
Governments and Roma must do what they have signed up to : take determined action to deliver tangible results .
We understand our responsibility in this and we are fully in favour of our common partnership .
This process for us Roma , and I believe for the whole European Union , is about much more than mutual trust .
It is also about building a community of values that we can all share , and that we can all enjoy , to be able to really challenge the difficulties that we have been discussing here over the last six years .
I thank you very much for all your support and I would like to join Renate Weber and the other shadow rapporteurs in thanking the secretariat of the Committee on Civil Liberties and all the advisers who , with us , have been fighting very hard for this .
The debate is closed .
I am sorry I have had to be so brutal with the speaking time but we are , as you can see , extraordinarily late in starting the next item on the agenda , which is Question Time .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Last year 's events involving the expulsion of Roma from one country to another and the discrimination against this ethnic group and its segregation from society have prompted the European Union to take concrete action .
This includes the European Union strategy on Roma inclusion , initiated by the European Parliament .
The inclusion of this ethnic group is not merely an obligation in terms of human rights , but also an economic necessity , and not only is it a moral imperative , but also in the strict financial interest of all the Member States .
Moreover , given the extent of exclusion , the overall inclusion of Roma is essentially an issue of human rights .
I would like to underline that by adopting a common strategy for the whole of Europe on Roma inclusion , we in the European Parliament are demonstrating that the European Union is not just leaving Roma integration problems to be addressed by the Member States themselves .
As we have seen from recent events , these problems are impossible to solve purely at national level , and consequently there is a need for close cooperation between the European Union and the Member States .
It is also very important for the European Commission and the Member States to mobilise existing EU strategies and measures and to coordinate actions , and find common ground in order to ensure the social and economic inclusion of Roma .
The strategy will only be actively implemented once a common European approach on issues of European Roma integration has been found .
Furthermore , we should involve representatives of the Roma community as much as possible in the process of drafting EU policy on Roma issues .
The report on the EU strategy on Roma inclusion lists the problems and difficulties facing Roma communities in the EU .
The nature of poverty has changed substantially over the last two decades in Central and South-Eastern Europe .
The political and economic changes have led to the break-up of traditional communities , and the Roma have thereby lost the option of being mobile , and have become the most excluded and least educated subgroup in society .
The Roma population has , moreover , displayed the typical trait of demographic growth .
While the majority of society is ageing , the proportion of Roma in society is rising through high population growth .
All this makes it clear that , unless employment levels can be increased among the Roma , and unless they are better integrated into the majority of society , the costs of maintaining the situation at a bearable level will constantly rise , including costs for social assistance and benefits , essential costs for education , additional costs for providing security , administrative costs for supervising social spending and also higher costs for healthcare .
Roma integration is therefore not merely a moral duty and a duty in terms of human rights protection but , above all , an economic necessity as well .
Most of the measures implemented so far are so-called legally unenforceable regulations .
However , if there is to be progress in this matter , the EU strategy on Roma inclusion must go beyond this so-called soft law and must be included in the instruments established through primary law .
I believe we all now know that the Roma issue is not just a problem for some Member States or potential candidate countries .
It is a pan-European problem , which must be resolved without delay .
The biggest barrier to Roma inclusion with the majority society is poverty and low levels of education .
Education is the key to raising living standards and to the constantly sought-for creation of civil society .
Job creation is extremely difficult and , as a member of numerous youth organisations , I know what the current situation is for young people on the labour market .
The situation is many times worse among the Roma population , resulting in the marginalisation of the Roma and increased criminality , which only further exacerbates the situation .
It is not so long ago that France deported the Bulgarian and Romanian Roma .
These actions came under scrutiny not only because of a suspected breach of basic human rights , but also EU regulations .
I therefore fully agree with the Commission statement that it is necessary to contribute to better cooperation between the interested parties at the domestic , international and especially European levels .
Despite constituting the largest ethnic minority , the Roma community in European Union Member States still suffers discrimination and segregation .
I agree with a number of my fellow Members who said that it is very important to create a strategy on Roma inclusion at European level .
In every Member State , we have excellent examples of how we should reduce Roma exclusion in various areas : education , culture , employment , healthcare or even Roma participation in political and civil life .
However , such initiatives are not visible enough .
In my opinion , the European Union would therefore be an appropriate platform to improve cooperation between the Member States , to pool and disseminate good practice and experience , or to provide funding .
Although the EU level is very important , I believe that the most effective results can be achieved by acting at local or regional level .
Only in specific localities or towns will we gain a better understanding of those areas ' problems , needs and social environment and , as a result , projects being implemented will be closer to those for whom they are intended .
I am following the Roma issue very closely because I live in Eastern Slovakia , where there is a Roma majority .
I support the draft resolution concerning the strategy on Roma inclusion .
Today , on 8 March , we celebrate 100 years of defending women 's rights .
We are also debating discrimination against women today , and when debating this strategy , it is therefore also necessary to talk about discrimination against women from minority groups in particular .
The Roma are among the most disadvantaged population groups throughout Europe .
I have read the statement of Mrs Járóka : ' Poverty threatens the new generation - not on account of their Roma origins , but on account of their parents ' unemployment ' .
I would like to add that this is also on account of social exclusion .
Unemployment will continue , particularly for the Roma population , but we know how to integrate Roma into cultural activities and into civic life immediately .
The gender equality problem is worse in minority groups .
In relation to Roma inclusion , we must therefore not forget dialogue with Roma women , who have a greater emotional influence on their children and on the future generation .
First of all , I would like to express my sincere appreciation for the fact that the Hungarian EU Presidency included the issue of Roma inclusion among its priorities .
It stands as eloquent proof of the Hungarian Government 's commitment in this regard that the rapporteur , Mrs Lívia Járóka , who is the only Roma Member of the European Parliament , is one of the Hungarian delegates of the European People 's Party , and that Mr Zoltán Balog , the presenter of the case , head of the newly established State Secretariat for Inclusion , is engaged in supporting the betterment of the Roma people , who suffer from multiple disadvantages .
Based on these facts , we can rightly conclude that the Hungarian EU Presidency is leading Europe by good example in the settlement of issues relating to the Roma .
With regard to the Roma strategy , I believe it is important to stress that the integration of the 12 million Roma living in the EU is a common issue for Europe , whose resolution shall require the contribution of both the individual Member States and the EU institutions .
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán aptly pointed out that if we do not wish to ' export ' the problems of the Roma - who live in extreme poverty and social and ethnic exclusion - through ' nomadisation , ' that is , emigration to the developed EU countries , then we must find a solution to their current , untenable situation through joint action and with combined efforts .
I wish the European Parliament , the European Commission , the European Council and , last but not least , the Hungarian EU Presidency , successful work in developing and bringing to a final conclusion this momentous strategy for the integration of the Roma by June this year .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0019 / 2011 ) .
Before I start Question Time , because we are so late , I want to say a couple of things about the manner in which I will be conducting Question Time .
I would be grateful if everybody would pay attention , including , if I may ask politely , the Commissioners who will be responding .
I will take , by way of supplementary questions , only the author of the question because we do not have enough time to do more if we are to get through enough questions .
I would ask the Commissioners who are responding or delivering their first answer not , please , to read us a long essay .
We would like a very nice answer and an informative answer to our question , so that you can have some dialogue with the questioner .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
( DE ) Madam President , I must admit that I support your arguments about the time available .
However , I would like to ask you to take one thing into account .
The Members who want to ask questions are not the ones who are responsible for the fact that we are running so late .
My problem is that I put a question to the Council concerning a matter which will now be dealt with as Question No 2 .
My question to the Council was identical to this , but Question Time with the Council has now been cancelled , without a replacement .
This is , of course , rather unfortunate , and I would like to ask you to review your otherwise completely logical and understandable approach with regard to this one question .
I have no alternative in the circumstances we find ourselves in tonight .
I am very sorry for all the questioners , but the best I can do is to get through as many questions as possible and let questioners have their moment .
It is not a position I relish , and you will know , I think , that we are taking steps to move to a new more real form of Question Time to reflect the new situation we find ourselves in after the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
The sooner that happens , frankly the better , but let us now proceed .
Part one
Subject : Framework directive on minimum income in the EU
Last year , Parliament adopted a report on the role of minimum income in combating poverty and promoting an inclusive society in Europe , in which it maintained that a minimum income should be guaranteed in the EU under a framework directive .
Given that there are already more than 85 million people in Europe living below the poverty line , does the Commission not consider it necessary to draw up a framework directive on a scheme to guarantee a sufficient minimum income in Europe as a whole ?
Member of the Commission . - People have often said that societies should be judged by the way they treat their weakest members .
Clearly , if we fail to provide adequate support for persons in need , we are likely to exclude them even further , and so make it harder to integrate them into society and bring them onto the labour market .
The Commission believes that , in addition to acting as automatic stabilisers , minimum income schemes can play an important role in protecting the most vulnerable from the worst effects of the crisis by providing safety nets .
The Commission recommendation on the active inclusion of people excluded from the labour market and the EPSCO Council Conclusions of 17 December 2008 on common active inclusion principles to combat poverty more effectively both highlight the importance of access to adequate resources , alongside quality services and inclusive labour markets .
The recommendation calls on the Member States in particular to ' recognise the individual 's basic right to resources and social assistance sufficient to lead a life that is compatible with human dignity as part of a comprehensive , consistent drive to combat social exclusion ' .
The approach outlined in the recommendation has proved to be a step in the right direction , especially during the economic crisis .
But more needs to be done to fully implement active inclusion reforms .
As the Commission announced in its communication on the European Platform against Poverty and Social Exclusion , it will report in 2012 on the implementation of the common principles on active inclusion , focusing , inter alia , on the effectiveness of minimum income schemes .
It will propose action based on that assessment , including ways in which EU financial instruments could support active inclusion .
( LT ) Madam President , Commissioner , thank you for your reply , but you did not answer my question .
My question was worded thus - does the European Commission intend to initiate a framework directive on ensuring sufficient minimum incomes , because otherwise , we definitely will not overcome poverty .
Even last year , during the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , poverty grew in individual Member States .
Commissioner , one other point - since a really high number of elderly people are falling into poverty , how would you feel about the Commission initiating uniform criteria as regards a minimum pension at European Union level ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission has advocated a minimum income and also a minimum wage , but we are speaking here about Member State competences and Member State responsibilities , and the subsidiarity principle comes into this discussion very strongly .
In the crisis period , I agree , we have to pay specific attention to members of the vulnerable groups in society , especially those who are left without an income because they are also out of work , but we have to encourage the Member States to use various means - and this is just one option - to prevent people falling into poverty .
So the room for legislative initiatives here is extremely small , even though , at certain times , the political demand for them is very significant .
With regard to the poverty of older people , this is a very complex subject , on which we have to work in the fields of employment , social services and social protection , and this leads me to the campaign next year on active ageing , which will be supported by policies in the areas of healthcare and preserving health , and lifelong learning , because we believe that the biggest progress we can make in terms of the living conditions and social inclusion of older people will be in enhancing participation in the labour market .
We can then build additional policies on to that .
Subject : Energy-saving light bulbs
Is the Commission aware of the study by the German Federal Environment Agency , according to which energy-saving light bulbs pose a risk of causing poisoning , because of the mercury contained in them , if they break in the domestic environment ?
What conclusions does the Commission draw from this study ?
Is the Commission prepared to reconsider its decision to withdraw conventional light bulbs from the market ?
Is the Commission prepared to suspend the ban on conventional light bulbs , at least for private households ?
Madam President , Mrs Koch-Mehrin , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is aware of the report from the German Federal Environment Agency and has , of course , once again carefully investigated the facts .
The background to the situation is as follows .
As a result of a decision by the European Council in 2007 and subsequent resolutions by the European Parliament and the Energy Council - in other words , after wide-ranging consultation with Parliament and the Member States - the Commission submitted its proposal for an ecodesign regulation in 2009 .
This included the gradual changeover from conventional light bulbs to energy-saving bulbs which make more efficient use of electricity .
We believe that in the European lighting and light bulb market , it will be possible to achieve a total saving of 40 billion kilowatt hours , which corresponds to electricity costs of between EUR 5 billion and EUR 10 billion .
The directive includes a number of safety measures , with the focus being on mercury and maximum limits .
These were lowered significantly once again in September last year in order to further reduce the potential risks to the public .
The findings in the study commissioned by the German Federal Environment Agency have led us to ask the Scientific Committee on Health and Environmental Risks to issue another statement .
After reviewing the entire body of scientific literature , the committee has come to the conclusion that broken compact fluorescent bulbs are very unlikely to present any risk to human health .
However , there is one problem in this area .
The studies are based on trials involving adults .
Of course , it is obvious that children need to be considered separately , which is why we are working together with the German Federal Environment Agency to produce the appropriate results for children as quickly as possible .
We are monitoring the situation very carefully .
I am in contact with the aforementioned agency so that we can carry out a rapid , joint evaluation of any additional tests it organises .
Our overall conclusion is that , because of the need for confidence among everyone involved , we will continue with the gradual implementation of the regulation .
However , we will be happy to report to Parliament again if findings emerge which could give rise to a different evaluation .
This is the situation at the moment .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Oettinger , it is good that you have commissioned the Scientific Committee on Health and Environmental Risks to look at this issue again .
I am pleased about this .
However , the question remains : How can we explain to the citizens of Europe that they have to allow something into their houses under EU regulations which represents a health hazard for their children ?
You have children and you know how it is .
Things often get broken .
Mr Leichtfried from Austria and I are very concerned about this .
How can we make it clear that this is something dangerous ?
We do not seem to be able to learn from past mistakes .
However , you were not responsible for the original decision , so you can show a willingness to learn without losing face .
You could have said that we will withdraw this ban , at least for private households .
Would you be prepared to reconsider your decision ?
Madam President , in answer to the question , I would like to point out that bulbs will be available on the market immediately after the changeover which will not present any potential risk .
The question relates to CFL , or compact fluorescent lamps .
For this reason , we need to consider increasing our public relations activities on the ecodesign directive so that we can inform citizens about LED lights and new-generation halogen bulbs .
These will allow us to achieve both things : our environmental and energy-saving goals under the terms of the regulation , on the one hand , and the prevention of any possible risks , on the other .
I am happy to look into this again in more depth .
Subject : Victims ' rights packages
Improving support for victims of crime is an important part of the Stockholm Programme .
In particular , the issues surrounding assistance for the victims of cross-border crime in Europe are of real concern to EU Citizens .
There are few practical procedures in place that offer support or advice to victims and families that have been caught up in the aftermath of crime and serious injury abroad .
I am helping a constituent whose son was a victim of a violent attack whilst on holiday in Crete .
There is a real need for EU action in this area to fulfil the promise of a citizens ' Europe .
Commissioner Reding has announced a package of measures in relation to the protection of victims of criminal offences .
In light of this , when does the Commission intend to propose this package for victims of criminal offences ?
Could the Commission give more information as to what this legislative proposal will include ?
Could the Commission give some detail on the non-legislative measures that are to be included in the package ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , more than 30 million people across Europe are reported to be victims of crime every year .
It is important that we ensure that victims have access to their rights and receive the support and protection they need .
This is a strategic priority for the Commission .
Let me take this opportunity to highlight the courage of Mrs Hughes , who is campaigning for stronger victims ' rights across Europe .
I think that her determination should serve as an inspiration to us all to strengthen victims ' rights and to reinforce citizens ' trust in our judicial systems .
We need this stronger mutual trust to ensure that the victim 's needs are recognised and protected , not only at home , but also cross-border .
We need to ensure , too , that victims are not forgotten by our judicial and legal systems .
That is why the Commission will propose a comprehensive package on victims in May .
This will address the quality of treatment that victims receive in the aftermath of a crime and during the criminal proceedings .
It will ensure that victims receive the same minimum standards of treatment in all EU Member States , irrespective of their nationality or country of origin .
Our proposals aim to promote a change in attitudes towards victims , to do more to ensure their recovery , and to minimise the risk of their being further harmed by repeat victimisation during the proceedings .
In very concrete terms , what will the package consist of ?
Firstly , a horizontal directive on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings , which will , for example , clearly establish the following enforceable rights : easily accessible victim support services in all Member States ; the right to interpretation during interviews ; a minimising of contact between the offender and the victim during proceedings , with any new courts to be designed so as to provide separate waiting areas ; and the right in all Member States to request a review of the prosecution .
Secondly , I will also propose a regulation on the mutual recognition of civil-law protection measures to ensure that any victim who is at risk , and who benefits from a protection measure taken against a potential offender in one Member State , can continue to benefit from such a measure when they move or travel to another Member State .
That instrument will be complemented by another instrument on the mutual recognition of criminal-law protection measures .
We also intend to introduce a wide range of non-legislative measures to ensure that the new legislation works effectively , and we will propose a road map on the strengthening of victims ' rights to ensure that these rights remain high on the political agenda in the years to come .
As you know , we visited your office last week with Maggie Hughes , one of the many thousands of brave victims of crime .
I have to say that , speaking to your staff , we are very excited that this could potentially be a package of measures that restores trust and added value for citizens who need help when they are victims of crime .
What Maggie Hughes and many other victims of crime have said to us is that they like the measures that you propose but that they want to see a concentration of help .
For example , if there is a victim support office , it should be easily accessible and we should have individuals who help in the hospital , in the police cell and with the court system .
This is what our citizens are asking for and , up until now , they have not received .
So really this is a plea to you to make this the kind of potentially great proposal that it can be .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I absolutely agree .
I , too , have felt that victims have been somewhat absent .
With regard to procedural rights , we have focused strongly on people who get into trouble because they may have committed a crime : we have been concerned to see that their rights are looked after , as we should be in our rights-based society .
Very often , however , victims are victimised a second time when they come to court , and nobody cares .
It is a very unfair situation , amounting to a negation of rights .
That is why I hope this victim package will change not only laws but also mentalities , and that everywhere in our courts , our police stations and our hospitals - as the honourable Member rightly urged - people will have a special care for victims and will know that they should not be treated just like anyone else .
It is of the utmost importance that this should also apply cross-border , to people in a Member State other than their country of origin .
So I rely on Parliament to help the Commission produce the best legislation possible , and also - with regard to the codecision aspects of the package - to be swift so that it can be put forward for agreement with the Council .
Part two
Subject : Commission proposals on a common consolidated corporate tax base
Can the Commission give an explanation of the current situation with regard to the Commission proposals on a common consolidated corporate tax base ?
Member of the Commission . - The Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base ( CCCTB ) is an important initiative in removing obstacles to the single market , and was identified in the Annual Growth Survey as a growth-enhancing initiative to be frontloaded .
Indeed , it will tackle some major fiscal impediments to companies ' competitiveness .
At the moment , the lack of common corporate tax rules and the divergence of national tax systems often lead to over-taxation and double taxation .
Moreover , businesses are faced with heavy administrative burdens and high tax compliance costs .
This situation creates disincentives to investment in the EU and runs counter to the priorities set in the Europe 2020 strategy .
Significant progress has been made so far on the technical preparation of the CCCTB proposal .
It is now time to offer companies a single set of rules to make it easier and cheaper to do business in the single market .
The CCCTB is scheduled for adoption by the College of Commissioners on 16 March 2011 .
I am convinced that the final proposal will greatly contribute to a better environment for businesses , growth and jobs in the EU .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your answer .
Just three short questions and I hope you will be in a position to answer them .
Do you envisage CCCTB as being voluntary ?
Secondly , do you envisage any circumstances in which domestic courts might lose their jurisdiction in tax matters if whatever decision they take impacts on yields in another Member State ?
And finally , I expect at this stage some formula has been arrived at for the apportionment of tax that is payable in the different Member States .
Has any impact analysis been done by the Commission on winners and losers , and by that , I mean winners and losers in financial terms , under whatever formula you have already come up with ?
Member of the Commission . - I will be very brief on the question of whether CCCTB will be voluntary or mandatory .
The answer is yes , it will be voluntary : the proposal provides for a voluntary option for companies to apply CCCTB rules .
Concerning the role of domestic courts , the CCCTB proposal provides for rules for dispute settlement , and the role of domestic courts will not be undermined as a result of the proposal .
The proposal provides for an apportionment formula with an equal division between sales , labour and assets , and the labour factor will be divided into two components : payroll and number of employees .
Yes , we made an impact assessment , and that impact assessment will be published together with our proposal .
I am fully convinced that the proposal will be for the benefit of European businesses including , I believe , Irish businesses .
Colleagues , I realise that there are some Members who have come into the Chamber since we started Question Time and will not be aware of the huge time constraint we have been under in order to try to make progress .
The aim is to answer as many questions as possible .
I therefore said at the beginning that I will not take any supplementaries , except from those Members who have put questions .
Let me say at the moment that my aim is - and this depends , to some extent , on the length of Commission replies - to take the following questions before 20 : 45 , that is , the questions from Mrs Jensen , Mr Papanikolaou , Mr Posselt and Mrs Ţicău .
That is the plan .

Subject : VAT exemption for agricultural products in Romania
Danish firms which have invested in agriculture in Romania have been informed that , in future , they may not charge VAT on goods sold to intermediaries .
However , farmers will still be able to charge VAT on goods sold to end users ( i.e. bakers , other farmers , etc . ) .
Apparently , the proposal for the VAT exemption of sales to intermediaries was sent from the Romanian Government to DG TAXUD .
Has the Commission approved the exemption from VAT of the sale of agricultural products to intermediaries ?
If so , why ?
Does the Commission consider that such a system will result in a change in trade patterns for agricultural products in Romania ?
Does the Commission consider that it will create a distortion of competition on the internal market if financial incentives are given to farmers to sell their products to certain customers ?
Will the Commission ensure that common VAT regulations apply to all agricultural producers in Romania ?
Member of the Commission . - Because of the VAT fraud situation in relation to certain agricultural products , the Commission is in contact with Romania in order to determine the most appropriate way forward in dealing with this problem .
One of the possible solutions to deal with the so-called carousel fraud in this sector would be to apply the reverse charge mechanism .
Under this arrangement , which is not an exemption scheme , supplies remain taxed but the person liable for the payment of the VAT to the tax administration is no longer the supplier but the recipient taxpayer .
The fact that the recipient is liable to pay the tax instead of the supplier is the only modification to the standard regime , according to which a taxpayer supplying goods to another taxpayer collects the VAT and pays it to the State while the recipient taxpayer can deduct this amount via his VAT declaration .
Both under the standard and the reverse charge regimes , should the recipient be a final consumer , he will not be able to deduct VAT and will bear it entirely .
Therefore , VAT still remains neutral for taxpayers and there would be no distortion of competition .
Because the recipient can simultaneously pay and deduct the very same amount in his VAT return , this modification has the merit of removing the need for an effective payment of the VAT to the tax administration .
Therefore , it avoids fraud arrangements that are based on non-payment of the VAT by the supplier followed by deduction of the VAT by the customer , who is in possession of a valid invoice .
A downside of this system is the fact that it could create other risks of fraud , since all VAT would be collected at the last stage in the supply chain .
Therefore , such a system should , in the Commission 's view , preferably be limited to agricultural products which are normally sold to intermediaries - taxable persons - and not destined for supply to final consumers .
In any case , as this arrangement would deviate from the normal VAT rules set out in the VAT Directive , Romania would have to be granted a derogation by the Council on the basis of that directive ; the Commission is still examining the issue .
( DA ) Thank you Commissioner .
I am not sure that I understood all of the details , but I can , of course , look at them more closely later .
However , this new system , which I understand has been established to prevent fraud , may pose a particular problem for producers from another country who have invested in Romania and who therefore have VAT expenditure in a different country that cannot be offset against VAT income in Romania because they have no VAT income .
Has the Commission considered how we could solve this problem for producers from another EU country that have undertakings in both Romania and other EU countries , so that they are not prevented from being able to offset their input VAT against their VAT income ?
Thank you .
Member of the Commission . - I would just like to say that the reverse charge mechanism is not a new mechanism and is applicable in several Member States .
For example , it is also applicable in the emission trading system in some Member States .
It is true that the reverse system charge actually implies collection of VAT at the end of the supply chain instead of collecting it throughout the supply chain .
When we look at the requests from the Member States to apply a reverse charge mechanism , we look , of course , at all the details , and the issue of the distortion of the internal market is also taken into account .
That is why Commission proposals are not made automatically but through a study , on the basis of which we submit a proposal to the Council .
With regard to Romania , we have already been working for more than half a year - or even longer - in order to find a solution as to how to address VAT fraud in agriculture in this particular country .
I have been in here since the beginning of Question Time , which was supposed to start at 19 : 30 .
There are a lot of people in my country , which gets a new government tomorrow , who are interested in the question which I have put to Commissioner Rehn .
I ask you , please , even we have to sit for an extra few minutes , that my question be allowed and that the Commissioner be allowed to respond to it .
Members have already left this Chamber because I have told them I could not deal with their question or I could not deal with supplementary questions .
It has been a difficult afternoon .
It continues to be a difficult evening .
I have indicated those questions I want to take up to the time of 20 : 45 .
We will see how we can do , but really I am doing my best to be fair to all concerned and indeed to the Commissioners who are waiting to participate .
Subject : Statement by the head of the OECD on the possible restructuring of eurozone Member State debt and Commission 's standpoint
On Thursday , 27 January 2011 , speaking at the World Economic Forum in Davos , the head of the OECD , Angel Gurria , asserted that ' one country may need restructuring , that is Greece ' .
It should be pointed out that this is the first public statement on the question of restructuring a eurozone member 's debt by the head of an influential international organisation that cooperates closely with the EU on a range of political , economic and social issues .
What is the Commission 's standpoint on this specific question , particularly in the light of the statement by the head of the OECD ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission , together with the ECB and the IMF , recently concluded the third review of the Economic Assessment Programme for Greece .
Our joint overall assessment is twofold and I will outline it briefly .
Firstly , the programme has made further progress towards its objectives ; and secondly , there remain considerable challenges to be overcome in order to secure fiscal sustainability , restore competitiveness and ensure a viable banking sector .
While there have been delays in some areas , the underlying fiscal and other reforms necessary to deliver the programme 's medium-term objectives are now being put in place .
However , major reforms still need to be designed and implemented in order to build the critical mass necessary to secure fiscal sustainability and economic recovery .
The challenging efforts of consolidation will be supported by a bold privatisation programme , as indicated by Prime Minister Papandreou .
The government has expressed its commitment to substantially scaling up its privatisation programme with a view to realising EUR 50 billion in proceeds from privatisation by 2015 .
This has the potential to cut the debt ratio by more than 20 percentage points of GDP over the next five years .
Furthermore , determination in implementing the privatisation programme will increase economic efficiency and support higher investment and exports .
For all these reasons , the government 's full commitment to this process of privatisation , and not least its determination to tackle privileges and vested interests , will indeed be critical to realising the ambitious objectives and thus utilising the potential for substantial improvement in the market sentiment vis-à-vis Greece .
The Commission therefore encourages Greece to show resolve in its privatisation programme .
This relates to a comment made by the OECD Secretary-General : this year , 2011 , is the decisive year for Greece in terms of restoring the credibility of its economic policies and that is a prerequisite if it is to regain market access in the course of next year .
To this end , the authorities should achieve , or even surpass , the fiscal target for this year and articulate a robust medium-term budgetary strategy .
In addition , Greece should achieve a decisive breakthrough in structural reforms over the coming weeks and months .
Determined implementation of the programme should strengthen credibility and the confidence of citizens and investors alike .
To conclude , through the combination of these policy measures - i.e. meeting the fiscal targets and implementing the privatisation programme - and the EU measures of extending the loan maturities and revisiting the pricing policy in the light of debt sustainability , concerns about debt restructuring can , and will , be addressed .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , last year , we jointly signed a memorandum with Greece making provision for repayment of the loan granted over three-and-a-half years .
Today , you personally proposed in your statement that it be extended to seven years , which obviously means that a computational error was made .
At the same time , Moody 's has downgraded Greece 's credit rating to the same level as Angola ; this was unwarranted and is unacceptable .
At the end of the day , Commissioner , we are all wondering what will ultimately suffice in order for Greece to get back on its feet : a simple extension ?
A reduction in interest rates , as you also mentioned ?
Renegotiation of the terms of the memorandum ?
Eurobonds ?
The European growth bond ?
All of the above ?
Or perhaps something else ?
Perhaps more austerity measures in Greece ?
What , Commissioner ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the essential thing , and the necessary condition , is to stick to the targets of fiscal consolidation and implement structural reforms with full determination , in line with the memorandum .
Moreover , as I said in my previous reply , it is essential for Greece to embark on a very ambitious programme of privatisation which will help reduce the debt burden .
It is also very important , in the context of the comprehensive strategy to be decided this March in the European Union , that the Member States look at the issue of debt sustainability .
I can only encourage the Member States to decide to extend the loan maturities of loans to Greece as well as to revisit the pricing policy for these loans .
This is an absolute farce and this is a point of order .
Question Time , we were told , was to be from 19 : 30 to 20 : 30 .
You , or somebody , decided that the previous debate would be allowed to trespass on Question Time .
It is one of the few avenues for people to ask questions of a Commissioner .
We have a crisis in Ireland ; my colleagues Gay Mitchell , Pat the Cope Gallagher and myself have tabled questions .
Who decided ?
I want to know now - and this is a legitimate question - who decided that what should be a twenty-minute session , and we are only eight minutes into it , should be reduced to an eight or nine-minute session .
Who decided that , Madam President ?
Mr Higgins , I was actually about to make a statement before I gave the floor to the Commissioner for what will be the last question because , believe you me , I am as angry as you .
I do not like sitting here in these circumstances , having to disappoint a large number of Members and having to keep a number of Members of the Commission waiting .
The people I would like you to target are your Group leaders and I say that again loud and clear : it is the Group leaders who set the agenda and leave us in a situation , almost every plenary week , where we do no have enough time to deal properly with Question Time to the Commission , or indeed , when it has taken place , to the Council .
It is unsatisfactory ; I have made my views known before .
I would ask each and every Member who cares about it to contact their Group leaders and tell them what they think , because I am stuck with the agenda as I find it when I take over the chair and I do not enjoy it .
But who decided that Commissioner Šemeta could have three questions and Commissioner Rehn could only have one question ?
Mr Higgins ' was the second question to Commissioner Rehn and mine the third question .
How did one Commissioner get a number of questions and another only one question ?
I do not understand that .
We have done two and now I am giving Mr Šemeta the question that is actually addressed to Commissioner De Gucht .
That is why .
I have to go through a certain order and I am sorry for that .
I am sorry for the three of you , but I would suggest to you that , as Commissioner Rehn is , I know , a very sympathetic commissioner , I am sure that as he leaves the Chamber , he will be prepared to talk to the three of you .
That is the only solution I can offer and I know that it is not satisfactory .



Having read the three questions , 23 from Higgins , 24 from Mitchell and 25 from Gallagher , I can only assume that the Commissioner would have grouped those three together and therefore can we not , or have you the right to , trespass on the next debate ?
Because at all times , it is Question Time that suffers .
So if we can trespass , maybe the Commissioners will be good enough to give us some more of their time after 9 o 'clock .
Mr Gallagher , I cannot trespass on the beginning of the next session .
I have already indicated to Mr Posselt that I will take his question and to Mrs Ţicău that I would take her question , and indeed the question from the three of you would have been the last one if we had been going quicker , but we are not .
It is difficult for me now to take even Mr Posselt 's question .
That is the reality .
I am really sorry and , as I said , I am angry but this is the situation we have been put in .
You have seen what has happened all day with the agenda and it is not satisfactory .
So I would like , if I may , to move , as I said , to the question put to Commissioner De Gucht and to be answered by Mr Šemeta , and I say with much regret that that will be the last question this evening .
Subject : External trade and the Eastern Partnership
What is the Commission 's assessment of the development of trade between the EU and Eastern Partnership countries , and what is the role of the Black Sea strategy and the countries of the Southern Caucasus in this ?
Member of the Commission . - The global financial and economic crisis has negatively impacted on bilateral trade between the EU and the eastern partner countries .
Overall , trade between the EU and six eastern partner countries declined between 2008 and 2010 by 20 % .
It must be recalled that the Eastern Partnership started being implemented when the financial crisis was in full swing .
Its launching summit took place on 7 May 2009 .
In this early period , working structures were created and some first meetings of the multilateral platforms were being held .
The Eastern Partnership was simply too young to soften the negative effects of the financial and economic crisis .
As for the role of the Black Sea Synergy on trade with the EU , it can be said that it has been negligible as the Black Sea Synergy initiative is a regional cooperation framework , not a trade arrangement .
The South Caucasus countries , individually or as a group , have not played any particular role in the development of trade between the EU and the Eastern Partnership countries .
Preparations for future negotiations of a bilateral , deep and comprehensive free trade area are ongoing with Georgia and Armenia , while the trade provisions of the partnership and cooperation agreement with Azerbaijan are currently being upgraded .
( DE ) Thank you , Mr Šemeta , for your very precise answer .
I will be very brief .
Do you think that there are opportunities for increasing trade with the countries of the Southern Caucasus , among other things , by reducing the tension between them , and , in particular , with regard to the external energy policy ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , as I said in my reply , we are working on the issue of a deep and comprehensive free trade area , and we presented key recommendations to those countries on what they had to do in order to start negotiations on such agreements .
Such agreements would , of course , constitute considerable progress , and if those countries do their homework - and at least some of them are really trying seriously to do it - then the prospects for intensifying trade will be much better .
Madam President , I waited until you had finished the questions before I made an interruption because I knew you were stuck for time , but I , like my other colleagues , would like to put on the record of the House that this is a further diminishing of a key resource for Members - especially for backbench Members of this House .
I think that it is wrong that you were put in the position whereby you were forced to cut us back , but likewise , I do not believe it is all the leaders ' fault either , because the running of the schedule on the day is for whoever is in the Chair .
Obviously , whoever was in the Chair before you allowed things to run out of kilter slightly , which put you in an embarrassing position .
Maybe we could come to an agreement and you , with the Bureau and with the Vice-Presidents , could agree that this section , Question Time , is sacrosanct and that that will not be changed .
If a debate needs to stop and resume after Question Time finishes , so be it .
I will be putting that to my own Group leader , and I hope others will do the same , but I would also ask you to bring it up with the Bureau .
I will be bringing it up with the group leaders because , I am sorry to say , that is where the problem lies : in the Conference of Presidents when they set the agenda .
It is a question of too much material being put on the agenda before we get to Question Time .
You are right .
There needs to be some sort of line drawn to make sure that this period of time when Members can hold the Commission or the Council to account is honoured .
I agree with you and I will be tapping away at my computer first thing tomorrow morning , I assure you .
( RO ) You said earlier that we would get to the question I submitted to Commissioner De Gucht .
Unfortunately , I understand that the Commissioner has left and I have stayed here in the Chamber waiting to receive the reply .
I believe that no procedure has even been followed and I do not understand what has happened .
Mrs Ţicău , I wanted to take your question but I also said that the time constraint was that we had to stop at quarter to the hour and we reached that before we reached your question .
That is the simple answer .
I am sorry .
As I say , I am not happy with the position that we have been put in , but there is nothing more I could have done tonight to try to get through more questions .
I did not allow supplementaries in an attempt to achieve more for you , but I am sorry I have not been able to reach your question .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 20 : 50 and resumed at 21 : 05 )

Industrial policy for the globalised era ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Lange , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Industry , on an industrial policy for the globalised era .

Madam President , Mr Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , this report presents the position of the European Parliament very clearly .
I would like thank the shadow rapporteurs who have contributed to the report and the rapporteurs for the opinion of the relevant committees .
Together , we have succeeded in conveying a clear message , Mr Tajani , which is that we want to move industrial policy closer to the centre of the political arena , for good reason .
Industrial policy will help us , firstly , to create good quality , future-proof jobs in Europe and , secondly , to secure investment in Europe .
Our competitors all over the world are making good use of industrial policy , for example , in the United States , China , Brazil and India .
Thirdly , we are faced with challenges relating to sustainability , both in terms of the climate and the economic and social foundations of our society .
Against this background , it is important for us to put industrial policy at the centre of the political arena .
On the one hand , this means that we expect industrial policy to be integrated in such a way , Mr Tajani , that it becomes the focal point of legislative initiatives within the European Union .
We do not want to see environmental , trade and competition policies being drawn up first and only subsequently being coordinated with the interests of European industry .
On the contrary , we must define the other areas of policy on the basis of the strategic interests of a sustainable industrial policy .
Secondly , Mr Tajani , we need better coordination between the industrial policies in the different Member States .
Therefore , I would like to ask you , and we have included this in the report , to make use of Article 173 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Lisbon , in order to coordinate industrial policy in the Member States more effectively , so that we really are all moving in the same direction .
We must , of course , focus on a number of specific areas .
On the horizontal level , we need to look , in particular , at innovation policy throughout the entire value-added chain .
We must succeed in supporting the entire economic chain , from fundamental research through to the market launch of products , and in bringing the best solutions for our society onto the market .
We also need to pay more attention to resources .
Simply saying that this is important is not enough .
We need to introduce practical legislation which will significantly increase resource productivity .
In industry , labour is responsible for 20 % of costs and resources for 40 % .
That is a starting point for action on raw materials .
The mobile phones that we all use contain rare earths and metals , which are seldom recycled .
The recycling rate for mobile phones is only 1.5 % .
That is a starting point for creating jobs and increasing the competitiveness of European industry .
I would like to make one last point in this context .
Innovation and resource productivity will not happen by themselves .
They depend on the employees who are involved .
For this reason , a sensible industrial policy must also take into consideration the skills and the involvement of employees .
If we can bring this about , then I am confident that we will have future-proof jobs in European industry .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Lange , for the work he has done .
I know it is not easy in a Chamber organised like this one , with so many parliamentary groups , to succeed in arriving at a synthesis that will allow the debate on industrial policy to be wound up positively .
I would therefore like to thank you for the work you have done because , if we truly want to put action to promote the real economy at the heart of our political action in favour of the social and market economy , we - the Commission , Parliament and the Council - must work together .
I agree with your appeal for greater cohesion by the Member States , but there is an encouraging sign from the Council , which has , in fact , supported the Commission 's position .
In addition , in the countries where it has been possible to present the industrial policy document , there has been some willingness - albeit to varying degrees in the different countries - to take part in joint action under the governance of the industrial policy .
As the Union does not want to impose decisions on the individual Member States , this is an attempt to coordinate their policies .
This appears to me to be a move in the direction of your request , but it also confirms that Europe needs its own industry in order to address the immediate challenges of finding a way out of the crisis .
We cannot think of overcoming our current difficulties - a situation that is being made worse by the ongoing crisis in the Mediterranean region - without solid action to promote our industrial and business policies , because they are the only ones that can enable us to develop and create new jobs .
The report you have prepared , Mr Lange , rightly emphasises the economic , environmental and social challenges we face : in short , the sustainability of our industrial policy .
It places sustainability on the same level as competitiveness , because these two dimensions are closely connected .
Indeed , I am convinced that in today 's world , these two aspects cannot exist without each other .
To achieve this , we must also equip ourselves with modern , competitive industry that makes a clean break with the old method of industrial policy making .
What does having modern industry mean ?
It means having industry that is efficient in resource use , energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions , which implies an economy aiming at becoming a green economy , via the route of a greener economy .
This industry must also be accountable , tackling difficulties on the basis of constant and fruitful dialogue with the social partners .
I believe a strong signal needs to be sent out that the 2010 industrial model cannot be one based on State aid and that , to be competitive in the era of global challenges , European industry cannot afford not to focus on innovation and research .
That is why , before issuing the industrial policy document , the Commission presented its document on innovation policy , which I think is absolutely fundamental to the development of a genuine industrial policy and also helps identify paths to follow in the sector of raw materials research and innovation .
It is not a coincidence that one of the innovation partnerships mentioned by the Commission is precisely about raw materials , researching ways to recycle and replace raw materials .
It is therefore clear - not least because we will talk later about rare earths in the following debate - that innovation , raw materials and industrial policy are all part of a single strategy , and , to my mind , the revision of the Small Business Act also forms part of the same strategy .
By putting this series of political and legislative acts into practice , therefore , the Commission is demonstrating that there is a will to implement political action in favour of industry and business .
With regard to governance and industrial policy , I think the process is well under way , as I was saying before , both within the Commission and in the Member States .
Within the Commission , as you know , President Barroso called on me at the beginning of the mandate to chair the group of Commissioners on industrial policy .
I have called two group meetings so far , one before the communication was adopted to discuss political priorities , and the second to discuss the practical implementation of the communication , with particular reference to the competitiveness test and the standardisation strategy .
I consider the group of Commissioners to be a special tool designed to provide political guidance and ensure that initiatives are consistent in terms of industrial policy .
As regards the Member States , I believe the reaction has been positive .
As I was saying , on 10 December 2010 with the Hungarian Presidency , we launched the first cooperation exercises on access to credit for small and medium-sized enterprises , which will be followed by other , similar exercises , in close cooperation with the Member States .
We will continue to give you the necessary details for ongoing collaboration between Parliament and the Commission .
Before I finish , Madam President , please allow me to say a word about the importance of supporting entrepreneurship among women .
It is no coincidence that today is 8 March , and I have always said that we need more women entrepreneurs , but once they have decided to commit themselves , we must also be in a position at least to give them good advice .
That is what we have decided to do by including an ad hoc action during the revision of the Small Business Act .
The Network of Female Entrepreneurship Ambassadors that we have already launched will continue to exist , but we want to go beyond awareness raising .
We want women entrepreneurs to be able to receive good advice from experts , and to this end , we are about to launch a consultation exercise in the very short term to support certain initiatives aimed at providing mentors for new female entrepreneurs who would like one .
These people can give them concrete advice on starting up and then managing a business .
The aim is to roll out this initiative in at least 10 Member States and then expand it to the rest of the 27 .
Commissioner , thank you for that small insight into women in business .
I suppose it is not entirely a coincidence , given that today , 8 March , is International Women 's Day , but , in any case , we welcome your initiatives in this regard .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , industrial policy is a key element for growth and employment in our regions and countries .
At a time of severe economic crisis , therefore , we welcome the Commission 's initiative to provide Europe with a common medium- to long-term approach , and we fully support Mr Lange 's outstanding report for at least three reasons .
The first is that the report takes an approach to the subject of industrial development that does not break down industrial and business interests into market sectors , but puts them together according to common objectives .
The second reason is that it underlines the importance of regional structures through more effective support for clusters , innovation networks , knowledge transfer , research , and the improvement of skills and infrastructure development .
The third reason - and I am finishing - is that it highlights the role and function of small and medium-sized enterprises , which are looking to Europe to find a way out of this crisis , which is liable to seriously jeopardise their future .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the economic and financial crisis has led many people to rediscover the central importance of industry .
Despite your efforts , Mr Vice-President , the Commission has still not always realised that .
A great many acts , of which the documents on the Europe 2020 strategy or certain free-trade agreements that have recently been approved or are under discussion will not be the last , are still biased towards the service economy and the strengthening and development of services , particularly in the financial , banking and insurance sectors .
In contrast , the real economy is giving us opposite signals , as you have said .
Production and exports are rising and we are witnessing a reversal of the trend for relocations .
We must encourage these signals , since no great economy in the world can escape the central importance of industry .
Hence , we need to complete the internal market and to speed up the implementation of strong initiatives in support of innovation and research , technology transfer , product traceability , protection of intellectual property and promotion of European production , not to mention effective rules against dumping and for true reciprocity in bilateral negotiations .
This report is a step in that direction , and I am very grateful to Mr Lange and all those who have worked on it .
Madam President , is there still a genuine ambition in the face of the deindustrialisation of the European Union ?
We know that economies cannot prosper without heavy industry and that industry cannot exist without factories .
We are all gathered together in this House to stand up for Europe 's industrial jobs .
There is no conceivable future for industry without confidence in scientific and technical progress .
Therefore , at a time when Europe should be beginning extensive work to identify the Arianes and the Airbuses of 2050 , the Commission has to realise that , with the crisis , the rules put in place are no longer suited to today 's economy .
The issues of free trade and free and undistorted competition have become dogmas .
We cannot be the only economic area in the world to unilaterally apply free trade principles while having no idea of what our main competitors are doing .
I therefore regret the fact , Commissioner , that there is a certain amount of nervousness when it comes to issues associated with strengthening the European Union 's anti-dumping arsenal and to applying the general principle of reciprocity in trade with third countries .
The worst situation is one where the European market is too open in the face of competing markets which are too closed .
Furthermore , in the context of the fight against climate change , I would like it , Commissioner , if we could implement tools in addition to greenhouse gas emission allowance trading , such as the carbon inclusion mechanism at our borders .
In this way , we could re-establish a balance so as to make relocations to third countries less attractive for our companies .
We should improve the help available to our SMEs and reduce their costs ; we should strengthen European patents and the fight against counterfeiting with ' made in ' origin marking .
Likewise , if Europe cannot access raw materials , we will no longer be able to talk about an innovative industrial policy .
Our concern relates to education , training and research , as well as a culture of innovation and science , which must hold pride of place once more within the European Union .
( Applause )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I join all my fellow Members who have spoken in noting that we are at last talking about a common industrial policy again , and I hope action and also specific decisions will be forthcoming again soon .
I am grateful for the Lange report , the excellent work done by our fellow Member , and Vice-President Tajani 's communication .
This decision means some important things , the first of which is that the revitalisation and recovery of Europe 's economy and the resilience of employment , as has been said , depend partly , and perhaps especially , on the recovery of the whole manufacturing sector , both the more advanced and the more traditional parts of it , and on the support it is given .
That is because it is still possible to push the boundaries in manufacturing , something that was not so obvious until a short time ago .
Secondly , the recovery of industry in Europe also means that our competitiveness is not only in play in the financial or tertiary sector , but here as well , and it is not too late for us to take up the challenge to make Europe competitive in industry vis-à-vis the rest of the world .
The third point , as has been said , is that the new industrial policy focuses on factors rather than sectors ; it focuses on factors and instruments that can genuinely promote new companies and a new capacity for resilience and modernisation .
I feel it is important to highlight once again these new factors on which we need to act : credit - we are calling for new initiatives in addition to those already announced by the Commissioner on the subject of credit - raw materials , energy prices , innovation , research , the need to enhance the capacity for the technological transfer of the results of research and innovation within companies in Europe , in new products and new ways of organising production .
We must make good use of a highly unique industrial fabric in Europe , particularly in certain countries , which is that of small and medium-sized enterprises , the quality of enterprises and of their products , and the unique nature of European industry .
I think we should rediscover these manufacturing traditions and manufacturing roots in many countries in order to innovate and change them .
Lastly , there is the question of location , which is very important .
European policies are successful if they find a region able to tackle them .
We therefore thank Mr Lange and look forward to an excellent collaboration with the Commission in order to arrive at concrete results very soon .

Madam President , Mr Tajani , thank you very much for your strong commitment to a European industrial policy .
I have been looking over at Mr Lange and thinking that there has been a lot of commotion about an own-initiative report .
A total of 500 amendments and 50 compromise proposals have been tabled with the aim of making industry in Europe a world leader again .
We can only achieve this by means of an integrated and sustainable policy .
We need to ensure that research and innovation are at the heart of our strategy .
Therefore , we must put in place a regulatory framework which will support innovation and sustainability at the same time .
The major challenge faced by your report was finding the right balance between environmental goals and economic competitiveness , while also avoiding protectionism .
I am looking at Mrs Grossetête , because the French always want to introduce a touch of protectionism .
At the same time , we need to support small and medium-sized businesses , promote the European patent and prevent knowledge theft , particularly with regard to China .
We also want to see fewer regulations being imposed on European industry as a result of red tape .
This means that we need to focus on reducing the amount of bureaucracy .
Mr Lange , you have succeeded in covering this quite well in your report , so I would like to thank you for your hard work .
However , this report can only represent the first step .
We need to link the concept of industrial policy , which people in many Member States find it hard to discuss and which the Germans , in particular , have always been unwilling to talk about , with the competitiveness pact , which will be presented to the Heads of State or Government over the next few weeks in order to safeguard the euro area .
If we do not manage to do this , then we will have a problem .
We must coordinate areas such as cohesion , industry , trade , research and innovation , but also social issues , the climate and the environment .
The current example of E10 in Germany demonstrates that this is not happening .
This is all about adding bioethanol to petrol .
The EU has put in place an important strategy , set itself the 20-20-20 targets , and we have said to the Member States that they must implement it .
The Member States , and Germany in particular , were part of the decision-making process and supported everything that was decided .
However , when it came to putting it into practice at home , they suddenly cut back the tax incentives and the consumers stopped cooperating .
If we fail to convince consumers , as was the case in Germany with E10 , then we will not be able to implement climate policy in combination with industrial policy .
We need to have the consumers on our side .
That is the central message .
For this reason , I wish the industrial policy project every success .

Madam President , the importance of Mr Lange 's report has been somewhat over-emphasised as a result of the enthusiasm of many of the Members who have taken part in the discussion .
The report covers almost everything and , in some places , contains contradictory information .
Nevertheless , I believe that this report represents important progress .
In the past , it was often the case that only the French or those on the left-wing who were in favour of strong state control spoke up in support of industrial policy .
It was a taboo subject for everyone else .
Now we are in the new position of having reached a basic consensus about the fact that we must have an industrial policy in Europe and that it must be a joint policy at a European level .
I think that this is a significant step forward and I am grateful to Mr Tajani for highlighting this so clearly .
We cannot go on as we did before and Mrs Grossetête is absolutely right about that .
We cannot treat industrial policy as something which emerges almost by chance at the end of our free trade policy .
We need to turn things back the right way up , but not on the basis of illusions of state control and not with the idea that the state must take a regulatory role and intervene directly in business .
The state must create a sensible framework which promotes innovation and , in particular , environmental innovation , and which will allow progress to be made in these areas by exploiting competition .
However , we do not want to see strong state control or protectionism .
In future , we will only be able to ensure that European industry is in a strong position if we take seriously the task of environmental innovation on a central level .
Therefore , I would like to say in conclusion , Mr Tajani , that I am very grateful to you for explaining that sustainability and competitiveness are not opposites , but must be put on the same footing and coordinated with one another .
Madam President , the debate on industry is very important for Europe at the present time .
The competitiveness of European firms depends on the continuing economic stability of Europe .
We are all surely aware of these arguments , but on the other hand , we are constantly trying to take on commitments , be they in the form of extreme requirements for environmental protection or mandatory tax obligations to ensure financial stability .
It is certainly important to assess the impact of industrial output on the environment in a stringent manner , but we must not indirectly burden industry with regulations that are almost overstated .
This may lead to a situation where , in a globalised world , European industrial production is more weighed down by political decisions than is the case elsewhere
I consider the most important thing in the report to be the emphasis on the importance of supporting science , and research and innovation .
Europe has long ceased to be a leader in the area of innovation .
It is of fundamental importance to support innovative projects .
I very much agree that there is a need to rework financial support procedures for innovative projects .
Our aim should be to simplify the administration and , at the same time , to change the overall approach as well .
It is essential to take account of the commercialisation of research and the financing of European funds .
Madam President , it is time to defend the European Union 's industries in every one of its countries .
That requires a change in the positions that have been taken to date , in which the European Commission did not have the least concern for striking a balance between the need to defend a prosperous industry , specifically manufacturing industries , and international trade .
Industrial production is fundamental to sustainable growth and employment in Europe , which necessitates another EU and external trade policy that defends our industries , including those that guarantee jobs in countries and regions where unemployment is already very high .
To this end , it is essential to give full attention to small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and to research and development ; to take into account regional development , and the specific characteristics of each country and industrial sector ; and to improve workers ' qualifications and training .
However , there are many contradictory positions in the report we are debating .
While , on the one hand , it advocates defending industry and SMEs , on the other , it includes proposals calling for the liberalisation of international trade , on free competition , on the deepening of the internal market , and on public / private partnerships .
However , such proposals do not defend our industries like they should , as the European reality has already demonstrated .
We have therefore tabled some proposals to remove these most damaging aspects ; we hope that they will be adopted tomorrow .
We advocate industries that are efficient in terms of using resources that are less dependent on carbon , that value jobs with rights , and that guarantee equal rights for women in terms of access to jobs , to promotion , to wages , and to participation in management and administrative bodies .
In order to guarantee all this , it is essential that there be an EU framework , and in that sense , the European Commission has an important role to play in terms of industrial policy , of external trade , of financial policy , and of research , science and innovation that supports SMEs , as well as in terms of commitment to training and reskilling workers , and to the dignity of those who work .

Madam President , first of all , I , too , should like to congratulate Mr Lange on his very detailed report on industrial policy .
Commissioner , the economic crisis has shown us that countries with an industrial base not only survive ; they also prosper .
Look at Germany , look at China , look at Spain .
Spain is holding up under the economic crisis because it has an industrial base .
My country , Greece , had an industrial base , Commissioner , but we have managed to wipe it out , for various reasons .
I would like to focus on a very topical problem faced by Greek industry this week .
Mr Trichet made a statement about a possible rise in the European Central Bank base rate within the next month .
This caused a surge in the 3-month Euribor interbank rate , to which thousands of business loans in Greece are linked .
In a single day , the Euribor registered its biggest increase since September 2008 , causing massive problems to Greek businesses , which are already suffering under the recession .
On the same day , however , the Europe director of the International Monetary Fund stated that the European Union 's monetary policy will hold up and does not need to be tightened .
We are not saying that Mr Trichet should not raise interest rates .
However , there could be a smooth transition , to avoid this explosion in loans that we are seeing .
Do you think you could intervene , Commissioner ?
( HU ) Madam President , I am pleased to note that there are several mentions in the report on industrial policy of the key importance small and medium-sized enterprises have with regard to European industry , European employees , and the present and future of us all .
From now on , the facilitation of the operation of SMEs should be a priority in all documents and all subjects .
These small companies create the majority of jobs , and have the highest capacity to reinvent themselves and take the greatest role in innovation and preventing the European economy from falling even further behind .
Quite importantly , they pay the largest share of taxes into our budgets , meaning that it is largely they who sustain bureaucratic administrations .
In return , bureaucracy , together with bankocracy , has created a legal institutional and economic environment which intends to make the operation of SMEs impossible .
This short-sighted practice , which serves the profit-mongering of multinational companies , cannot go on any longer .
The report is correct in stating that speculation on the financial markets must be prevented , but at this point , we need to do more than that .
Express penalties should be imposed on those banks that do not facilitate the supply of funds to SMEs through their credit policies .
The report also makes a passing reference to the fact that in the new Member States , industry is losing ground , and that the EU must find the means to halt unfair practices by large companies .
We must state openly that over the past years , multinational companies of the old Member States , with the assistance of EU bureaucracy , bought out and ruined the majority of the manufacturing industries of the new Member States , and then bankrupted the companies operating there and took over their markets .
The result is millions of people without a job and a future outlook , profits easily acquired in the east , and sizeable tax revenues in the west .
Also , with the assistance of bureaucracy , much of the technology accumulated in Europe has unfortunately been transferred to China .

( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would also like to start by thanking Mr Lange for his efforts in bringing together so many differing opinions and visions , a situation that is quite common in Parliament .
I would also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs from the various political groups .
In fact , this report tries to answer a question that has already been under consideration for a long time : do European industries have any future in a global world ?
I think the answer is yes .
Yes , because European Union countries are proving that they do .
Yes , because there are also specific European industrial sectors that are proving that they do .
All of this has to do with a number of aspects : some are related to the job market , because we need a flexible job market , not a rigid one ; others are related to productivity , financial policies and tax incentives .
However , allow me to highlight three that are now closely linked to the European Union itself .
Firstly , the culture of innovation and entrepreneurship .
These are two key issues .
Enterprise and innovation are key elements of the future of any industry in Europe .
Particular attention should be paid to young entrepreneurs .
Secondly , strengthening the internal market and making sure it is competitive and , internally , based on free competition .
Therefore , the subsidies still being given to transport , energy , and publicly owned businesses should be reduced so as to ensure free competition within the European internal market .
Thirdly , respecting the conditions of competition within the international framework : when it comes to environmental policies and product sourcing , it is vital to compete on equal terms .
We do not want protectionism within the European Union , nor do we want protectionism when our industry competes with third countries and third regions .
( SV ) Madam President , several of us participating in this debate have started by saying ' at last ' .
That probably says something about the status of industrial policy in the social debate and in politics for rather a long time .
However , now industrial policy is back in any case - I think that is clear from this report , too .
The service sector will continue to be important , but it is also becoming clear that it is highly dependent for its development on us having strong industrial production and a strong industrial sector .
These two things go hand in hand .
Thus , industrial policy is central to one of the most important political issues : work for everyone , full employment .
However , if modern industrial policy stopped there , nothing would have happened over the last 25 years .
Modern industrial policy is so much more than that .
Today , it also involves playing a part in the major transition - the radical switch to environment and climate sustainability - and not posing a barrier to it , but actually contributing to this transition .
This is currently an element in the competitiveness of industry - that is clear when you look at the investments that are being made in a number of our competitor countries .
Access to raw materials is part of this - a requirement for industry therefore , but , at the same time , also part of the transition .
It concerns everything from energy efficiency to resource management and recycling , for example , in the form of what we refer to as urban mining .
Another key issue for a modern and sustainable industry is recurrent training programmes .
We will not , and we must not , compete on the basis of low wages and poor working conditions , but on the basis of qualified and skilled people who work , and who want to work , in industry .
( BG ) Madam President , Commissioner Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , Europe can , and must , adopt a new path today , by creating a new integrated industrial policy .
A crucial role in this will be played by the integration of all the factors in the European Union influencing industry .
I will mention just some of them .
Firstly , guaranteeing sustainable , long-term deliveries of key raw materials for developing Europe 's high-tech sectors .
In this context , I urge increased cooperation with third countries with an abundance of raw materials .
Secondly , an economy based on innovation and the free movement of knowledge .
I urge for the key link to be strengthened between education , vocational training and professional life .
Europe produces the most PhD holders in the world , but fails to successfully convert their skills and knowledge into really practical market solutions .
We must build European innovation centres where cooperation will be actively fostered between knowledge and the needs of the market .
Thirdly , the transition to a low carbon economy is a key step .
The high-tech edge Europe has will enable us to enjoy to the full the potential and benefits of the ' green ' economy in the future .
All these elements require a new level of cooperation between Member States and European institutions .

Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mr Lange on an excellent report , and a substantive one , to make us think about the trends for industrial policy .
As we come out of the biggest recession for the last 60 years , we really have to galvanise our industries to be competitive in global markets - backing small firms , boosting enterprise , and supporting all those who want to create jobs .
So the linkage between innovation skills and sustainability is evident .
Not necessarily by using funds - we can do this by strengthening the internal market , trade promotion and providing a supportive framework for innovation .
Lastly , one element missing for me is the digital agenda .
Everyone in Europe , every business , should have the right to have access to the best IT , mobile and broadband at super speeds .
Were you aware , Commissioner , that South Korea fixed the aim last week to have , by the end of next year , Internet speeds plugged into every home that will be 200 times faster than those in the average household in the US ?
As was said by one senior IT executive , for Europe 's competitiveness , one has to realise that it is much better enhanced by investing in IT compared to physical infrastructure .
( CS ) Madam President , I would like to make just three comments .
The first concerns the fact that Europe must aim for a pioneering spirit , so that technological priorities come first in some areas , in order to achieve not just comparative advantages , but also absolute advantages , because average quality products command average prices .
Secondly , I would like to say that it is important to aim for two-way mediation between large and small systems , because concentrating on large systems will not bring the desired results .
General Motors is an example of failure which cost US taxpayers USD 57.6 billion .
The third issue is that industrial policy should not depend solely on the so-called political and economic élites , but should be based on a great stream of small innovations from below , in other words , large technological breakthroughs depend on a great number of small innovations which come from work collectives .
( IT ) Madam President , Vice-President Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , the title of this report already contains the keyword , in that it refers to an industrial policy .
Over the last few years , if not decades , in Europe , we have witnessed a growing lack of political interest in this field , due to an exaggerated laissez-faire attitude towards the markets , in the belief that the whole system would regulate itself without interference .
Political intervention means establishing rules to aid the presence of our companies in the market , and I am pleased to note that this report makes particular reference to small and medium-sized enterprises and the manufacturing sector , which has been abandoned all too often in the past .
The proposed instruments of administrative simplification and easier access to credit are a step in the right direction .
I would also like to highlight the part concerning fair competition with third countries , because in the past , we have been too permissive in this area , and entire basic sectors , such as the Tuscan textile sector , for instance - and I am quite sure of this because I am from Prato - have been brought to their knees by unfair competition that should certainly have been stopped and prevented at source .

( DE ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Lange and the shadow rapporteurs for their hard work .
They have been successful in transforming the discovery which we all made during the crisis , namely , that industry is obviously more important than many people thought , into a report , and in ensuring that industrial policy is moved nearer to the top of the European Parliament 's agenda .
The fact that this debate is being held in the evening may be a disadvantage .
This subject is so important that we need to talk about it at other times as well .
As some Members have already said , industrial policy is not about the state intervening , but about it establishing the right framework .
The state does not need to decide on the content of industrial policy or to distinguish between good and bad industry .
Instead , it must create the opportunities for industry to develop within a framework .
We must focus on those areas where we can really help in terms of innovation and research .
I think it is very helpful that Mr Tajani has provided us with information which makes it clear that the question of competitiveness is of the utmost importance in many areas of European policy .
In future , it will be very useful to use this as a criterion and to consider whether our political decisions will always , frequently or just often enough help or harm the development of industry in Europe .
I would like us not only to have a report and a topic for further debate , but also to change the way we act after this and to take this subject seriously , because industry is important .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( DE ) Madam President , I have a question for Mr Reul .
This morning , we celebrated the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day .
Against this background , I would like to ask you what opportunities you think are available for women in the industrial policy of the future .
What chances do women have in industry , because I believe that we urgently need their contribution ?
Which skills and qualifications would women be best advised to acquire in order to work in industry ?
( DE ) Madam President , I think they have excellent opportunities and , if necessary , I will deal with this issue myself .
( ES ) Madam President , the crisis has certainly highlighted the importance of industry as the driving force of the economy .
Commissioner , we welcome the fact that the Commission has understood this , and has taken back industrial policy for the Union .
Our rapporteur , whom I wish to congratulate on his excellent work , has already explained how we interpret the transition to an industrial policy that is smart , resource-efficient , and sustainable from an environmental and social viewpoint .
Of what he said , I would just like to emphasise one aspect that I consider to be crucial : human capital .
Assuming that every job should be ' green ' , it is vital for European workers to have the appropriate skills , not only to improve the competitiveness of our industry , but also so that no worker is left by the wayside .
We have a strong foundation : young Europeans have never been so well prepared , and yet we lack engineers , we lack young entrepreneurs , and we lack innovative policies for managing human resources .
We should therefore encourage synergies between those universities with a strong entrepreneurial culture and companies that are truly driven by knowledge .
With regard to training , we need to adjust work skills to the demands of the new economy and to do so in a way that is economically accessible for workers and businesses .
Also , industry should place greater emphasis on organisational innovation , understood as a more flexible and dynamic sharing of risks and responsibilities within companies .
Only then will it be able to incorporate and capitalise on the talent and knowledge of its workers .
Finally , allow me to say a word as a member of a group that has opposed the launching of an enhanced cooperation on the EU patent , because we think it affects the internal market , territorial cohesion and legal certainty .
The Court of Justice of the European Union has supported this position in Opinion 1 / 09 published on 8 March 2011 , which concludes that the draft agreement establishing a European and Community Patents Court is not compatible with the provisions of the Treaty .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , first of all , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur for an excellent and very important report .
This is actually largely a matter of how we can bring competitiveness to European industrial policy and , on the other hand , how we can respond to the structural change that has come about through job cuts in basic industry in certain areas .
I believe that industrial policy is part of the change .
We need to see this change and we also have to be able to adapt to it .
We have to look forward in industrial policy and create a sustainable one based on our own European strengths and our regional resources .
An example of this is the bioenergy sector , where there is a good deal of potential in Europe , I believe .
Regional structures will allow us to support a sustainable industrial policy in Europe , and because of this , we need to stress the importance even more of innovative clusters and broad cooperation between actors , educational institutions and companies .
When speaking about a European industrial policy , it is , of course , very important to include the SME sector - small and mediumsized enterprises .
We need to be able to reduce red tape for SMEs , as has been said here on many an occasion , and do everything we can to support opportunities for SME entrepreneurship , both now and in the future .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report highlights , at last , industry 's key role in the Union 's future and confirms the need for a European industrial policy .
It implicitly recognises the Lisbon strategy fiasco by rightly asking for 3 % of the Union 's gross domestic product to be dedicated to research and development and by proposing , above all , that the private sector be heavily utilised .
Unfortunately , it still has a vision of competitiveness that is focused on a deadly cut in labour costs , when we actually need to develop competitiveness based on training , capital savings , energy and raw materials .
The report also implicitly admits the failure of the financial markets to channel savings into investments that will create wealth .
Resolving this problem requires social control of credit or credit requisition for the benefit of employment , research and development , and wealth creation .
We need European and national public financial centres to guarantee industrial financing .
Our Parliament cannot simply take action to ensure that the large European industrial groups do better .
Our main objective must be to provide more and better quality industrial jobs in the Union .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe has never had to rethink its industrial policy as much as it needs to now , and it must also reconsider certain decisions made in the recent past .
This flagship initiative linked to the Europe 2020 strategy has therefore been both useful and timely , and for this I am grateful to the Commission and to Commissioner Tajani in particular .
I also thank the rapporteur , Mr Lange , for the work he has done and my colleague Mrs Grossetête , who , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , made a significant contribution towards reinforcing the positions put forward by the Commissioner .
For my part , I decided to make my contribution with amendments illustrating the role of small and medium-sized enterprises , which are considered by everyone to be the anchor chain of Europe 's basic industry , the part that knows best how to stand firm at times of crisis and how to innovate while keeping prices competitive .
I believe the role played by thousands of small and medium-sized European entrepreneurs needs to be supported with solutions to the difficulties and constraints that they have pointed out on several occasions : I am referring to better access to credit , the possibility of more transparent and less costly participation in public calls for tender and , above all , administrative simplification across the board , which everyone regards as the real revolution that this continent now needs .
I am pleased that the Commission has highlighted the subject of efficient and responsible raw material use , and I also consider it important that we are going to discuss rare earths soon . The attention devoted to the subject of intellectual property protection is significant .
I can finally see a route marked out that I hope will soon lead us to set standards and guarantees that are valid throughout the European Union .
That means offering hope , especially to young people , through the answers that Europeans themselves often suggest .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to thank Bernd Lange for his excellent work .
Tomorrow , his collaborative method will be crowned with success .
Moreover , Commissioner , this is an opportunity for the Commission , which provided us with a rather disappointing communication .
As someone who hails from a large region heavily hit by the crisis , when it had already been affected by industrial restructuring , I have listened to the message of the unions , which have constantly challenged us .
We need an industrial policy , all of whose components work towards the same goal : constructing a strategy that is based on sustainable , employment-centred growth that is built around the optimisation of skills and which shows that social and technological innovations are compatible with each other .
That is the key to European competitiveness and not the use of the workforce as an adjustment variable , as the Commission proposed in the European semester .
The best move the Commission could make is to rapidly integrate the Posting of Workers Directive into the work programme and to begin fiscal harmonisation starting with corporate taxation .
Furthermore , this policy should take shape not only at national and European level , but also at local level in the context of an effective cohesion policy .
Our choice is a regulated financial market , and we share the desire to consolidate the single market , but not at the expense of an inequitable labour market which is subject to social dumping .
Today , Madam President , we are debating an ambitious industrial policy , and this morning , we voted on a tax on financial transactions , and on Eurobonds .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must use these means to finance it .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Lange , and the shadow rapporteurs on the work they did , Mrs Grossetête in particular .
Europe is currently finding its competitiveness in global markets decreased .
As such , Europe needs to find ways of strengthening its industrial base to face up to new challenges .
This report 's very goal is tabling proposals to relaunch European industry .
An integrated and sustainable industrial policy must be based on scientific research , on innovation , on increased resource efficiency , on a commodities strategy , on reinforcing SMEs , and on developing regional networks .
In particular , it is essential for energy efficiency and the introduction of information and communication technologies to constitute the basis of this new industrial revolution , so as to increase competitiveness , economic growth and employment .
I particularly welcome the emphasis given in the report to traditional European industry , which is essential to our economy .
Measures such as the introduction of new technologies and increased reinforcement of scientific research and innovation in sectors such as the manufacturing industry are of crucial importance .
This is the only way that we will be able to return Europe to global leadership , which is so necessary for Europe 's competitiveness and economic growth .

( NL ) Madam President , first of all , I would like to congratulate my fellow Member , Mr Bernd Lange , on an excellent report and on the fantastic cooperation on his part .
Industrial policy is making a comeback .
It is not , however , making a solo comeback , because it is not alone .
Together with two other flagships , two other strategies , this strategy stands at the heart of the European agenda for jobs and a healthy economy .
Most of all , though , it is a strategy , not just for the present , but for the future , too , a viable future .
Industrial policy should be considered together with all the other strategies , concerning the Union of Innovation , raw materials and the efficient use of natural resources .
These three form the core .
It must be a holistic approach , where different policy areas work closely together .
However , are they really different policy areas , given that industry - as you , yourself , Commissioner , have said - is not the enemy , but the ally of sustainability ?
Industrial policy cannot function without an integrated market .
The internal market is still too fragmented and requires completion .
The whole industry , especially small innovative companies , stand to benefit from that .
Producers are allowed to offer their opinions , but they must also accept responsibility , and that means ultimate responsibility for the product .
The aim is to promote clean production and sustainable products , because I believe that this , ultimately , is the future of Europe .
It will help us create cradle-to-cradle industry and encourage intelligent use of raw materials and a healthy economy .
Industrial policy has been neglected and left to the market for too long .
It is time that we set an example again , both for others and for ourselves .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to thank you for the attention given to industrial matters and to pay tribute to the tremendous work accomplished by my fellow Member , Mrs Grossetête , on behalf of our political group .
Industry accounts for 60 million jobs plus two extra jobs in related services for each job in industry , that is to say , 180 million jobs in total .
It accounts for three quarters of our exports , namely 5.5 million enterprises .
What must we do ?
We have to act and to protect ourselves .
Self-protection is not protectionism ; we must therefore have an industrial policy .
Some say : agriculture in South America , industry in China and services in Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , if we do not manufacture more cars , more planes , more ships , more trains , more satellites , more medicines , more nuclear power stations , we will be ruined !
As for services , we will have them because we will have an industrial policy .
I would therefore like to make three proposals .
The first relates to industry standards .
Whenever we set industry standards , we must have impact studies to ensure that our products are manufactured in accordance with these standards on EU territory .
The second concerns education and research .
We must have the best engineering schools in the world and we must support them .
We must reconcile the public with science .
As regards research , we are going to review the Seventh Framework Programme .
We have EUR 30 billion to spend in 2011 , 2012 and 2013 .
Let us allocate a portion of these envelopes to industry as a matter of priority .
The third is funding .
We could create a European Industrial Investment Fund .
I have a suggestion to make .
We owe EUR 37 billion to the pensions of EU staff ; let us put this fund into a pension fund , which would be a long-term savings vehicle .
I share the view on monetary policies .
Let us be very cautious about exiting the crisis .
Let us ensure that we do not have interest rates that are too high , which would result in a strong euro and put a brake on industrial exports .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the manufacturing industry remains important , even in the knowledge-based economy of today and tomorrow .
Maintaining high-value production in Europe remains essential and , at the same time , it is a mainstay of the knowledge and learning of many people in our countries and of the continued development of our competitiveness .
This report rightly sets industry high on the European agenda and that is important for both large industry and small and medium-sized enterprises .
In Europe , we can boast excellence in many fields .
I am thinking of the energy , space travel and automotive industries , which are all doing splendidly at the moment .
Then I am also thinking of the automotive industry 's supply chain , which is essential for Europe .
Just look how clever and clean the EU 2020 strategy is !
However , I do have one concern , and that is globalisation .
We have rightly established The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and we will soon have the European patent .
Nevertheless , Commissioner Tajani has put the issue of the necessity of a worldwide level playing field on the agenda .
It is great that Chinese companies are investing in Europe , but we should have a level playing field there .
If it is , indeed , the case that large government funds are being invested in this , then something is wrong .
Returning to protectionism is not one of our goals - as Mr Audy has just said - but this is about ensuring the necessary transparency in key sectors , such as the ICT and other key European sectors .
This is not a European veto .
We are not saying ' these are the shareholders , those are the supervisors ' , but it is really important that we , representing Europe , look into this properly .
It would not be out of place to start a debate on this , in response to Mr Lange 's excellent report .
It will continue .
Commissioner Tajani , I wish to invite you to join in that debate .
( NL ) Madam President , with the Lange report , you , Commissioner , will tomorrow most likely see Parliament standing fairly united on the importance of industrial policy .
For you , as Commissioner , that must be a real shot in the arm .
There is considerable consensus amongst the various groups that industrial policy in Europe has a future and that it should be supported .
That is the extent of that consensus , however , because , if we were to try to establish what kind of industrial policy we mean and which of its elements should be retained in the future , then we would all disagree .
You yourself have referred to the fact that we need an industry which uses less energy and fewer materials .
I am with you on that , as far as short-term objectives are concerned .
Regarding the long-term objectives , we need to make a much bigger leap .
As you know , Commissioner , management means looking ahead .
We must have the courage to say that , by 2050 , we will have an energy supply system which is wholly based on renewable and sustainable energy and we have to start preparing industry for that now .
Secondly , material management .
We must , indeed , ensure that these mobile phones are more effectively recycled over the next few years , but in the future , we have to ensure that we manufacture mobile phones which are completely embedded in a cradle-to-cradle-concept , so that all the essential components of that mobile phone are systematically recovered and used to produce new mobile phones .
It is that kind of overall policy that needs to be developed by 2050 and I expect the Commission to take decisions now that will ensure that industry has a clear framework to work towards .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think the text of the Lange report is balanced and its main merit is that it centres its examination on certain crucial factors , in particular , the revival of the European industrial policy and the shift in focus from financial activities to the real economy .
It should be noted , however , that those services linked directly or indirectly to companies are an integral part of them .
I have a few criticisms and proposals to make .
With regard to paragraph 89 on enhanced cooperation on the European patent , I believe , Mr Tajani , that the single European patent is essential and indispensable , especially for us Italians .
The deadlock that has been created through enhanced cooperation can , in my view , only be broken by taking the European patent forward just in English , because using three languages would create an unheard-of precedent .
My second consideration is the lack of any innovative financing proposals .
The text often mentions the need to move swiftly towards the building of trans-European infrastructures , which are crucial for the continent 's development , but it says little about how to finance those networks .
Earlier today we adopted an own-initiative report analysing in depth the system of project bonds in a public / private partnership system , which would thus offer guarantees on securities issued by the companies that are set up to build and run such infrastructures ; Mr Audy has just quoted some examples .
There is no reference to the link between the European Union 's industrial policy and strategic policies for the Union such as Galileo , ITER and others .
There needs to be a greater link between research and innovation .
Mr Tajani , I believe the challenge facing us is of vital importance for maintaining the social context .
In fact , the slight recovery that we have seen cannot reabsorb the number of people made redundant over the last three years .
It is , unfortunately , necessary to act in time and quickly .
( FR ) Madam President , the excellent report by Mr Lange has three positive features .
Firstly , it proposes an integrated industrial strategy for the European Union ; that is to say , a strategy at once continental and cooperative , which differs in all respects from the narrowly national and non-cooperative policies in operation in Europe for the last 15 years .
Secondly , this industrial strategy is financed , which is in marked contrast to the 2000 Lisbon strategy .
If it were not financed , it would remain empty words .
The main source of this funding is EU project bonds , Eurobonds and euro projects .
In voting this morning , we faced up to that .
Thirdly , this strategy protects our industries .
This report is for opening up Europe ; it is against giving it away .
It is for exchanges founded on reciprocity and balance .
Several articles focus on these issues .
This is absolutely crucial because , in this area , we appear naive and weak .
( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , during the crisis , we could see for ourselves how important the role of industry is in our economy .
Unfortunately , our relevant policies are still often based on the idea that markets must regulate themselves .
In this respect , the Europe 2020 strategy is a pioneering initiative , the first to acknowledge the need for a new approach .
European industry must retain its leading position in key areas , and must not be allowed to lag behind events .
We must treat the new structure of the financial sector and the coordination of the fiscal macro-economy as priorities , because only through their reform can we ensure the success of our industrial policy .
We need a new , comprehensive regulatory framework which can steer the financial system back to productive investments .
An industrial base that is competitive on a global scale and a knowledge-based industry focused on production must be at the heart of our industrial policy .
To this end , however , we will need the entire innovation chain .
In this case , we should not only talk about technological innovation , but about the innovation of product design and quality as well .
Furthermore , we must encourage synergies within the sector .
These include the link between energy policy and industrial policy .
Energy supply is an essential factor , and the new , growing markets lie in renewable energy sources , which may consequently result in the creation of new jobs .
Reliable access to raw materials is also crucial , and faces us with an increasingly serious challenge .
In addition to securing already existing resources , we must also be able to realise our recycling efforts .
We must also do everything in our power to strengthen SMEs , as they are key actors in European industrial production .
We must encourage their highest possible participation in public procurement and must provide them with access to favourable bank loans .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to congratulate Mr Lange on the completion of this important report .
It is very important during these times of economic austerity that the European institutions are pushing for a strong cohesive industrial policy to maintain jobs in Europe and to encourage renewed competitiveness .
Vice-President Tajani has stated that industry is at the heart of Europe and is indispensable for finding solutions to the challenges of our society today and in the future .
The S & D Group position is that industry plays a key role for jobs in Europe .
This is why we must enhance efforts to maintain a strong industrial base in Europe .
I am specifically concerned about developing the necessary infrastructure where it does not exist .
Finally , I am glad to see that the final report strongly advocates the significance of raw materials in the industrial sector of the future .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I offer my congratulations to Commissioner Tajani on the work that has been done and also to the rapporteurs .
I am in favour of this important report , which represents Parliament 's contribution to the debate on Europe 's industrial policy .
There are many positive points in it , which I strongly support .
First of all , I think every possible effort must be made to reaffirm the key role of European industry on the world stage and to offer particular support to small and medium-sized enterprises , which form a vital pillar in the internal market .
In addition , I fully agree with what the report says about the urgent need to introduce European provisions regarding origin marking in order to make companies more competitive and to enable European consumers at last to make informed choices about products normally associated with a reputation for quality .
Unfortunately , it is well known that some states have been opposed to this specific point in the Council since 2005 .
We must , however , try to break this deadlock , based on the strongly favourable position adopted by Parliament on several occasions , and this is important during the legislative process of a number of EU acts .
The voice of the European public cannot be ignored again , especially when it is based on such solid foundations : it is a question of making our policies more democratic .
Another important point is surely the one concerning young entrepreneurs - whom you , Commissioner , referred to more than once in your report - because I believe they are truly the future of our industrial policy .
I still have doubts about certain aspects , such as the explicit reference to new legislation on resource efficiency , the creation of task forces at national level to manage restructuring operations , and especially enhanced cooperation on the European patent .
( ET ) Madam President , I would first like to thank the rapporteur .
Europe needs a new approach to industrial policy and the funding of programmes related to it .
In addition to the structural reforms in the European Union 's financial perspective , the emphasis should be on innovative financing measures .
I am not only talking about Eurobonds or project bonds , but about completely novel approaches to industrial policy , science and the funding of innovation .
We must take innovative small businesses and help them grow .
We must find new ways to help companies to share risks and combine various instruments , including on a pan-European basis
Estonia has experience , for example , with revolving funds , which guarantee risk , rather than giving out grants and direct assistance .
In the innovation cycle , these funds have facilitated a considerable increase in such funding for businesses .
Grants are important , but what is more important , in the basic research phase , is to find new ways to use public money more effectively .
( RO ) Madam President , the EU 's industrial policy must create an adequate framework for boosting the industrial sector 's contribution to EU GDP .
It must also improve the European Union 's competitiveness and create jobs across the whole Union .
Industrial strategy must identify the strategic areas in which we will invest , as well as the necessary raw material sources .
I call on the Commission and Member States to ensure that these priorities are supported by the future financial perspective , the annual budgets and EU sector policies .
Energy consumption is an industrial production indicator .
We need an eco-efficient industrial policy , providing production capacity across the EU in a sustainable manner and reducing the Union 's energy dependency .
The Union 's competitiveness depends largely on its capacity for innovation , research and development and on the link between innovation and the production process .
Public funding must be increased for research and development in order to mobilise private investment , while simplifying procedures and cutting red tape are a prerequisite for industry 's increased involvement .
( HU ) Madam President , the economic crisis has demonstrated that the service sectors are far more vulnerable than industrial policy , and Europe must therefore once again focus on the latter .
I therefore very much welcome both the attitude of Commissioner Tajani and the report of our colleague , Mr Bernd Lange , on this subject .
It has been a pleasure working on this report .
Every one of the participants wanted to add something to it .
We were not arguing about what the difficulties were , but rather about how we could accelerate this process .
It is imperative that we understand that the European Union must play a leading role in setting its own goals , and also in pulling the Member States along on this road .
The European Union must coordinate , lead and hold the Member States to account for what they have achieved in this area .
Industrial policy provides Europe with the opportunity to gain a competitive advantage in manufacturing industries , biotechnology , nanotechnology , the chemical industry , or even in fields related to the aerospace industry .
We must understand that in the industrial policy of the 21st century , the intensity of knowledge and the efficiency of material use are increasing .
At the same time , we must strengthen vertical relationships , from education to research to market opportunities .
Supplier relations , including small and medium-sized enterprises , as well as horizontal relations , must be established .
We believe that social dialogue cannot be circumvented .
( ES ) Madam President , this report on industrial policy , on which we will vote tomorrow , includes a point that will not be supported by the Spanish Members because it welcomes enhanced cooperation as an appropriate legal instrument for the establishment of a single EU patent .
It is not only the Spanish Members , but also others from different Member States who , firstly , call into question the legality of enhanced cooperation as an appropriate legal instrument in this case , and , secondly , condemn the failure to observe the rule of unanimity , which should be applied to all issues relating to the rules governing languages .
However , my reason for asking to speak , Madam President , was to draw Parliament 's attention to Opinion 1 / 09 published today by the Court of Justice of the European Union , which states that the European and Community Patent Court , as is currently being proposed , is not compatible with the Treaties .
The clear position expressed by Court of Justice is a considerable obstacle to this enhanced cooperation , and I hope this decision will encourage other Members to join us in order to defend the equality of all Member States and the rigorous application of EU primary law .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report on the industrial policy is thorough , examines all the weaknesses in the system , and points us in the direction of respect for the principles of the social market economy .
Realistically , however , we have to accept that Europe has not had its own industrial policy so far .
In fact , productivity in the manufacturing sector in Europe is going through difficult times , while emerging countries are not only growing but also investing heavily in research and technology .
To make industry and employment grow in Europe , we need to deploy special measures in addition to the current rules , even to the extent of reviewing the distribution of competences between the Member States and the Union .
Redistribution policies and systems also need to be reviewed in line with a new cultural approach to industrial relations , with the company profit-sharing model at the focus of our reflections .
The Europe 2020 strategy sets out goals that the European Union cannot afford to miss and , if it is to achieve all the targets set , Europe must overcome the challenge of industrial growth by strengthening training and research in support of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for this very important report .
It is good to see that industry is back on Europe 's agenda .
I think that what we need is a balanced European economy .
I speak mainly on agriculture and food policy , but I was moved to participate in this debate because I think talking about industry and agriculture and services is really important .
Europe needs a balance of all three and not to recognise that would be very foolish .
I want , in particular , to draw attention to paragraph 112 , which talks about free trade being the cornerstone of Europe 's economic growth , but also talks about fair global competition and , in particular , urges that , when we come to do bilateral trade agreements or multilateral agreements , we must take account of the principles of sustainable development , social and environmental concerns and relevant standards in those agreements .
Those of us on the agriculture side would say the very same .
So I think this is an important report on all fronts .
( PL ) Madam President , one of the decisive factors affecting industrial growth in the European Union is the trend towards a ' green economy ' .
This is good news .
However , the way in which the current EU regulations operate is blind and arbitrary , resulting in the opposite effect , or , in other words , limiting our progress towards this goal .
The European copper industry has become an example of such an adverse impact .
There can be no question about the fact that both the Climate and Energy Package and the benchmarks directive will cause a drop in the production of copper , which , as we all know , is a metal which is in great demand for innovative and energy-efficient technologies , particularly in relation to electricity transmission and heat transfer in heat exchangers .
I would like to ask the Commissioner whether it is not time - while we still have time - at least to revise certain aspects of these regulations , and to stop these destructive measures ?
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , the deep international economic crisis has hit industry especially hard .
The idea that the markets should regulate themselves has been proved wrong .
Europe has lacked the ability to give a unified response or to perform an economic analysis .
Europe therefore needs to equip itself with a solid , competitive and diversified industrial base .
Europe 's new industrial policy must be able to look to the future by taking a global approach to its own policies aimed at reaffirming the core importance of industry , especially manufacturing , which must continue to be the driving force of our economy and to prompt new intelligent , sustainable and inclusive modes of growth .
I endorse and congratulate Mr Lange on his report , which examines all these factors and provides some interesting food for thought .
( SK ) Madam President , the global economy has been going through major changes for a long time now .
In addition to traditional industrial zones , powerful new industrial centres are growing .
A strong competitive environment is developing , in which we will have to try harder and harder to maintain meaningful employment for our citizens .
In this competition with other industrial centres , we are disadvantaged by two serious drawbacks .
The first comprises the enormous differences in the legal environment which regulates ways of doing business , dispute resolution or the enforcement of obligations , and these differences prevent a broader opening up of cross-border business through the jurisdictions of the Member States .
This is related to the second drawback - the excessive bureaucracy , which not only consumes the money generated by industry while producing no added value , but even harasses those on whose labour it lives , by means of all kinds of statements , regulations and guidelines .
Commissioner , none of the rapidly developing countries have the kind of administrative juggernaut that we have in Europe .
Madam President , honourable Members , I believe the fact that so many MEPs are present for an evening sitting shows just how important industrial policy is for all of us , and , since there is consensual agreement , how right it is to put industrial policy and enterprise policy - basically the real economy , which is also the internal market , innovation , competition and social policy - at the heart of our political action to end the crisis and to create development and jobs .
I say this because we must not believe - and I think I have been clear both in the course of my speech and in the report on industrial policy that I presented to the Commission - that enterprise and industry are merely economic capital , because they are also human capital , the region , the local community in which they operate .
As I also said during my hearing before Parliament prior to my appointment as Industry Commissioner , this is my vision - a broader vision - which stems from a concept that is part of the Treaty of Lisbon , namely , the social market economy .
The ultimate aim of all our actions , both in terms of economic policy and in terms of the real economy , is social policy .
Our objective is not to enrich entrepreneurs or investors , although the enrichment of investors is one instrument for responding to the citizens of the European Union .
We now have to apply and defend the choices we have made and are making - which are contained in the Europe 2020 document - with a strong effort to apply the political choices that we have made .
I am not concealing from you , nor from myself , the dangers that still exist .
Speculators are still active , and I do not rule out the possibility that they may still try to have one last throw of the dice .
It must be very clear that we are on the side of the real economy .
Speculation that enriches only those who perform a transaction is very different from the action of a business or industry that creates prosperity for many citizens .
However , we must remain vigilant , and work and apply our industrial policy .
Consequently , the Commission 's industrial policy document contains a series of competitiveness tests that will be used to monitor the application of a serious industrial policy , which will allow our entrepreneurial system to take up the challenge in the globalised era .
Nor am I avoiding the question asked by Mr van Nistelrooij : I believe that the game must always be played on a level field and according to the same rules .
Madam President , when Anderlecht plays Liège , the rules must be the same whether it plays at home or away , and the same principle must also apply to our industrial system .
When our industries play in Europe , they must see the same rules applied as when they play outside the European Union .
I believe that this is a good rule for defending not only the market , competition and growth , but also the rights of workers in the European Union .
Yet when it comes to defending the European industrial system , I believe that it is right to support the principle contained in the document that we are discussing in favour of origin marking .
I consider that Parliament is once more giving a strong signal in harmony with the European Commission .
There are doubtless many other things that need to be done to reduce the bureaucratic burden on companies and industry .
As the revised Small Business Act states , we have to reduce the time taken to set up a business and we have to cut red tape , which can be excessive and which crushes the will to do business .
We have to help young people to become entrepreneurs , and we need to do a great deal of work in connection with training .
I therefore believe in the importance of clusters , where schools , universities , SMEs , large companies , research and innovation work together to enhance the competitiveness of our entrepreneurial system .
We already have 2 000 clusters in Europe , and I believe that this pilot scheme must be rolled out .
With regard to access to credit , a great deal has been done , but we can do more .
I am very pleased to hear that the Managing Director of the London Stock Exchange - the United Kingdom is one of the countries where much has been done to help services , banks and finance - will take full part in the credit access forum organised by the European Commission to show that the world of finance , or part of the world of finance , wants to participate in the growth and development of SMEs and our industrial system .
This signal from London - and it is not the only signal to have come from the United Kingdom - makes me hopeful that this trend will be reversed .
We need this to happen in Europe in order to help the real economy .
With regard to raw materials - a topic that has arisen in several debates - I am absolutely convinced that we must continue along the road taken .
The European Commission has issued a document and there will be a debate , as a result of which we are now working on part of the raw materials issue .
As I said in my first speech , I am totally in favour of conducting research into raw materials recycling .
We can also work on finding substitutes for rare raw materials .
Therefore , in an activity also linked to our innovation policy , one of the innovation partnerships envisaged by the European Commission relates precisely to innovation in the raw materials sector .
I repeat , recycling and substitution are areas which I believe we should continue to explore in order to provide our industry with specific responses , including international policy initiatives , as I have said on many occasions .
Following the agreement with the African Union and after opening a debate with the Russian Federation on the issue of raw materials , I shall travel to Latin America at the beginning of June to discuss the raw materials issue with Brazil , Argentina and Chile .
Europe must give industry and the SME sector a specific response in this respect .
Therefore , we must continue to work on implementing the Small Business Act .
There is a great deal to do ; we have asked all the Member States to appoint an SME ambassador , as the European Commission has done .
The signals being received are positive ; some countries have already appointed an ambassador , or have indicated their intention to do so , and in a broader context , too , because we must not separate large-scale industry from SMEs .
The growth of the real economy is linked to the internal market , industrial policy and SME policy .
Since the role of the unions has been mentioned several times , I will conclude by saying that , for the first time , an Industry Commissioner has met representatives of industry , SMEs and the unions to discuss restructuring policy .
A new season of debate has begun , one that will see workers ' and employers ' representatives sitting together round a table in meetings organised by the European Commission , to promote economic growth and the greater good of all EU citizens .
Commissioner , I have taken due note of your allusion and reference to the Belgian football championship , but I hope that I do not have to take them as some kind of prediction .

Madam President , Mr Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for your many inspiring contributions .
Mr Tajani , the four key messages which bring us together are clear .
Firstly , we want to ensure that industrial policy lies at the heart of EU policy .
Secondly , we want to link together sustainability and competitiveness and develop them further .
Thirdly , we must not take a dogmatic approach , because this area cannot be regulated by the market alone or by the state alone .
We need practical , sensible measures .
Fourthly , this is just the beginning and not the end of the discussion on modernising industrial policy in the European Union .
We are extending a hand to you , Mr Tajani , but we are also aware that we must take you at your word .
We are expecting concrete legislative proposals and also concrete measures to provide financial support , particularly in the field of research .
Mr Tajani , if we are successful , and if the hand that we are extending to you and the statement that you have made are compatible , perhaps we will find ourselves in a situation similar to that at the end of the wonderful film ' Casablanca ' , when Humphrey Bogart says to the police captain : ' I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship ! '
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11 : 30 on Wednesday , 9 March 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The internalisation of trade and supranational corporations are some of the many aspects of globalisation .
When discussing the EU 's industrial policy , we must answer the following question : what kind of industry does Europe need - a corporate , branch-driven industry , characterised by large-scale mass production , or small-scale regional industry , or maybe even national industry ?
Large , supranational corporations , which can sometimes be richer than some countries , accumulate huge profits , and also taxes , including VAT , in one location , most frequently their place of origin .
Apart from employment , the countries in which production takes place are left with only expenses .
Fiat , for example , is a supranational corporation which generates revenues equal to 4 % of Poland 's GDP in statistical terms , but its profits and the majority of its tax revenues go towards another budget .
On top of this , the company has recently transferred the production of its Panda cars to Italy , for political and national reasons , since it can certainly not be for economic reasons .
A conflict of interests is apparent here .
The social situation is deteriorating in Poland , but improving in Italy .
Supranational corporations have already ravaged Poland , buying up industrial firms for 10 % of their value after the end of the People 's Republic of Poland .
The mistakes made by liberal doctrinaires , including Balcerowicz , resulted in the borders of Poland being opened up to global competition from wealthy corporations .
This quickly resulted in the destruction of our industry , the closing down of competitive plants and scientific infrastructure - and huge unemployment .
This is now affecting the old EU Member States , after something of a delay .
A sound industrial policy is needed , but not economic nationalism .
Securing Europe 's supply of rare earth elements ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Commission on ' Securing Europe 's supply of rare earth elements ' , by Mr Tsoukalas , Mr Rübig , Mr Caspary and Mrs Schnieber-Jastram , on behalf of the PPE Group - B7-0017 / 2011 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on ' Securing Europe 's supply of rare earth elements ' , by Mrs Ek , Mr Panayotov , Mrs Hall , Mrs de Sarnez , Mr Rinaldi , Mrs Schaake and Mr Theurer , on behalf of the ALDE Group - B7-0020 / 2011 ) , and
the oral question to the Commission on ' A raw materials strategy for Europe ' by Mr Szymański , on behalf of the ECR Group - B7-0207 / 2011 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
Rare earth elements are critical to hundreds of high-tech applications and key to the development of green technologies .
EU industry depends totally on REE imports from China , which holds a monopoly over 97 % of world production and has 36 % of global economic reserves .
China has strong scientific research in the field and has achieved a palpable competitive advantage in producing alloys and end products .
At the same time , EU industry lacks both access to raw materials and the know-how for processing them .
Although rare earth elements are not as rare as their name suggests , experts estimate that it takes around 10 to 15 years to reorganise a viable production line .
The European Union is developing a medium-term strategy for raw materials ; however , the problem of rare earth elements is much more immediate .
Increased domestic needs in China and its efforts to limit the environmental impact have already resulted in very strict limitations on exports , at a time when global demand is increasing .
China has set lower export limits for the first half of 2011 , down 35 % compared with last year , but stricter limits are expected in the second half .
The shortfall is expected to make itself keenly felt over the next six months , with increases in the prices of rare earth elements and disruptions to production lines .
Experts estimate that there will be a global shortfall of 40 000 tonnes of rare earth elements in 2014 .
The questions to the Commission are direct and urgent :
What short-term measures is the Commission proposing to take , along with its partners , to establish alternative sources of rare earth elements ?
What is the state of play in our talks with China and our international partners on the subject ?
author . - Madam President , I sometimes wonder if Europe 's response in the face of every challenge is to freeze in fear of China and call for trade sanctions and state intervention .
A successful EU raw materials strategy must be aimed at encouraging free trade .
It should contain sustainable and resource-efficient management , innovation and access to raw materials for European companies .
It should not involve stockpiling raw materials with taxpayers ' money .
Europe is increasingly dependent on a small number of key resources and is falling behind in the race to secure alternative sources , but it is private companies , not politicians , who can determine the need to build up stockpiles .
If it is an efficient use of resources , they will do so .
What we need instead is a comprehensive raw materials strategy that involves all aspects of access to rare earths .
This includes trade , research and innovation , recycling and development of transport and infrastructure to enable development of domestic sources .
We need better management of raw materials supply within Europe and effective measures to encourage recycling and reducing waste .
Europe is rich in natural resources and is also strategically placed with its proximity to the resource-rich Barents region .
With minerals , metals and forests , northern Europe has the potential to respond significantly to EU raw material needs in a sustainable way .
We also need to encourage innovation and research into alternative solutions and find ways around materials that European companies find too expensive .
The EU strategy must be based on free trade and must ensure that both developed and developing countries can benefit from the sustainable supply of raw materials .
We should also use the aid-for-trade mechanism .
Europe needs actions aimed at innovation and eliminating trade barriers in third countries , not a policy of stockpiling rare and critical raw materials and undermining democracy abroad .
We need suggestions from the Commission regarding raw materials and rare earth elements .
We are still looking for these suggestions .
Madam President , access to rare earth elements will determine the position and competitiveness of European industry .
If we do not ensure the availability of these materials , we will do away with the most technologically advanced sectors of our economy .
No areas of our policy must therefore be neglected .
We must skilfully use the resources we already have and which have been abandoned unnecessarily .
We must use trade policy instruments to ensure effective prevention of free trade violations .
We cannot therefore limit ourselves to using only the expensive and still very limited possibilities open to us for recovering materials from used appliances .
There are several questions at least which should be put to the European Commission in the context of the communication on raw materials .
Firstly , has the Commission assessed the impact of China 's protectionist raw materials policy on European industry ?
Secondly , what role can recycling play in comparison to the opportunities provided by trade policy and own resources ?
What is the ratio between these three possibilities ?
Thirdly , does the Commission have at its disposal an assessment of the costs involved in increasing the share of recycling in the European raw materials policy ?
Madam President , honourable Members , as you know , at the beginning of February , the Commission approved the updating of the EU strategy on raw materials , which is based on three pillars .
The first concerns the supply of raw materials from outside the European Union through agreements with the African Union .
We have put the raw materials issue on the agenda of our meetings with the Russian Federation .
Moreover , as I said during the previous debate , in June , I will travel to Brazil , Argentina and Chile to initiate diplomatic action with those Latin American countries as well .
Then I will talk about the relationship with China .
The second pillar is about ensuring a more sustainable supply within the EU .
This is why we have updated the implementing rules of Natura 2000 , in agreement with Commissioner Potočnik .
We want to ensure that they are interpreted in a way that will not harm extraction activities but , at the same time , we want to ensure that the environment is still respected .
The third pillar concerns recycling and the efficient use of resources .
I would repeat what I said during the previous debate : as part of our innovation policy , we are planning a series of innovation partnerships in various sectors , one of these being the raw materials sector .
One of the innovation partnerships will concentrate , in particular , on activities that we can carry out in the raw materials recycling and substitution sector .
The new communication emphasises , in particular , the situation concerning the supply of rare earths and other essential raw materials .
There is no doubt that the reduction in the rare earth export quota decided by China significantly limits the global supply .
We are assessing the situation in order to identify the most suitable multilateral instruments , including the World Trade Organisation and our bilateral relations with China .
At the WTO , we have initiated a dispute settlement procedure against China regarding access to the nine principal raw materials in 2009 .
The examination of the case is at an advanced stage , and the conclusions will , of course , be very important for our discussions concerning the initiation of a WTO procedure on rare earths .
At bilateral level , the Commission has taken up the issue with the Chinese Government on several occasions , from both a political and a technical point of view .
At the end of 2010 , a working party was set up between the EU and China to facilitate the dialogue on issues relating to rare earths and other raw materials .
The EU will conduct , within the scope of strategic partnerships and of dialogues on future policies , an active raw materials diplomacy with the aim of guaranteeing access to these materials , and to essential materials in particular .
One example , as I said , is the initiation of a bilateral dialogue in the context of the 2011-2013 Joint Africa-EU strategy , which includes a section specifically dedicated to raw materials .
I have already told you about our relations with Russia and Latin America .
Within the EU , the Commission is supporting the exploration of essential raw material deposits , and this objective is promoted in particular by the ProMine 2009-2013 project , which comes under the Seventh Framework Programme .
As for recycling , it presents huge technological challenges , particularly since the quantity of raw materials contained in many products is infinitely small .
Our strategy is intended to promote recycling through measures aimed at improving the implementation and application of EU waste management legislation .
Furthermore , we shall continue to encourage research and innovation in the recycling and substitution sector , as has already been done under the Seventh Framework Programme for financing projects concerning the substitution of rare earths .
In this context , the Commission is examining the possibility of launching an innovation partnership in the field of raw materials and hopes to present a specific proposal within the next few months .
We have also begun a cooperation exercise with the United States in the field of innovation , and we are examining the possibility of cooperating with Japan as well .
Naturally , we shall continue to keep a close eye on the problem of essential raw materials in order to define the priority measures required , and we believe that security of raw material supplies is essentially the responsibility of companies .
However , we are prepared to discuss , in close cooperation with the Member States , the costs , potential benefits and added value of a raw material stockpiling programme .
This is what we are doing , but naturally , I am always ready to listen to any suggestions from Parliament in order to ensure that the Commission continues to work actively on a matter that is crucial for the competitiveness of our European entrepreneurial system .
Madam President , Mr Tajani , thank you very much indeed for your initiative .
Raw materials will help to ensure that we have a healthy industrial sector in future and , therefore , it is important for us to conclude bilateral agreements with China and many other countries , and not just in the field of trade policy .
For example , we should also be focusing on investment protection agreements , because we can sign long-term contracts in this area which will protect the return on investments in the new mines that we urgently need .
In other words , long-term contracts will provide protection for our investments so that the new mines , which will be competing with existing ones , can receive the financial support that they require .
In the context of the World Trade Organisation 's ( WTO ) follow-up conference to the Doha round , we can also investigate the situation of the Singapore issues .
We have already put together a good package of measures in Singapore and we need to take this forward , perhaps even in parallel with the current Doha negotiations .
We need to find out whether there has been a breach of anti-dumping regulations with regard to the prices which industry in China pays in some cases for raw materials for processing and the surcharges imposed on European industry .
Work on clarifying this is already in progress .
However , this is not just about rare earth elements ( REEs ) , but also about magnesite , for example , which is the most important raw material for fireproof products and which is essential for the production of steel , glass , cement and other materials .
We should be considering possible substitute products which can be used in the future and perhaps establishing our own research programme for these products .
I also welcome Mrs Hedegaard 's proposal for a carbon footprint tax , which would allow additional VAT to be charged on products manufactured with high levels of CO2 emissions that are transported over long distances .
Madam President , Commissioner , I believe this debate shows how important it is for the raw materials strategy to have a long-term and broad impact .
Rare earth elements are , of course , rare on the market , but not in the ground .
There are a number of reasons for this .
They have quite simply not been of sufficient economic interest to quarry in all of the places where we know they are present .
There have also been environmental and working environment disputes .
The EU ought to invest a great deal in research and development . It ought to invest in resource efficiency and , in particular , in recycling , as has been said here throughout the evening .
This , of course , requires everything from intelligent , simple and smart collection strategies to ecodesigns which make it easy to take batteries out of devices that are to be recycled .
However , we also need to move away from our colonial impulses in our cooperation with other countries in other parts of the world .
That is something that we have not managed to do particularly well yet .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , you have already provided some information , Commissioner , but I would like more details .
Firstly , the WTO .
What exactly are we doing at the WTO concerning the initiative that was already taken in 2009 but which , as far as I know , concerned magnesium and bauxite ?
Do we have a procedure at the WTO regarding rare earths ?
Is such a procedure possible and do we initiate it alone , or can we initiate it together with the United States and Japan , as I think would be desirable ?
Secondly , you have said that we need to increase supplies from other deposits , including European ones .
Is there a role for Greenland ?
What is the precise thinking in this respect ?
Thirdly , the recovery of rare earths from recycling .
Are we moving towards a set of European rules on so-called urban mining ?
Will there be a directive or a regulation ?
What is planned in this respect ?
Fourthly , with regard to studies and investigation , the development of investigations , will we have some specific provisions in the Eighth Framework Programme also ?
Furthermore , with regard to the stockpiling system , will we have common European rules on stockpiling in this case , too ?
Finally , to what extent is the issue being dealt with bilaterally with China as part of the high-level economic and commercial dialogue and in the negotiations under way on the new partnership and cooperation agreement with that country ?
Madam President , in the short and medium term , our dependency on the import of rare earth elements ( REEs ) from China certainly presents a problem .
I cannot see that Europe has a strategic weakness and it must not remain dependent .
To put it more bluntly , in some ways , the Chinese are doing us a favour by making it entirely obvious to us that we need to escape from our current position of dependency .
Therefore , we must not make the additional mistake of creating antagonism between Europe and China .
There are opportunities for cooperation in this area .
However , when we look towards Asia , we should also take Japan into consideration .
Over the last year , Japan has been in a more difficult position with regard to access to REEs than Europe has .
Japan has also reacted more quickly and more effectively .
The Japanese Government has spent USD 1 billion on research into the substitution and recycling of REEs .
How much are we making available as part of the Seventh Framework Programme ?
It goes without saying that we need trade policy .
We must also develop our own reserves , where they are available .
However , in my opinion , the strategic focus of our policy on REEs must be innovation , raw material efficiency and technological leadership .
We need mandatory targets for raw material efficiency .
We also need specific , concrete plans for recycling REEs .
The Commission 's communication makes no direct mention of recycling .
This is no longer a solution for the future , but one which we need now .
Many companies have already been doing this for some time , including Rhodia , BASF , Osram and many others .
Substitution is another key factor .
Even China is now beginning to invest in substitutes for REEs , because it is obvious that it cannot continue using these substances at its current rate , even to meet its own requirements .
We must be quick to make the most of the opportunities offered by the current situation and we must not complain that these opportunities are open to us .
Madam President , rare earth elements are of decisive importance for hundreds of technological solutions .
They are therefore an essential factor in continued technological progress and greater innovation in the European Union .
The fact that they are used so widely means that demand has increased , while opportunities for increasing the amounts extracted are growing rarer .
At present , 124 000 tonnes of rare earth elements are extracted annually worldwide , and demand for them will grow by as much as 50 % by 2012 .
Around 97 % of the global supply is extracted in China , which is crucially important , since China has been reducing extraction and exports since 2006 .
In August , it announced that it would be reducing exports by over 50 % and creating strategic reserves .
What is more , many companies extracting rare earth elements in other parts of the world are , in fact , Chinese-owned .
The take-over of a rare earth elements mine by a Chinese mining company was recently blocked in Australia .
This is a very serious problem relating to the monopoly on the extraction of these raw materials .
We must do everything in our power to prevent any risks in connection with this key economic sector , which guarantees Europe 's growth and future .

Madam President , Mr Tajani , only last autumn , the European Parliament specifically welcomed the fact that the Heads of State or Government of the European Union had explicitly recognised , in a statement from the Madrid Summit , the sovereign right of states to manage their own natural resources and to control their use .
The statement also included a specific reference to the importance of sustainability criteria .
The summit was attended by Latin American countries , but the same laws apply to China and other states .
The extraction of rare earth elements ( REEs ) has led to serious environmental damage in China , as was the case in the past in the USA and elsewhere .
This must not continue .
We need an international agreement .
China and other potential producers need our expertise and technology transfer in order to ensure that their mining processes are environmentally friendly and that their miners can work in much greater safety .
China is also interested in investing in high-tech production facilities for processing REEs , because it does not just want to be a supplier of raw materials .
The Commission should therefore play the role of mediator here .
A modern raw materials policy must be characterised by partnership .
At the same time , you must put the emphasis on developing improved recycling and substitution technologies , because in future , the metals found in REEs will become even rarer : too rare simply to use them once .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Tajani , you have made some more announcements today , Mr Tajani , about what the Commission intends to do over the next few months regarding supplies of raw materials .
In 2007 , the Commission also made an announcement and presented its raw materials strategy .
My problem is that the announcements we have heard over recent days and the announcements we have heard over recent weeks are very similar to those made in 2007 .
However , I have the impression that very little has happened since then .
Little has happened at least when it comes to us asserting our own interests .
It seems to me that many other states are promoting their interests very aggressively .
This is known as the ' colonial reflex ' .
I see this happening not in the countries of the European Union , but specifically in China , which is using the issue of raw materials , and of rare earth elements ( REEs ) in particular , to maintain its monopoly and put other countries at a disadvantage .
I increasingly often ask myself , Mr Tajani , who should be responsible for ensuring that something actually happens .
Is it your Directorate-General ?
Is it you ?
Is it the Directorate-General for Trade ?
Is it Mr De Gucht ?
Is it the other commissioners ?
Who really has overall responsibility ?
What concrete steps must be taken ?
Whose actions should we be measuring and when , in order to ensure that measures are actually put in place by the European Union ?
I would be very grateful if you could investigate this issue , because we are all aware that the Chinese are continuing to play an active role and are imposing export restrictions and duties , which present our companies with huge problems .
Has the Commission finally drawn up a list of all the products where the Chinese currently have a competitive advantage because of their export restrictions ?
Is the Commission intending to take anti-dumping measures , where appropriate , in order to remove competitive disadvantages for our companies ?
I would be very grateful if you could turn your attention to these issues .
( RO ) Madam President , rare earth elements are vital for the production of monitors and mobile phones , as well for manufacturing high-performance permanent magnets used in wind turbines or electric vehicles , car catalytic converters , PCBs and fibre optics .
They are therefore vital to new clean energies as well .
Although these elements are traded globally , the market for certain raw materials and rare earth elements is not very transparent and the volumes traded are small .
The European Union is dependent almost entirely on rare earth element imports , with 97 % of their global production being concentrated in China .
The demand for raw materials will be boosted by the growth of the emerging economies and by the rapid spread of new technologies .
The processes for mining , refining and recycling rare earth elements have severe consequences for the environment if they are not managed properly .
The European Union should focus its efforts on streamlining the processes for using and recycling rare earth elements and on research targeted at replacing critical raw materials with other less critical materials .
Commissioner , we call for the list of raw materials to be updated regularly .
( FR ) Madam President , the observations conveyed by the oral questions on which this debate is based are simply a further indication of the scarcity of resources and , in particular , of the increasing scarcity of certain essential minerals .
Moreover , they tell us about the vulnerability of States that import compared to States that hold a monopoly .
The reaction of the European Union must be two-pronged : on the one hand , to ensure that we are not taken hostage by defending our situation in all relevant forums ( WTO , G20 , United Nations ) , while , on the other hand , acting within the framework of the Lisbon strategy in order to reduce our dependence on rare earth elements .
Our watchwords must be effective recycling of materials already used and the promotion of research and development programmes into alternative products .
Finally , through our partnerships with developing countries , the EU must help prevent the looting of the rare earth elements belonging to those countries .
( Applause )

( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , the situation is clear : the EU needs to secure its supply of rare earth elements , but we face increasingly tough competition in this market .
To be sure , China controls 95 % of global production , and its continued cuts in export quotas have placed this issue at the heart of the G20 agenda .
We are therefore debating a critical issue for the whole European economy , one that must , of course , be addressed through cooperation with countries that have reserves , but also , and above all , through research , development and innovation .
It has already been said that investing in research and development is vital if we are to tackle the technological challenges involved in finding more efficient extraction techniques , searching for alternative raw materials to reduce dependence and recycling , which is something of the utmost importance , as the so-called ' urban mines ' could be an important source of raw materials for the European Union .
We therefore congratulate the Commissioner on his commitments to this issue , and we will be keeping a close eye on all the steps that the Commission takes in this regard .

Madam President , I must say that I am very concerned about some of the aspects I have listened to here in Parliament recently - tonight , the shortage of rare earth elements ; last night , the 80 % deficiency in protein ; a few weeks ago , sugar beet factories being closed down and now we have a deficiency in sugar .

I think it is time the European Union started putting itself first and particularly trying to promote its industries .
Obviously , where rare earth elements are concerned , I welcome the Commissioner 's commitment to look at innovation in terms of getting substitution , etc . ( and also recycling ) , but , above all , to look at new technologies .
I attended a seminar a few weeks ago in Brussels which described new technology developed to get rare elements from the seabed .
At the end of the day , we have to look to be self-sufficient .
It is good for the Commissioner to go to Brazil and to talk to China , but if diplomacy fails and they do not give us what we want , where do we go ?
If we do not have a strong economy , we will be irrelevant politically .
( LT ) Madam President , the issue of raw materials is inseparable from the European Union 's growth and economic progress .
We can therefore congratulate the Commission for the raw materials strategy .
Nevertheless , the potential shortage of raw materials in the future should not only make us focus on solving the issue of access to raw materials .
I agree that this may be a very good opportunity to turn the European Union economy towards a model based on using resources more efficiently .
A reduction in the use of raw materials and much greater concentration on the efficient processing of raw materials are probably the quickest route to reducing the Union 's import needs .
Proper investment in new processing technologies and the creation of substitute raw materials would facilitate a significant reduction in dependence on imported rare earth elements .
This could ensure a leading role for Europe in this area and would make a major contribution to the implementation of the goals set out in the Europe 2020 strategy .
( PT ) Madam President , this debate on the difficulty of accessing commodities , such as rare earth elements , is intrinsically linked to the current state of development of the world economy and the systemic crisis in which we are immersed .
The crisis which was announced as being financial is , in reality , a much larger , global crisis .
It is a crisis that is also rooted in the confrontation between economic growth as it is understood by capitalism and a planet Earth that is generous but finite .
The roots of a system , capitalism , which subordinates everything to the dynamic of profit and accumulation , also lie in this inability to understand nature and its limits ; but nature does , in fact , have limits .
The move toward a world that is polycentric from the economic and political points of view opens the way for increased competition for resources : it awakens and feeds conflicts .
The foreign-exchange and trade wars that we have been witnessing are worrying symptoms , but not isolated ones .
Other wars are queuing up as threats to the present and future , and it is also about all these things that we are talking when we are debating what has been brought before us today .
Madam President , Commissioner , when my grandmother was born , she was one of the two billion living on earth ; when I was born , I was one of the five billion on earth ; and when my granddaughter is born , she will be one of the nine billion living on earth .
So extensive technologies must be replaced by intensive technologies for all resources , including rare materials .
Therefore , I would like to remember somebody who , a hundred years ago , received a Nobel Prize for chemistry for the separation and purification of radium and polonium : Maria Skłodowska , who is known as Madame Curie .
We need Madame Curies , we need scientists , we need breakthrough technologies .
I would therefore like to ask you , Commissioner , to do your utmost to ensure that chemistry remains a place for young talent in Europe .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , yes , we could import raw materials , but we should be conserving them , instead .
Perhaps we could even start producing them ourselves .
I welcome your initiative for a new partnership , one which includes substitution in its remit , but I think that the other members have already mentioned this and they are right : we have to try to conserve raw materials here in Europe .
That is very important .
We need to increase collection .
We need to switch to other business models , in order to recover rare earth elements for recycling wherever possible .
We can do this through innovation and , to that end , we need greater efficiency .
However , I have one very important concern : are you going to ensure that , if those rare earth elements become even rarer , they will be reserved for the most important applications ?
Are you going to ensure that , should these metals become even rarer , the applications we all need the most , those that are the most urgent , will ultimately be enabled to continue ?
For example , are you going to ensure that , instead of ending up as part of a McThis or McThat , these metals are allocated to windmills ?
Will you look at that issue as well ?
That seems to me to be very important .
( PL ) Madam President , for reasons of competitiveness , market players are predisposed towards investments which give a rapid return , or , in other words , investments in plants whose products reach consumers directly .
Investments in prospecting for raw materials , particularly in mineral deposits , involve a long and expensive process with a long wait for returns .
It is therefore only the largest investors which can afford them .
They are mainly monopolists and can set their own conditions , as was the case with the rare earth elements .
It has now turned out that Europe 's growth is limited due to a lack of lanthanides , in particular , samarium and neodymium , which are needed for the production of high-energy permanent magnets and which are used in wind energy and to power electric vehicles .
It is time for the European Union to pay attention to the security of raw materials , in the same way as it pays attention to energy security .
This relates not only to rare earth elements , but also to other rare raw materials and materials used as catalysts , for example , rhenium and the platinum metals , tungsten , molybdenum , lithium , selenium and so on . Thank you .
Madam President , honourable Members , I would like to thank Parliament because , with this debate , it is giving power to the action that the European Commission - and the Barroso II Commission in particular - is taking to resolve the sensitive issue of rare materials .
As Mr Scholz emphasised , since the Madrid meeting , the European Commission has begun to take determined action .
In other words , it has not just made announcements ; it has taken specific measures .
When I say specific measures , I mean the preparation of a list of 14 rare raw materials on which action is needed - a list which , unfortunately , I fear will have to be extended .
In addition , the first agreement with the African Union has involved several months of work and has culminated in an agreement within the African Union / European Union action plan , which sees Africa directly involved in a joint effort with the European Union and with the Commission .
That effort concerns both what we can do within the EU to analyse our needs and an analysis of the real possibilities of extraction work in Africa , the possible implementation of a geological service and the plan to create trans-African network infrastructure to support the mines from which it will be possible to expand the extraction industry .
The agreement with the Russian Federation to put raw material agreements on the agenda is another definite result - not just an announcement - and two meetings have been held .
In the same way , the European Commission document on raw materials is not merely an announcement , but a Commission-approved text that outlines a clear and precise strategy , as I told you , which is based on three specific pillars on which we intend to continue to work .
The decision to create an innovation partnership linked to an action that will see the private sector - and , I hope , also Parliament and the other institutions - participating in innovation and research with the aim of identifying robust recycling and substitution measures yielding real results is not just an announcement , but a specific measure on the part of the European Commission .
It is a request that has been approved by the College and which is therefore part of the Commission 's innovation strategy .
With regard to the WTO , naturally , we shall continue to work to resolve the issue by diplomatic means .
The trip to Latin America is another specific measure , not just another announcement , because visits connected with such sensitive issues require dedicated preparation that must subsequently produce real results .
Naturally , I shall inform Parliament about what has been done .
With regard to certain locations in Europe where it is possible to check whether raw materials are present in the subsoil - I am thinking of Greenland , the Barents Sea and other locations in northern Europe - we need to check whether extraction activities are possible and whether they are economically viable .
However , we are ready to support any initiatives aimed at carrying out possible investigations .
Next week , a political debate , but one that includes technical aspects too , will be held at the European Parliament building in Brussels .
It will focus on the opportunities that exist in the Barents Sea , and I will be present in order to discuss with some Swedish ministers and some experts whether those opportunities are economically viable or not , and whether they are viable from an environmental point of view - another area where we need to see whether it is right and appropriate to carry out investigations .
With regard to the WTO , I am responsible for the industrial part of the raw materials issue .
Commissioner De Gucht is responsible for the commercial part .
He has already said very clearly that he intends to defend the interests of the EU .
Indeed , and I also say this for the benefit of those who are interested , including Mr Caspary , who I believe asked the question - if he wishes , I will forward it to him by tomorrow morning - paragraph 5 ( 2 ) of the document in the raw materials communication mentions possible anti-dumping measures and commercial action .
However , with regard to the action at the WTO , for which Commissioner De Gucht is responsible - as I have said during my speech - we have initiated a procedure with Mexico and the United States regarding nine raw materials , which do not include rare earths .
The examination is already at an advanced stage of completion .
Hence , the conclusions will also be crucial in terms of indicating the steps the Commission should subsequently take with regard to rare earths .
We are evaluating the situation precisely in order to identify the most suitable instruments in this area .
However , with regard to the recycling of rare earth elements , and the question asked by Mr Rinaldi during his speech , I can answer by explaining the recycling measures that we as the European Commission intend to take .
Current legislation covers 40 % of the waste produced in the EU .
The Commission has proposed to expand significantly on Commissioner Potočnik 's proposal , which is not my proposal , regarding the targets for recycling electrical and electronic waste containing rare earths .
Other measures are also planned in order to improve the action concerning products and to facilitate their end-of-life recycling .
Legislation is already being drafted , and Commissioner Potočnik intends to continue to work along these lines .
With regard to industrial policy relating to rare earths and raw materials , it is my intention to continue to move forward and not to make promises , because I am not accustomed to making them - I am accustomed to honouring the commitments I make , particularly those I make before Parliament , as I have done ever since I obtained a vote of confidence from the committees to which I presented myself .
I intend to continue to move forward and to honour all the commitments I have made , without making announcements , but by trying to provide specific responses to the needs of European companies and citizens , including in this sensitive area of industrial supplies .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Rare earths are a key element of the European economy .
Following the European Commission communication on the raw materials initiative , we have to strive to ensure that an ambitious common strategy is defined quickly for this sector .
We really must prevent Europe from becoming totally dependent on the current monopoly enjoyed by China , which today produces 97 % of these metals and are indispensable for high-tech industries .
It is therefore necessary not only to re-evaluate the extraction potential within Europe , but also to recover these precious elements from waste by means of more effective recycling .
In this respect , the European Union must urgently invest more resources in technological research , aimed , in particular , at an easier and more economical form of extraction of rare earths from electronic waste .
One need only think , for example , that up to 350 grams of gold could be extracted from one tonne of mobile phones , if they are recycled correctly .
The road to guaranteeing a sustainable supply of these elements is still long and cannot develop without greater cooperation with resource-rich countries through strategic partnerships and ongoing relations .
Finally , I would like to see timely measures adopted to deal with the increase in the prices of these materials , which are of strategic importance for European industry .
We have recently started to become increasingly aware of the fact that rare earth elements are of decisive importance for technological applications and of fundamental importance for the development of environmentally-friendly technologies such as wind turbines , hybrid vehicles , etc .
It should be noted that their extraction is extremely complicated .
EU industry is entirely dependent on imports of rare earth elements from China , which has a virtual monopoly in this area , since it controls 97 % of global production .
China possesses 36 % of confirmed global reserves of rare earth elements and 59 % of estimated total reserves and , at the same time , is endeavouring to conclude bilateral agreements in order to secure proven reserves throughout the world .
EU industry lacks access both to rare earth elements as raw materials , and to the expert scientific and industrial knowledge needed to process them .
Furthermore , while global demand for rare earth elements is still growing , China has announced drastic cuts to its exports , as vividly described by a group of Japanese experts during a very interesting presentation they made when visiting the European Parliament in February 2011 .
In connection with the unquestionable need for exploitation of rare earth elements by industry in the EU Member States and the need for research into them , I would call for dialogue with the People 's Republic of China on increasing exports of these raw materials and for our efforts to be focused on searching for alternative sources for their extraction .
Possibility of using gas from alternative sources in Europe ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the possibility of using gas from alternative sources in Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this agenda item addresses an issue which will certainly be an important concern of ours in the months to come : What will the gas market look like during the next few decades ?
The question is what role gas will play in the near future in heat generation , conversion to electricity , industry and as a fuel for transport and , therefore , in our energy timetable leading up to 2050 , where it will be of huge importance .
We also need to consider how the transport routes should be developed , including pipelines , infrastructure and terminals .
Other issues include investment costs and the forecasts concerning the gas price in the energy mix .
The European gas market currently has a volume of around 520 billion cubic metres per year .
Part of this comes from our own deposits in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands , but more than 60 % of our gas supplies are imported from third countries and this figure will soon reach over 80 % .
For this reason , new deposits , such as gas in rocks , will be a useful supplement to existing deposits and will therefore reduce our dependency on imports .
There is currently a boom in sales of tight gas and shale gas from the USA .
Ten years ago , no one would have believed how quickly and how dramatically the production of gas from rocks , which is extracted using water pressure and chemical agents , would transform the market .
Until a few years ago , the USA was an importer of gas .
Now it is an exporter , even given its own growing demand for gas .
Therefore , the gas market , which has always been a continental market , is , for the first time , on the way to becoming a global market , with gas from the USA being supplied to liquid natural gas ( LNG ) terminals in Europe .
I am not drawing any conclusions from this development at the moment .
The issue of avoiding increasing dependency , the open market and world trade all speak out in favour of it .
It is also in the interest of some Member States .
However , on the other hand , it is important to make it clear that we have environmental regulations governing running water and groundwater and the extraction of raw materials from the earth .
We also have legislation concerning hydrocarbon resources which aims to allow non-discriminatory access to the environment and also to protect it .
In addition , there are health and safety regulations for EU citizens .
All of these things have to be taken into consideration .
There is potential for research and , where appropriate , for extraction , firstly in Poland and then also in the United Kingdom and Germany .
In Germany , however , there is also the issue of acceptance .
It will not be possible to extract this gas without the acceptance of the people in the regions and the local residents .
The Commission is monitoring the process and is also prepared to issue expert reports .
I believe that we will not have a clear idea of the proportion of our own gas from rocks on the European market for three to five years .
We must follow up these developments without prejudging them .
However , it has to be said that even if we make use of these deposits , they will only ever supplement existing sources of gas .
This means that imports of conventional gas from third countries such as Norway , Russia and Algeria , or by sea from Qatar and other states , will definitely continue to play a central role in meeting the needs of the European gas market in the decades to come .
Infrastructure such as new , secure pipelines and additional LNG terminals will remain important .
I think there is the possibility for us to extract our own gas to supplement imports , but this will definitely not be able to replace imported gas .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am pleased that the European Parliament has managed to initiate a debate on the possibility of exploiting gas from non-conventional energy sources , such as shale gas , tight gas and coalbed methane .
In view of the Energy Council 's recent conclusions on energy and the broad public debate , I believe that shale gas may , in the long term , become one of the ways in which energy sources can be diversified .
The European Union should not preach to the converted ; instead , it should take a closer look at the United States , for example , to see how the extraction of shale gas has already revolutionised the energy market there .
Assuming that this will have even greater consequences for the global market in the future , obtaining shale gas should also be a priority for Europe , in particular , because resources of the gas exceed conventional gas reserves in the European Union fourfold , according to the Second Strategic Energy Review .
Commissioner , the European Union should carry out initial analyses of the extraction of shale gas in Europe .
The potential for shale gas has already been noted in Germany , France , Romania , Bulgaria , the Netherlands , Sweden , Poland and Great Britain , among others .
If possible , financial support should be provided for research programmes , which would allow safe and economically viable technologies for extracting gas from non-conventional energy sources to be developed .
I will permit myself to ask two questions .
Firstly , is the Commission taking steps to carry out initial analyses of the possibility of exploiting gas from alternative sources in Europe , and is it preparing technical and economic feasibility studies of such extraction in the context of work on the energy infrastructure priorities between now and 2020 ?
My second question is as follows ; has the Commission made any provision in the planned 2014-2020 financial perspective for support for geological research with a view to estimating the potential of existing deposits and the possibility of extracting shale gas in Europe , which will accelerate technological development in the field ?
Madam President , as the Member States ' economies and industry recover , there will be an ever-increasing demand for gas .
Meanwhile , the rapid depletion of our own natural gas resources may make the Union even more dependent on third country suppliers and weaken our industry 's competitiveness .
Gas from alternative sources may be an effective way out , fundamentally redrawing Europe 's gas supply map and redistributing economic levers .
However , it is necessary to take action immediately and we could take advantage of the experience already gained by other countries .
Recently , there has been much discussion about the potential of shale gas , and today , Commissioner , you also indicated that this was noted in the conclusions of the European Council of 4 February .
I believe that the European Union really must establish concrete plans as a matter of urgency and begin to research possible deposits of such gases and their use .
Of course , as you mentioned , shale gas must not and cannot be the only way of reducing energy dependence .
However , if the predictions of European Union geologists are confirmed , then gas reserves may be found not just in Poland and Germany , but possibly also in other countries .
In future , this would help reduce the influence of third countries on the European Union 's economy and its competitiveness .
Unfortunately , in this area , we lag at least a decade behind the United States , where the ever-increasing quantities of shale gas being obtained have completely transformed the gas market .
I believe that efforts in this area need to be intensified and concrete measures need to be adopted to use these sources in the economy .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I fully understand the enthusiasm arising from the presence of shale gas in European subsoils and the desire for energy independence is highly commendable .
That said , I think that this optimism should be considerably tempered , first in the United States , where shale gas is indeed widely used .
Several States are moving towards a moratorium and the Independent Panel of Experts ( IPE ) has been commissioned to carry out an impact assessment , which will take more than two years , to analyse the environmental consequences of this exploitation .
Secondly , at a time when we are trying to substantially reduce our greenhouse gas emissions , it would appear to be totally inconsistent with EU policies for an impact assessment of the purely climatic impact in terms of greenhouse gases of the exploitation of these deposits not to be carried out before any in-depth research were undertaken .
Thirdly , Commissioner , you said that we must comply with environmental standards .
We take note of and welcome that .
Nevertheless , in countries where exploration licences are granted - and I am thinking in particular of my own country - it is clear today that environmental law has been totally forgotten ; it is not applied and we are in breach of the law .
The Aarhus Convention is not applied , people have not been warned , there is no public inquiry , there is no impact assessment , and there is concealment of the dangerous chemicals that are used .
Therefore , it is absolutely unacceptable to continue in this way and the real issue , Commissioner , is whether the exploitation of shale gas on such dense terrain as European terrain , which is totally dissimilar to American terrain , is not incompatible with our laws to protect the environment and people 's access to information .
I am interested to hear your answers .
Madam President , Commissioner , I fully endorse what Mrs Lepage has said and I would ask the following question : is it an opportunity or a predictable ecological disaster ?
We are nonetheless 10 years behind the United States in terms of exploitation .
What can we see ?
We can see that the groundwater has been contaminated by the chemicals that have permeated this hydraulic fracturing .
We can also see air pollution .
We can now see that there are volatile organic compounds ( VOC ) and even ozone has appeared because of all the substances released into the air .
We can see that the health consequences affect not only people living in the vicinity but also cattle and , of course , the users of the phreatic nappes , because they can no longer drink the water they contain .
Last week , the New York Times reported that , as well as polluting the groundwater with hydrocarbons and biocides , the contamination also emits radioactive elements .
In France , as Mrs Lepage pointed out , eight licences were signed without any debate , without any consultation , without any impact assessment .
And you talk of social acceptability ?
There is genuine rebellion .
The latest demonstrations in the département of Ardèche were attended by more than 20 thousand people precisely because they care about their land .
And you say , ' It is an economic opportunity ' .
But whom does this gas benefit ?
Are we talking about cui bono ?
Is it about choosing gas for the needs of industry to the detriment of the reserves of water in the phreatic nappes ?
The New York moratorium is a good illustration of the problem .
We are therefore simply requesting that the licences be revoked .
For explorations to take place while we have no guarantee of compliance with the Groundwater Framework Directive , the Air Quality Framework Directive or the Aarhus Convention is out of the question .
We therefore await your responses and we will refuse , in Europe , in France and in the countries involved , to allow these non-conventional forms of gas to be exploited in the absence of these guarantees .
Madam President , the successful commercialisation of non-conventional gas has turned the United States into an exporter of this fuel , with a potential which exceeds that of Russia .
The situation on the markets has also changed .
Long-term , fixed contracts and price mechanisms based on oil prices have been replaced by much more flexible agreements , and the spot market is starting to play an increasingly important role .
Both individual consumers and industry are benefiting from this , since we are all paying lower bills .
Europe cannot afford to waste this potential and an opportunity of this kind , particularly since the EU 's emphasis on moving away from coal means that gas is increasing in importance in the European economies .
This opportunity to diversify gas sources and increase the share of own resources , and thus reduce our dependency on imports , has now emerged in countries including Poland , France and Germany .
Work on obtaining gas from non-conventional deposits is at an advanced stage in all of these countries .
Let us remember that this sector does not expect us to provide it with money or special preferential operating conditions .
It is a sector which is already investing hundreds of millions of euro in Europe , and it needs only one thing : for barriers not to be put in its way , and for it to be treated equally .
The European Conservatives and Reformists in this House also expect this of the European Commission .
Let us hope that we - Europe - do not waste this opportunity .
Madam President , compared to traditional gas sources , extraction from non-traditional sources today accounts for only around 5 % of total gas production globally .
The non-traditional sources have a lower concentration of the raw material than the traditional deposits .
In addition to coal methane or gas trapped in less permeable rocks or gas hydrates , the most promising source appears to be shale gas .
The best experience with the extraction of this gas has been in North America , where extraction from non-traditional sources accounted for up to 42 % of total production in 2007 .
According to the estimate of the International Energy Agency , there may be up to 991 billion cubic metres of non-traditional gas reserves in Europe .
They are probably located mainly in Poland , Germany , Hungary , Romania , Sweden and Great Britain .
In 2007-2010 , Poland issued almost 60 licences for shale gas prospecting and extraction .
The holders of these licences include major global energy concerns .
It is therefore clear from what has been said that these new non-traditional gas sources are also becoming an interesting alternative for the exploitation of new horizontal extraction technologies .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Oettinger , when we look at the fluctuations in prices on the energy markets over the last few weeks , we can see that not only the political risks presented by many countries , but also the financial markets and many other influencing factors make it impossible to develop a secure strategy for the future .
Therefore , we need to cut the energy cake into as many pieces as possible and it is clear that gas will continue to play a significant role in this respect in future .
Of course , we must focus on the efficient use of gas .
We need more efficiency not only in our production processes , but also in our consumption .
We must ensure that the charges resulting from CO2 emissions are paid by the consumer and not by the producers because otherwise , international competition will be distorted . It should be of no significance to us whether the gas which produces CO2 is used inside or outside Europe .
Europe is the region with the greatest buying power .
If we import products with a high proportion of CO2 or transport them within Europe , this must not affect our competitiveness .
We also need to consider the importance of pipelines in future .
A pipeline is rather like a marriage .
Both partners have to be joined together for a long period in order to achieve a win-win situation .

( DE ) Madam President , I was pleased to hear , Mr Oettinger , that you did not go along with the growing trend for ' shale gas euphoria ' , but instead advised taking a more sensible approach .
This area is , of course , promising to a certain extent , because it could result in a reduction in our dependency on gas imports .
In fact , we are already benefiting from this .
You have referred to the fact that prices are falling because of the large supplies of unconventional gas coming from the USA .
However , as you have said , we need to create an atmosphere of trust if we want this subject to be investigated in an impartial way .
The Commission is proposing to review the regulatory framework .
I was surprised to hear your spokesperson saying recently that there would definitely be loopholes in the regulations .
However , in contrast to the USA , the Commission has omitted to do a number of things .
The US Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) is undertaking a major study .
I would like to know why we are not doing something similar or , at least , waiting to find out the results of the study before we take any further steps .
We currently need a political moratorium on shale gas activities until we can answer the questions which many citizens are asking , because they have realised that action has been taken too quickly in the USA .
Problems are occurring there which are more significant than people initially wanted to believe and the USA now finds itself in the sort of difficulties that we definitely want to avoid .
Therefore , I am calling on you , as the Member of the Commission responsible for this area , not to persist in doing what you have planned , but to carry out more in-depth investigations , as the Americans are , in order to create an atmosphere of trust .
( PL ) Madam President , deposits of alternative gas , in particular , shale gas , have allowed the United States to achieve full gas independence over the past 10 years .
Thanks to these deposits , the United States has gone from being a gas importer to a gas exporter , and use of these deposits has also resulted in tangible environmental benefits , for example , by limiting the amount of coal mined and the resulting coal damage .
Scientists are forecasting that a similar scenario could occur in the European Union .
Exploitation of non-conventional gas deposits in Europe is the best alternative given Parliament 's high expectations with regard to reducing CO2 emissions , and thus reducing coal mining .
What is more , we have recently seen a marked rise in the price of gas obtained from conventional sources .
The situation in the Middle East is also having a definite impact .
The possible exploitation of deposits will therefore enable a real reduction in the costs of generating energy , since it is an alternative to imports which are growing ever more expensive .
The extraction of non-conventional gas also makes it possible to reduce unemployment , as seen in the United States , where experience has shown that such extraction pays off .
In the US state of Pennsylvania alone , around 200 000 people have found work extracting and processing non-conventional gas , and the local economy gains over USD 8 billion every year from taxes , orders placed by extraction companies and concession fees .
Let us therefore not lag behind , and let us take concrete measures to benefit from this huge opportunity and potential .
( PL ) Madam President , it is to be welcomed that we have succeeded in provoking discussion on a subject which has been somewhat neglected in the European Union , namely , obtaining gas from alternative deposits .
As the Commissioner has already said , the geological conditions for the existence of such gas potentially exist in many countries .
Amounts in Poland are estimated at 1 000-3 000 billion m3 , with annual exploitation of around 14 billion m3 .
Europe cannot afford to neglect this issue , if only in view of what has happened on the American market .
After all , gas as a fuel will remain a key source of energy for a long time to come , as emerges from the Second Strategic Energy Review , for example .
At the same time , this report reveals that Europe is dependent on supplies from third countries .
In view of the current conflicts in North Africa , for example , which are causing repercussions on the fuels market , we should therefore ask questions about whether such alternative sources may be found in Europe itself .
It goes without saying that the question will arise of what environmental impact such undertakings will have .
I think that we should earmark a large sum of money for research into environmentally-friendly methods for extracting gas from alternative sources , such as shale beds .
It would appear that Europe could be a leader in this field , too .
If we wish to meet our environmental goals , we must , on the one hand , acquire new sources of gas and , on the other , specify the technology and method of exploitation in such a way as to prevent far-reaching environmental damage . Thank you very much .
( RO ) Madam President , it is already well known that global hydrocarbon reserves are close to running out .
This will be reflected in higher extraction costs , which means exorbitant prices .
Gas produced from alternative sources would have an important role to play in the European energy market .
Europe could use it to diversify its energy sources , thereby reducing dependency on third countries .
One of the options available may be to exploit Europe 's gas reserves in an unconventional manner .
Three oil companies have already obtained a licence to do this in Romania .
Gas hydrates , also known as ' flammable ice ' , are in great abundance in the Black Sea .
If it is exploited locally , this asset will reduce the EU 's dependency on Russian pipelines .
The biogas market is also one of best developed in Europe .
Countries like Romania have the potential to produce biogas , but investment in technology is still required to exploit it .
( RO ) Madam President , on 4 February , the European Council recommended that Member States explore the resources of shale and oil shale gas in Europe .
However , exploiting unconventional gas sources poses significant environmental and social risks .
No exploitation of shale gas must be carried out without an impact study which will present the associated risks and the measures required to protect the resident population and owners , in view of the environmental risks .
Commissioner , the European Union 's energy security policy is based on the diversification of energy supply sources and routes .
Reducing dependency on Russian gas can also be achieved through implementing projects such as the Nabucco pipeline , a key priority for the European Union , along with other smaller projects , such as the Trans-Adriatic Pipeline , the Turkey-Greece-Italy Interconnector or the Azerbaijan-Georgia-Romania Interconnector , which highlight the particular importance of the Black Sea to the Union 's energy security .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to thank Commissioner Oettinger for his statement to the Polish press , in which he said that shale gas represents an opportunity for the European Union , and that , since we do not wish to be dependent on imports , the use of shale gas lies in the European Union 's interests .
However after listening to the Commissioner today , I would like to encourage him to show greater enthusiasm when talking about shale gas , which could prove to be a hidden treasure .
I understand all his misgivings about environmental protection , which are obviously based on past experience .
I would , however , encourage the Commission to be more active in supporting this prospecting , and to use the time you mentioned - you said that the first results may be available in five years ' time - to help all those searching for shale gas to ensure that the methods used are not detrimental to the natural environment .
This should primarily be the task of the Commission .
I would like to encourage the Commissioner to try harder , for the sake of the shale gas which is to be found in Europe .

( PT ) Madam President , fossil fuels currently provide the vast majority of the world 's primary energy needs : more than 80 % of the whole , with oil at 34 % , coal at 26 % and natural gas at 21 % .
As we know , these resources have been exploited at rates far higher than their natural rates of replacement , meaning that their inexorable exhaustion is looming on the horizon .
The situation of natural gas is comparable to that of oil , except that it is less widely distributed , and it is harder to transport and store .
We therefore urgently need to diversify our energy sources .
There are no miraculous solutions and it is necessary for the still available reserves of fossil fuels to be managed very carefully , wisely and sparingly .
However , whatever alternatives may be found for energy supply , it is almost certain that overall energy consumption will have to decrease in relation to current levels , which is not necessarily a very bad thing .
It is for this scenario that we must prepare ourselves , starting now .

Madam President , in the field of energy , where the Union is facing high import dependency , much has been done to reduce the constant risks associated with our vulnerability , the most recent and clear example of which was the approval of the regulation on the security of gas supply .
No option on our agenda should be neglected in order to reduce our energy import dependency .
This is why I , together with other colleagues , presented Written Declaration No 67 on the possibility of exploiting alternative sources of gas in the European Union .
I would like to share three facts with you on this matter .
First , renewables represent an increasing part of our energy mix which is positioning gas as the major backup fuel .
Second , the US has proven the existence of technological know-how and the economic viability of these unconventional sources , and third , the Union has a great potential in unconventional sources of gas .
In terms of energy dependency , we are not in the position to miss any opportunity .
Madam President , it was good to see the Commissioner in Ljubljana at the opening of ACER .
I think it is good news for our colleagues .
Shale gas is an opportunity to be a part of the solution .
Therefore , before we can exploit it , we politicians have to do everything we can in order not to destroy public acceptance , but rather to build it .
One difference certainly exists compared to the United States .
Europe 's population density is much higher than in the US .
Therefore , I think we have to ask the Commission to make an impact assessment .
We were thinking of introducing a pilot project and putting aside a bit of money , under the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , to run this and to finance the impact assessment from EU funds .
I think if we want to build on this technology , which could be part of the solution , we need public acceptance .
Madam President , firstly , I must say that I find myself in agreement with the Commissioner and compliment him on his balanced presentation .
Security of energy supply has to be the sine qua non of European energy policy as we go forward .
Obviously and ideally , we would have this from renewable sources and we have our policies in that regard , but otherwise , we have to look for it from other sources .
We cannot continue to be dependent on Russia - you saw what they did in Georgia a few years ago - and on regimes like Gaddafi 's at the present time , with the effect this has on prices .
We look to ourselves , and if we have alternatives - which we have here through shale gas - we must exploit those to the full .
There are those who are concerned about the environment , but the European Union 's record on the environment is second to none .
Ask any farmer in Europe and they will tell you how concerned we are about the environment and the measures we take to protect it .
The same can apply here , but we have to look at every means of getting gas from alternative suppliers and - if I might say this tongue in cheek - we can have great gas in so doing .
Madam President , let us try to forecast where the gas market is going .
Today , we have presented our communication about the Energy Efficiency Plan which involves a focus on saving energy , using it more efficiently and not wasting it , along with the security of the energy supply .
Secondly , we also have a growing requirement for energy within the European Union .
Just one example of this is mobility .
In Germany , there are 520 diesel-engined vehicles for every 1 000 people .
In the new Member States , the figure is below 200 .
These two figures will converge , but they will move up rather than down towards the level in Poland .
Thirdly , our own deposits of gas are shrinking .
The amounts have fallen significantly in the United Kingdom during the last decade and will do the same in the Netherlands over the next decade , which means increasing dependency .
In addition , a lot of our hopes are , of course , pinned on gas .
Why is this ?
Although it is a fossil fuel , it is far more environmentally friendly when it comes to CO2 emissions than coal or oil and much more flexible than nuclear power and coal .
For this reason , gas is essential in order to ensure that electricity can increasingly be generated from renewable energy sources .
If we look at the subject of the base load , it is currently around 8 000 hours per year , while the figure for wind power , depending on the situation , is between 2 000 and 5 000 hours and for solar energy between only 600 and 2 000 hours .
This makes it clear that we need gas .
If we want renewable energy , then gas is its logical partner , however difficult that may be for many people to accept .
I am therefore working on the basis of an annual requirement of 600 billion cubic metres in Europe , rather than 300 billion .
This will result in a dependency level of 80 % .
For this reason , we must first diversify and modernise our transport routes , so that they meet the latest technical requirements .
We must also eliminate islands , develop our storage capacity and diversify our sources .
This means that , alongside Russia , Norway , Algeria , Qatar and Libya , we should also obtain gas from the Caspian region .
Gas from this area can be brought into the European gas market via the Turkey-Greece-Italy Interconnector ( ITGI ) , the Trans-Adriatic Pipeline ( TAP ) and Nabucco .
In the interests of diversification , I do not exclude the possibility of using gas from rocks in the Member States .
This process is only just beginning .
However , there is the question of whether we need regulatory intervention from Europe .
Why might this be the case ?
Let us assume that Poland hands out licences arbitrarily and this puts the groundwater or the soil in Poland at risk .
This would be unlikely to have any major impact outside Poland 's borders .
We need to look at the following question , if we do not want to take ourselves too seriously .
Do we not trust the government in Warsaw to ensure that there is clean water and clean soil for the sake of the health of its citizens and to protect ownership rights ?
I trust every democratically elected government in Europe which is accountable to a parliament and to the public to do this .
Therefore , if we are serious about subsidiarity , we need to consider why a borehole in Poland should be controlled , authorised or rejected by Brussels and not by Warsaw .
I have fundamental confidence in the national governments .
I do not distrust them .
Nevertheless , I am happy to discuss the subject of common regulations .
We must investigate whether the European regulatory framework is sufficiently comprehensive and whether environmental law , soil conservation law , groundwater regulations , health and safety at work for the employees involved and people in the area and ownership rights will all be guaranteed .
I do not know , but I suspect that what my spokesperson said is right .
There is room for improvement in the European regulations .
That is true in all areas .
It applies to the quotas for women and it also applies here .
For this reason , we will investigate the possibilities for improvement .
We will also ask the Member States to give us a common , coordinated list of authorisation requirements .
All this has been happening without any definite conclusions being drawn .
The USA is similar to Europe in some ways , but not in others .
It has a quite different population density and , therefore , subjects such as local residents , health and safety and groundwater play a quite different role than in densely populated areas in central Europe , such as Poland , Germany or France .
We will commission an expert report which will involve investigating what the risks are on the basis of typical applications for test boreholes within the EU and whether the legislative framework in the European Union is up to the job , whether the legal regulations in the Member States are adequate , and whether , and if so where , we need to introduce improvements at an EU level .
I advise everyone not to bring emotion into this subject .
In reply to the French Member of this House who said that their interests were not being protected , I would say that in France , my interest in seeing the highest possible levels of safety for nuclear power plants is much more important than trial boreholes for shale gas , at least at the moment .
I would like to make one last point which is off the record .
I am very grateful to you for coming here so late in the day and for staying to take part in the debate .
I regret the fact that a whole series of Members , and I was a Member of this House for a long time , which is why I can say this , have taken the floor and then left the Chamber .
I do not think that there are any important events going on elsewhere .
I believe that it is not fair to me or to you to take the floor and then to leave .
This sort of behaviour is not good for Parliament 's reputation .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Gas extracted using non-traditional technologies may play a special part in the EU 's energy market in the future .
The reason for this is that the exploitation of alternative gas sources in the EU would significantly mitigate Europe 's increasing gas imports and the gas supply exposure of Central and Eastern European countries .
Additionally , a consideration we must not ignore is the fact that the spreading of new gas sources within the EU could contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in a cost-effective manner .
In the United States , the new technology has already revolutionised the gas market over the past few years .
As a result of the use of alternative gas sources , which currently constitute more than half of the US production , gas prices have dropped significantly and the country no longer has to rely on import sources .
In Europe , the world 's largest gas market , the exploitation of alternative gas sources is still in its infancy .
Despite the success in the US , the results of the European pilot investments launched so far fell short of expectations .
In addition to different geological conditions , investors are also faced with higher regulatory and environmental risks in Europe .
In order to translate the American success to the EU , it would be important for Europe to have an appropriate strategy for alternative gas sources .
A comprehensive assessment at European level would be required in order to clearly identify the opportunities lying in alternative gas sources , as well as the related risks .
This , because Europe cannot afford the luxury of renouncing the option of alternative gas production that could be exploited within the EU in an age where the traditional gas sources of the North Sea are being depleted .
Gas supply security will depend , in future , not only on the EU 's relations with third-country gas producers , but also on the development of gas production in the EU .
Investing in technological development in the area of extracting natural gas from alternative sources could make a vital contribution in the future to reducing dependency on gas imports .
I think that the potential existence and extraction of shale gas in Europe must not be ignored and I expect the Commission to prepare a technical and economic study on the feasibility of extraction .
There are various sources of funding available in Europe which can support Member States in making the necessary investment in infrastructure , production and in measures aimed at achieving energy efficiency at regional and local level .
These include , in particular , loans and guarantees from the European Investment Bank , or finances available via regional , structural or cohesion funds .
Based on these financing instruments and within the budget outlook for 2014-2020 , the Commission must also identify a financing solution for exploiting gas from alternative sources , which could have a far-reaching impact on the European gas and energy market .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 00 : 15 )
Opening of the sitting
Welcome to the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are making an early start today because we have an important debate .
Request for waiver of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Composition of political groups : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Southern Neighbourhood , and Libya in particular , including humanitarian aspects ( debate )
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , honourable Members , thank you for the opportunity to discuss with this House the circumstances in our Southern Neighbourhood and , of course , with particular reference , as the President has said , to the situation in Libya .
Let me begin by stating the obvious which is that the Southern Neighbourhood is changing fast and across the region , people are standing up for that core human aspiration : to be able to shape their own lives , economically and politically .
They call for political participation with dignity , accountability , they call for justice and they call for jobs .
I believe we have to respond to those calls .
I believe they are just and I believe that we need to make sure that we act quickly .
A crucial aspect of what is going on is that the demand is coming from within .
In my visits to Tunisia and Egypt , I heard many , many times : this is our country ; this is our revolution .
We want to do things our way but we want to engage with you and we need help .
Those principles , I believe , should guide the actions that we take : these democratic transitions must belong to the people ; they must be home-grown .
They will determine what happens next .
But we have to be ready to offer the support , ready with creativity and determination and to do so on a scale that matches the historic nature of the changes we are seeing .
In a fluid situation like this , we have to have our actions rooted in our core values and our core interests .
We have every reason to back the changes under way .
Tunisians , Egyptians , Libyans and others are demanding respect for those values that actually are at the heart of the European ideal .
The emergence of the democratic societies will help to sustain security and provide shared prosperity in our neighbourhood and that is why we have moved between us , the Commission and myself , to produce a joint paper for the European Council that meets on Friday which includes measures that we hope will contribute to that : more European Union financial support available from within the institutions , but also by mobilising the European Investment Bank - and I pay tribute to Parliament for moving so swiftly to recognise the need to assist the Investment Bank with its mandate to be able to put that support at the disposal of people - and that has been extremely successful .
We need your help to do more for the EIB and also for the EBRD , both of whom have been talking with me about the capacity that they have to alter their mandates and be able to put new support at the disposal of this neighbourhood - not , I hasten to add , at the expense of the work that they currently do , but in addition .
With the European Investment Bank , we know that we can mobilise a further EUR 1 billion .
Just so you can appreciate the amount that that will give , the current work of the Investment Bank in Egypt is EUR 488 million .
This would be able to allow them to double the investment at least and that would enable some of the big infrastructure projects which are clearly needed and wanted by the people to be set in place .
We also want to see , through the paper , support with the training and exchange of students .
These are young populations .
One of the common factors across the Southern Neighbourhood is that it is a young society ; those young people , some of them highly educated , some of them wanting further opportunities in education and training - we should respond to them as well , and we will be inviting Member States to consider that and I invite the Parliament to do so as well .
The emergence of a vibrant civil society : meeting with civil society in Tunisia , I met with people who had never been in the same room before because it had not been allowed .
Their willingness and desire to establish themselves more fully as NGOs , as organisations able to work on issues of concern in their society and to hold their government to account , that is an extremely important part , as you know so well , of the development of this society .
From that stems more inclusive governance : the ability of people to feel that they have a stake and a say in the governance of their society .
Of course , too , food security , a huge and growing issue in the region ; further trade openings ; the ability to get greater market access and mobility partnerships - all of these are included in the overall package that will be put to the European Council .
I stress again , as I have done before , we want to see this as an incentive-based approach enabling people to move quickly , but also to differentiate .
These countries are all different and they are at pains to say , ' Please do not put us all together and see us as the same .
We are different countries ; we wish our societies to develop as differently as yours have .
Yes , there are similarities but our distinctive difference is something we wish to ensure that you respect and you work with ' .
We want to take an approach which says that we give more for more ; that those partners , those countries who want to go further and faster with reforms , should be able to count on greater support from the European Union .
In the coming days and weeks , as we have already been doing , we will be discussing with our international partners how we can coordinate so that we do not overlap and so that we are able to respond more quickly .
On 23 February , I held a senior officials ' meeting with officials from the institutions , the World Bank , the Investment Bank , the EBRD , the IMF , but also senior officials from China , Russia , from Australia , from Korea , from the 27 Member States , from the United States and from Arab countries .
The purpose of that meeting was not to decide what we would do to these countries but to be ready to be able to offer support quickly .
Honourable Members know that one of the criticisms which can be made about us is that sometimes we take a long time to respond .
I want us to be ready and my conversations with , particularly , the Arab League and with the countries concerned have been aimed at making it really clear that my purpose is to make sure we are ready to be able to respond and that that response is coordinated and effective and uses the best that we have available , not only in Europe , but across the world .
After the Foreign Ministers meet tomorrow , and the European Council meets on Friday , the NATO meeting I will attend tomorrow and then the informal Foreign Ministers ' meeting over the weekend in Hungary , I will then fly to Cairo to meet with Amr Moussa , the Arab League and to debrief all of them on what has happened in our discussions and also to meet a new Egyptian Foreign Minister whom I have already spoken to .
But , colleagues , I know there is a specific desire to talk about Libya so , having given that backdrop of the work we are doing , let me move on to the issues that concern us all in Libya .
I see two immediate priorities : first of all , to address the humanitarian crisis and assist with the evacuation , and second to make sure the violence stops and that those who perpetrate that violence are held to account .
On the humanitarian aid side , we have moved quickly .
The Commission has increased its assistance to EUR 30 million ; my colleague , Commissioner Kristalina Georgieva , went to the Tunisian-Libyan border last week to look at what was happening and to make sure that our engagement was working well .
We have also , of course , been in touch with the UN on a constant basis to coordinate our activities and Member States have allocated important resources to tackle what is an immense challenge posed by the continuous flow of people , including through FRONTEX .
On the evacuation of EU citizens , the External Action Service has been instrumental in making sure that we have a rapid exchange of information and most effective use of our resources .
Together with the Presidency , I activated the EU Civil Protection Mechanism on 23 February to help facilitate the evacuation of EU citizens .
Getting information in real time , as honourable Members know , is a challenge , but we needed to make the right choices and so at my request , Agostino Miozzo , the EEAS Managing Director for Crisis Response , travelled to Tripoli on Sunday and Monday to get an assessment of what is happening on the ground .
He met with officials , he met with ambassadors , in a situation which he described to me as calm but extremely tense .
Our European ambassadors welcomed the chance to talk in detail and to feed directly into our work their analysis of what is happening on the ground which , combined with contacts that we are making everywhere , helps us to establish a clearer picture of the situation .
Of course , we focused a lot of our efforts initially on the evacuation of European citizens and we have to show solidarity with Tunisia , which is bearing the brunt of the evacuation of so many people , especially Egyptians who are ending up on the Tunisian border and need to be brought to Egypt .
Honourable Members know that there are about one million Egyptians in Libya , and about one and a half to two million people from the African countries that surround Libya who are currently there , and we know from what we heard is happening in Tripoli that there are about two to three thousand African people at the airport who are waiting to see how they are going to leave .
We have to be ready though to step up our support for the Libyan people .
As I have said , this is a very fluid situation and we have to read it very carefully .
I have asked my services , therefore , on a prudent planning basis , to look at a possible CSDP engagement ; that engagement would be to support current evacuation and humanitarian efforts .
As always with any CSDP options , this needs to be very carefully analysed and we will need proper answers on questions of mandate , resources and objectives .
That work , I can tell you , is ongoing this week .
Dealing effectively with the humanitarian crisis is fundamental , ending the violence is a prerequisite to everything else .
That is why I am pleased that the international community as a whole , through the UN Security Council , has made its position clear : that the violence is unacceptable ; it must stop and people should be held to account .
I am glad that agreement was found in New York on the European demand to include a referral to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court .
This was a European initiative and they have already started preliminary investigations into alleged war crimes .
Not surprisingly , we are working very closely with our partners : with the UN , with NATO , with the USA , with Turkey , with the Arab League and with many , many other countries with whom we are in daily contact .
We talk with them about all of the issues in the Southern Neighbourhood but , especially , to make sure that we are collaborating effectively on the approach that we take in our Southern Neighbourhood and , as I have said , that includes all our partners .
We have , as you would expect me to say , our own responsibility .
We immediately suspended the negotiations of the EU-Libya framework agreement , together with all cooperation of a technical nature .
( Applause )
We started preparatory work on restrictive measures ahead of the UN Security Council .
In addition to the UN sanctions , we adopted on 28 February further restrictive measures : we have an embargo on equipment which could be used for internal repression and autonomous designations under the travel restrictions and assets freeze .
We are now in the process of adding several entities controlled by Gaddafi and his closest associates to that list .
Honourable Members , we will remain at the forefront of the international efforts to restore peace and stability in Libya .
Once we get an end to the violence , we have to work to support the emergence of a new Libya with democratically chosen leaders and where people 's rights are respected .
In line with what I have said from the very beginning , we will not be dictating outcomes but supporting pluralism , accountability , deep democracy and shared prosperity .
By their nature , crises are a test of our policies , our resources and our abilities to respond in real time and the events in the Southern Neighbourhood represent an enormous challenge for the European Union .
I believe , as Vice-President of the Commission , that how we respond will define this Commission for years to come .
So I look to the European Parliament and I need your support , because it is only our collective effort that is going to help to bring the European Union together , to confirm a strong position .
We cannot afford to think small ; we cannot afford to let inflexibility get in our way .
We can and we have to respond in a strategic and united way .
But I believe that if we do , we can make a real difference , supporting the people in the region who are asking for our support , but supporting them as they shape their own future .
( Applause )
Mr President , the European Union finds itself torn between two frustrations in the Libyan crisis , between what is desirable - the earliest possible disappearance of a criminal regime that is determined to die killing - and what is achievable .
If we are honest , Mr President , we must acknowledge that the European Union , despite all its efforts , has not lived up to public expectations .
This is not a criticism , Baroness Ashton , but rather a question of powers .
We have acted promptly and we have acted well , within the scope of our powers , with the European Union fully endorsing Resolution 1970 of the United Nations Security Council .
However , we are not a military union .
We are aspiring to be a political union , and we are still only an embryonic player on the international stage .
This is why , Mr President , whilst we are holding this debate , whilst the United Nations Human Rights Council is meeting today , and whilst the Council of Ministers for Defence , the Foreign Affairs Council and the European Council are meeting tomorrow , people are still dying in Libya .
It is against this backdrop that we must think about what it is that we can do .
Can we stand aside whilst innocent civilians are massacred ?
Can we remain impassive to the ' Somalisation ' of Libya , whilst the United Nations Security Council reaches another slow motion decision ?
The European Union must send a message that is loud and clear , and has a single message : ' the Gaddafi regime must end right now ' .
This message must be accompanied by a set of measures that ratchet up the pressure .
First and foremost , Mr President , the no-fly zone , the neutralising of Mr Gaddafi 's communications - and I believe we should congratulate the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe for bringing representatives of the Libyan opposition to the European Parliament - and , of course , international coordination , most particularly with the African Union and also with the Arab League .

This , Mr President , is what the public is expecting of us , and you will have the full support of our political group to achieve it , Baroness Ashton .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you , Baroness Ashton , for your words and the brilliant and self-contained manner in which you set out your position , as well as your analysis of the situation in our Southern Neighbourhood and in Libya .
We are facing an enormous challenge .
We are experiencing a truly historic change in the political balance of the world , in particular , in our immediate neighbourhood .
We have to deal with widely differing developments .
We cannot speak of a uniform process .
The uniform process is revolution , but it is very specific to each country and very varied between them .
It is different in Morocco from in Tunisia , in Algeria from in Egypt , and Libya is a special case which we are discussing intensively .
Gaddafi is a criminal .
He is a murderer who belongs before an international criminal court .
We probably all agree that this man will not escape his punishment one way or another .
The best thing would be for the Libyan people to be able to resolve this problem themselves and for them to then do so .
We are faced with a major challenge that requires a clear head .
We have to make a choice , including in what we say here .
On the one hand , our emotion tells us that this criminal must be stopped , that the fratricide in his own country must be stopped , and that we should not exclude any necessary measures to achieve that , including any military ones .
That is what our consciences say to us .
On the other hand , however , we all know how international politics works and that a wrong decision in this area can have wide-ranging and long-term consequences .
Of course , it is easy to say that we will intervene quickly , but even the implementation of a no-fly zone requires us to take the decision to put warplanes in the air and destroy the Libyan air force on the ground .
These are acts of war , implemented by NATO , which could perhaps solve a problem in Libya only to give rise to a number of problems throughout the wider region .
I therefore advise , urgently , that everything that we do be done within the framework of international law and , specifically , on the basis of a resolution from the United Nations Security Council and - this is the major common denominator - with the involvement of the Arab League and the African Union .
We are including this in the resolution , which is a sensible thing to do .
If we want to intervene in Libya , the only sensible option for this to happen is on the basis of a resolution of the Security Council and with the involvement of Arab states .
It is therefore worth me repeating that we should not exclude anything but we should also not satisfy short-term feelings rashly and with trite words that feel instinctively right but that - and I want to reiterate this - could be dangerous in the long term .
That would be dangerous .
In the European Council - and I turn to you , Mr Buzek , at this point , as you will be representing Parliament at the meeting of the European Council over the coming days - the question of whether we need a Marshall Plan for the whole region has been raised .
My response would be yes , we do need a kind of Marshall Plan for the whole region .
I would like to remind everyone , though , what the Marshall Plan meant for Europe .
It meant that George Marshall proposed to the United States of America that a percentage of the total economic output of the United States be devoted to Europe .
The results of this are well known - today , it calls itself the European Union , and it has levels of prosperity and democratic development and a peace dividend that this continent has never experienced before .
I would also observe , however , that the same governments that are discussing this will believe even 1 % of the total economic output to be too high a price for the European Union .
You cannot make these trite demands and then do nothing !
If we want stability to be brought to our Southern Neighbourhood , we will have to provide a good deal of funding .
This is because there is one thing that the people there need , and that is the prospect of being able to live in peace , democracy and prosperity , in other words , the prospect of also obtaining for themselves what we have .
That must be the goal of all the efforts that we undertake over the forthcoming days , weeks and months , including here in the European Parliament .
After all , all the fine words and nice resolutions that we adopt together deliver precisely nothing for the people of our Southern Neighbourhood - it is tangible acts that they need .
For that reason , the common goal for all of us must be the establishment of a free trade zone aimed at economic parity between North Africa and the European Union .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I think what we need now , Mrs Ashton , is a very clear message and statement from you and from the European Council on Libya .
I think three things are necessary in this message .
People are still being killed , so what we are saying is not neutral : what we are saying can help on the ground .
Firstly , we have to recognise - or at least to start the process to recognise - the National Interim Council as the representative of the Libyan people .
I think someone who is killing his own people in huge numbers has lost all legitimacy .
We therefore have to start the process of recognition because that can help the opposition to win this battle against Gaddafi politically .
The second thing we have to do - and the second message you have to give - is that we have to step up all kinds of help .
The opposition needs medicine , food , telephone lines , which are all things that we can provide .
Thirdly , we have to paralyse the killing power of Gaddafi as quickly as possible .
There is a clear consensus in Libyan society : there should be no direct military intervention in Libya .
It is a Libyan revolution and it has to remain a Libyan revolution .
What they need is a no-fly zone .
The European Union - the Council and you - must ask the UN as soon as possible to adopt a resolution on this , creating a no-fly zone and stopping the bombing of cities which are in the hands of the opposition .
Those are the three clear messages we need , and we need them now .
We do not need them in one week or two weeks ; we need them today , tomorrow and certainly on Friday when the European Council will make its first political statement on this issue .
Those are the three key elements that are necessary today .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to use this speech to make a rather broad point , because what is happening is , of course , historic , and I believe it is essential .
I firmly believe that what is happening today in Libya , Tunisia and Egypt is an unprecedented opportunity to create the conditions necessary for a peaceful resolution of a conflict that has been going on now for decades between Israel and Palestine .
I urge Israel to be bold enough today to take the political steps to launch a peace process quickly with the Palestinian State .
The opportunity to show that the democratic process under way in that region is a gift from history that can rid the region and the world of a conflict that has caused so much pain , so many misunderstandings , and so many tragedies , must be seized with both hands .
This message must be sent today to that region .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , you said a moment ago , Baroness Ashton , that we must respect peoples and their desire for freedom .
Let us be frank .
For years , we have failed to do that .
We were party to the dictatorships - we , the European Union and all the Member States .
So you have now ceased negotiating with Colonel Gaddafi ?
Mazel tov !
Are you serious ?
Do you really think you could have carried on ?
For years , this European Union , these Member States and Mr Berlusconi negotiated the return , for example , of refugees to Libya .
Was nobody interested in how those refugees were treated by Colonel Gaddafi ?
( Applause )
We should , after all , engage in a little self-criticism where this matter is concerned .
Today , a nation has risen up .
It has representatives .
When the people of Poland rose up , no one asked if Solidarność had been democratically elected ; Solidarność was recognised straight away , it was helped .
I call for you to recognise this interim government , because it is the only force that can bring about democracy .
Yes , we need to keep a cool head , Mr Schulz , but we also need to choose which side we are on .
Two things are needed .
Firstly , Colonel Gaddafi must not win , because if he wins , it will destroy any hope of democracy in many regions and it will be a victory for the dictators !
Therefore , our policy must be geared towards saying : Colonel Gaddafi must lose , and the Libyans must emerge victorious against Colonel Gaddafi .
Secondly , the Libyans do not want any foreign military intervention , that is true .
Yet they are saying : ' We want a no-fly zone ' .
The African Union is talking about a no-fly zone .
The Arab League is talking about a no-fly zone .
Therefore , it is not NATO .
The agreement to impose a no-fly zone is primarily intended to create a new balance of power in political terms , to isolate Colonel Gaddafi from the UN , and to say that we will go through either the Security Council or the General Assembly , which voted 100 % in favour of excluding Libya from the Human Rights Council .
This means that Colonel Gaddafi is completely isolated .
It says to him : ' You have no future , you have no chance ! '
The military exclusion zone is , first and foremost , a political act .
How can it be achieved ?
There are countless ideas .
Clearly , no one is going to bomb Libya , but an aeroplane taking off could , for example , be brought down .
Colonel Gaddafi has to be shown that he will not be allowed to bomb Libyan towns .
There are options .
This is a political act that we must carry out .
( Applause )
I really do believe that if we take the bull by the horns and recognise this interim government , we will get the European Union , the United Nations and the Arab League moving .
Let us speed up the isolation of Colonel Gaddafi , and then I believe that his days as a dictator in Libya will be numbered .
Now , there is also the issue of humanitarian aid .
Doctors are needed , and there needs to be a way of transporting the wounded out of Libya .
Some ports are open , and all the humanitarian aid should come via the east of Libya .
Lastly , food aid and military aid are needed , too .
This is the choice before us : if Colonel Gaddafi is to lose , the others need to win .
Let us ensure that what happened in Bosnia is not repeated .
An embargo was imposed on the Bosnians and on the Serbs .
Everyone was in agreement .
No , it is one side against the other here .
We want a military embargo , an arms embargo against Colonel Gaddafi .
We want to give the people of Libya the opportunity to liberate themselves with weapons , because this is the situation - this is what Colonel Gaddafi wanted .
I would like to end on the subject of refugees and humanitarian aid .
Let us use all the instruments at the EU 's disposal to temporarily accommodate the refugees and ensure that they are recognised by the United Nations Human Rights Council .
There are thousands of refugees who are recognised as such by the UNHCR in the camps .
We should let them come to Europe !
If we do that , we will be making a very powerful humanitarian and political gesture , and we will be acting in such a way as to ensure that Europe is recognised at last , that Europe 's values are recognised , because we are taking action to uphold those values and to ensure freedom in Libya , Tunisia and Egypt .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , this is an extraordinary debate .
I agree with almost everything that Daniel Cohn-Bendit has said today , which makes me a bit worried .
As I have always said , Gaddafi remains the Fidel Castro of Africa , although not even Castro would have resorted to such savage violence as we have seen recently from the Gaddafi regime and his sociopathic sons against civilian protestors .
Last January , I drew attention to the fact that Gaddafi used to be a huge sponsor of terrorism .
Now , of course , he stands accused of terrorising his own people .
Gaddafi spent a lot of money and time courting the West , trying to make us think he was a changed man .
That has not happened , of course .
With vast oil revenues at his disposal , he was able to dispense largesse in return for political acquiescence throughout Europe and Africa , not least in my own country , the United Kingdom , particularly under the previous government .
Our first priority now is to help bring an end to the senseless violence in Libya .
I was amongst the first in this House to call for a no-fly zone .
I thank France and the United Kingdom for pursuing this vigorously over the entire country to stop Gaddafi bombing his own people and flying in mercenaries , mainly from Algeria and sub-Saharan Africa .
I believe that the Security Council - particularly with the Russian and Chinese veto at stake - may not sanction this issue of a no-fly zone .
We should now seriously consider recognising the Transitional National Council in Benghazi as the legitimate Libyan Government , so that it could invite military assistance in without the need for recourse to a UN resolution .
This would prevent further civilian massacres and give the pro-democracy rebels a real chance .
Fortunately , most EU citizens in Libya were safely evacuated - and this was done efficiently - but it was clear to me that most EU Member States were only interested in helping their own nationals .
The Maastricht Treaty provisions that allow EU citizens , wherever they are , to seek consular protection from any Member State in times of urgent need appeared to have been totally forgotten during the evacuation process .

Mr President , we cannot understand the uprising in Libya without understanding the revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt . Precisely because this uprising in Libya is part of an historic , revolutionary and popular process which will bring democracy to the southern Mediterranean and to the whole of the Arab world , Europe 's position , and the changes in its position , regarding the way in which it has been acting in Libya are of paramount importance .
The days of Gaddafi 's regime are numbered because it is a dictatorship , and the people have ceased to fear it .
It cannot survive when its neighbours are in the process of transition to democracy , and also because it is isolated within the international community .
However , when considering this change in the European position , something needs to be said about the past , as the European Union was one of the pillars of support for the old regime .
The resolution does not say so , but the weapons with which the Libyan people are being repressed are largely European weapons and bombs .
I therefore want to make myself very clear .
The left is in favour of freezing assets , of the arms embargo , of fostering a relationship with the uprising , and of all humanitarian aid measures , but I would also like to make it clear that we are against any form of military intervention , including the measure that might open the door to such intervention : the no-fly zone .
This has been spoken of clearly here .
We have experience : we know how military interventions are started , and we know that once started they never stop .
Mr President , a true Libyan drama is playing out before European eyes on our southern border , as Gaddafi 's regime of terror is not only holding its ground ; it is very much on the attack against renegade regions of the country .
Meanwhile , murder is the order of the day in the capital , Tripoli , and countless Libyan citizens are disappearing without trace .
This is a tragic situation that underscores the opinion of an experienced traveller to Libya that the only effective means is probably armed intervention .
Mr President , I can , however , understand Western reluctance to use this ultimate means .
I have considerably less understanding , though , for the delay and procrastination in establishing a no-fly zone over Libya .
After all , inactivity in this regard has a high price , namely , prolonging the major suffering of the Libyan people .
The European Union can and must help lay the foundation for a post-Gaddafi Libya and for better prospects for the future for this tribal State .
First , let us break Gaddafi 's air force and leave the ' Brother Leader ' , as he likes to call himself , paralysed .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the leniency and the powerlessness we have demonstrated for a very long time now should not give way to a desire for chaotic intervention , the adverse effects of which would be immediately obvious .
For once , I can say that , broadly speaking , I approved of Mr Schulz 's cautious speech .
Indeed , I believe that the abundant good intentions of this House , the desire for humanitarian intervention , and the interference in others ' affairs , have truly adverse effects .
You want the dictators to leave their countries , and you are right .
Yet if you really want them to go , you have to give them a way out .
You cannot start by denying them a visa to leave their own country , nor can you promise them a life spent in prison as their only prospect for the future .
If and when you do that - and this is a fact , Mr Cohn-Bendit - you will give them no other option but to fight until the last drop of blood has been shed by their people .
That is a fact !
Traditional international law therefore had a considerable advantage over everything we are hearing today , and it is a real pity that it has been overlooked and , above all , that it has been overlooked by those who heaped praise on these dictators not so long ago .
I was not the one who invited Mr Ben Ali to this House and who listened respectfully to his speech .
It was all of you , ladies and gentlemen , and we heard very few protests then !
Mr President , at its beginning , the uprising in Libya had the same motivations and characteristics as events in Tunisia and Egypt .
The Gaddafi regime undertook an unprecedented lethal repression using air force , helicopter gunships and ruthless mercenaries shooting to kill unarmed civilians . The massacre caused defections in the army , the government and the diplomatic service .
The people in Benghazi and elsewhere took arms from the defecting army , and the uprising is now an armed conflict , unequal in terms of power .
Gaddafi has lost any legitimacy to lead , having committed crimes against humanity , against his own people .
The protracted conflict is causing a great humanitarian disaster inside and along the Libyan borders .
It risks creating migratory flows towards the EU , in particular , the southern Member States .
It also raises the world price of oil to levels dangerous for the world economy .
It is therefore imperative that the conflict ends immediately , but Gaddafi must not prevail .
The no-fly zone must be implemented urgently and we should use all other possible means to assist the pro-democratic Libyans to defeat the forces who , through bribery , intimidation and tribal manipulation , are still supporting Gaddafi .
We can imagine what it will mean if Gaddafi succeeds .
We will be witnessing a situation worse than that of Rwanda , to the shame of all humanity .
Resolute action is needed now .
Mr President , the European Parliament seconds the United Nations in their unanimous message to the Libyan dictator : step down , stop the bloodshed , face justice .
In the face of Gaddafi 's retaliation against his people , the EU must exercise the responsibility to protect by helping to enforce a no-fly zone , as envisaged by the Arab League , the OIC and the African Union , and the other measures decided on by the Security Council , with all means available , including CSDP assets - please note , Mrs Ashton - namely , to enforce the arms embargo .
The EU must do more to assist all those trying to escape or who are stranded in Libya by supporting UNHCR and humanitarian organisations on the ground and by helping to resettle refugees who cannot be repatriated , such as Somalis , Eritreans and Ethiopians .
A burden-sharing action plan to resettle refugees , a common asylum system , temporary protection measures - all should urgently be enacted by the European Union in compliance with the solidarity clause and the principle of non-refoulement , and as part of a coherent and long-term strategy to deal with the impact of political transition in the north of Africa , addressing the root causes of migration .
The EU must revise the ENP South , must prioritise support for capacity and institution-building to sustain the rule of law , human rights , including women 's rights , and to prepare genuine elections .
The EU must immediately establish relations with emerging political forces in Libya , namely the Interim Transitional Council , to encourage democratic transition and to ensure that democracy delivers the freedoms , the development and the dignity that the Libyan people are showing us they aspire to .
( DE ) Mr President , this debate here in the European Parliament makes one thing clear , and that is that we are not neutral when it comes to this conflict .
We are on the side of the democratic revolution .
Gaddafi must go and Europe must play an active role in bringing that about .
There is a sharing of the workload here at the international level .
We are discussing a no-fly zone , something for which - as Mr Schulz correctly identified - the backing of the UN Security Council is required .
What do we do if Moscow and Beijing do not grant their assent ?
Well , then we would have to close this loophole in international law .
We would have to take on the responsibility of protecting the unarmed population regardless , with the aid of the Arab League and the African Union , but also with the aid of an active role on the part of the European Union .
Military implementation would then be the responsibility of NATO and its partners , but politically and economically , the European Union would continue to also have the key role to play , long after , in such a scenario , NATO and the United Nations had finished playing their major roles .
There is one thing that I would like to say quite clearly , and that is that I was very pleased , Mr Schulz , to hear you say that we need a free trade zone .
This is because , if we do not allow these people 's products into the EU , they will continue to come across the Mediterranean in coracles and in their masses to overwhelm Lampedusa .
We certainly do not want that .
Let us , therefore , create the free trade zone , let us allow the products into the EU , so that the people there also have an economic future in their democratised countries .
( PL ) Mr President , developments in Libya are the latest in a series of events in North Africa and the Middle East .
The provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon allow the European Union to make use of the External Action Service , but hitherto , the service has been sluggish in its approach to events in the region .
I have twice appealed at least for a mission to be sent there .
It is to be welcomed that in the case of Libya , such a mission has been sent .
Its objective is to evaluate humanitarian efforts , but specific political action is also needed .
According to the UN , 1 000 people have already died in Libya , and according to human rights organisations , the figure may be as high as 6 000 .
The turbulence in the region is translating into a rise in crude oil prices in world markets , something which is very apparent to everyone who lives in the European Union .
It is in our vital interest that at the next summit , the Union adopt a definite position , taking action which is correlated with the efforts of United States diplomacy . Thank you very much .
Mr President , the momentous events in North Africa may have profound consequences for good or bad for the future prosperity and peace of western civilisation , but we are watching the outcome of a process that began 40 years ago .
The West has been held to ransom by oil-producing states , and we have transferred billions upon billions of dollars to corrupt and despotic regimes .
Without oil , Colonel Gaddafi would have been nothing more than a local tinpot dictator .
We have to hope that countries like Libya produce democratic and liberal regimes - for their sakes and for our own - but we cannot rely on this .
What western countries must do is concentrate funds and scientific research to find an alternative to oil .
If there is one lesson in this crisis that we have to learn above all others , it is that western civilisations must not be dependent on others for their vital energy supplies .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to offer my sincere thanks to the High Representative for the account she has given us and for her efforts over recent weeks , which could have put Europe on the map just a little bit if we continue to approach this issue with the necessary courage and take the necessary steps .
Despite the differences , the events in North Africa are highly comparable with those of 1989 .
The people are calling for freedom and better living conditions .
Alongside humanitarian aid , which we have to provide now , we must offer the people of North Africa our assistance , if they want it , in developing democracy there .
Democracy , however , will only survive if these people are helped to achieve better living conditions at the same time .
We have heard talk , in this connection , of a Marshall Plan and of a free trade zone - all of which is necessary , as it could be positive for us in a tremendously dramatic and historic sense for democracy , freedom and better living conditions to establish themselves in these countries .
We therefore must not treat this as run-of-the-mill and we must act quickly .
In order to prevent the murderer Gaddafi from reasserting himself , we need to hearten people and show them that we are on their side .
It is therefore important that relations be established with the Interim Council .
We must act as contacts in order to make it clear , in this way , that we are setting other elements in motion .
We must help bring about the total isolation of Gaddafi so that he is separated from his own people and so that no future is possible with Gaddafi , so that the people break away from him .
This must also include us preventing Gaddafi from bombing his own people .
This means that a no-fly zone - or whatever else - is necessary in order to provide protection and encouragement in order to ensure that those who are fighting for their freedom are not demoralised .
Furthermore , since we can do this together with the Arab League , in recognition of the United Nations charter , there would not need to be a UN resolution if Russia were involved .
We must , then , help the people there so that they are able to fight their way to freedom in this conflict and so that a sustained civil war with this murderer does not arise .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )


( PT ) Mr President , I just want to check whether I heard Mr Brok correctly : did you say that a military solution , or a decision of a military nature , does not , in his opinion , require a United Nations decision ?
If that is indeed what you said , I have to say that I disagree with you a thousand times over .
( DE ) Mr President , I specifically said that that would have to take place in cooperation with the Arab League and with Arab countries .
Secondly , it is desirable for legitimacy to be gained by means of a United Nations resolution .
However , if this should be vetoed by one of the Permanent Members of the Security Council , there are plenty of examples of how the United Nations charter can be used appropriately .
We cannot allow a veto by one of the Permanent Members to block us from preventing Gaddafi from murdering his own people .
Mr President , the recent events of historical importance in our Southern Neighbourhood call for a resetting of our policies there , but we have to start with the lessons to be learnt .
Firstly , we must learn that relying on authoritarian leaders or imposing our model of life is wrong .
We must leave those people to build their democracy in their way and under their conditions .
Secondly , we must understand that the national fragmentation of our aid-for-development policy that sometimes allows the promotion of national geopolitical agendas deprives us and the countries in the area of the benefits of security through development .
Thirdly , our lack of vision and political will in addressing the regional security challenges , mainly the Israeli-Palestinian issue , leads us towards ever worse crises .
On Libya , amongst other countries , we must remember that not all those fighting a dictator are democrats and change per se is not always for the better .
We can therefore speak about dialogue , engagement , humanitarian assistance , but recognition might be too early , and recourse to military means should be ruled out or , at any rate , be subject to United Nations approval and Arab League cooperation .
Otherwise , we could be led into an adventure , the results of which may be difficult to cope with .
( FR ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , this time , Europe must be present at the meeting .
Friday 's summit will have to recognise unequivocally and unreservedly the legitimacy of the National Council , the demands of which are simple .
Firstly , the humanitarian emergency .
A civil war is taking place in Libya .
We must increase our efforts to send food , medicines and doctors tenfold , and we must offer our support to the thousands of refugees thronging Tunisia and Egypt .
However , Europe cannot just settle for a humanitarian response .
The European Council must face up to its responsibilities and carry forward , as part of a decision taken at the UN involving the Arab League and the African Union , the project to impose a no-fly zone so as to prevent Colonel Gaddafi 's air force from massacring his people .
Lastly , I would like to say something to the leaders who are playing on all these fears : the migrants fleeing Libya want only one thing , and that is to return to their country .
As for those who are today risking their lives for freedom and democracy , what they want is to live and work in a free country of which they can be proud , and so when the time comes for reconstruction , it will be their economic development that the European Union will have to strive for with determination and courage .

Mr President , we all agree that Mr Gaddafi was a murderer , and I agree with Mr Schulz .
I just wonder why , over the past years , our EU leaders have been trying to charm him .

Here I have a picture of Mr Van Rompuy , recently arrived in office and already in the wrong company ; and here we have Mr Verhofstadt receiving the dictator with military honour , which he certainly likes .
Here , Mr Cohn-Bendit , we have Mr Berlusconi .

We know that Mr Berlusconi likes kissing , but he is kissing entirely the wrong person .
Also , Mrs Ashton , I have here Tony Blair , your former boss , kissing the dictator .
My point is this : I agree that you have to meet people nastier than yourself , but you do not have to kiss them .
You do not have to hug them .
You do not have to charm them .
You have been feeding the monster that people are now fighting , and that is why they are getting killed .
So I say to all these EU leaders who have kissed and hugged Gaddafi : shame on you !
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , he was the right man at the right time .
Mr Cohn-Bendit said : Mr Gaddafi is a criminal and he made agreements with Mr Berlusconi .




I say , Mr Gaddafi is a criminal , he made agreements with the European Commission led by Mr Prodi , with the Italian Government of Mr D 'Alema , with Mr Blair 's Labour Government and with a hundred other governments besides .
Mr Gaddafi is a criminal who , for more than 20 years , has led a State that is still of strategic and crucial importance for the interests of half the world .
We must have the good sense to admit this , otherwise how do we have a hand in the Marshall Plan alluded to by Mr Schultz ?
The Marshall Plan indeed existed , the Americans gave us the money , but as they did so , they demanded that the European governments drove the communists out of politics in their countries ; they dictated the conditions to us .
What are the conditions we intend to dictate to the countries of the southern shore of the Mediterranean in order to commit ourselves to a Marshall Plan ?
Do we intend to replace the dictators of recent years with other dictators in order to help our own interests or does our Marshall Plan aim to nurture the development of strong , healthy institutions that echo the spirit which is alive and well within civil society and which we have seen come to life in recent days in these countries ?
This is the real question we must ask ourselves and the proposals we must put to the Council , including the no-fly zone and patrols of the Libyan coastline , which is the duty of European ships in the Gulf of Sidra , not American ones .
This must be the appropriate response for Europe at this time .
( ES ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , I believe that this debate makes it clear that the entire European Parliament is aware that this transformational crisis in North Africa is no longer a test of European foreign policy , but is now a test of the very viability of Europe having an external policy .
This is why it is absolutely crucial for the European Union to be able to address the international community with a single and recognisable message .
I would like to take advantage of my minute here to add my voice to those who have stressed the importance of the humanitarian dimension in this transformational crisis .
This will enable Europe to act to mitigate the effects on the humanitarian front , above all , in terms of displaced people , and of potential asylum seekers and refugees fleeing from the area of conflict to the nearest border , which is the border with the European Union .
This is why I want to stress the urgent need for the European Union to complete its still-outstanding asylum package ; to review Directive 2001 / 55 / EC on measures to protect displaced people in humanitarian emergencies and cope with the unforeseen mass influx of migrants ; to be able to prioritise the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union and the European Asylum Support Office , which are the tools at its disposal ; and , above all , to fill the human rights clause of its foreign policy with true meaning , making it not just a verbose clause , but a condition for the very existence of the European Union 's foreign policy .

Mr President , yesterday , many members of our House met the representatives of the Interim Council of Libya , whose message was absolutely clear : they need international support and aid and they need it very quickly .
Therefore , the first thing we must do , as many colleagues have already said , is start to establish relations with the Interim Council in order to legitimise their activities .
We have to recognise them .
Secondly , we all know , and many colleagues have said this , that people are still being killed every minute by Gaddafi 's air forces in Libya and we must therefore , as a European Union , be ready and act fast , together with the United Nations and the Arab League , to establish the no-fly zone .
My last point concerns humanitarian issues .
These people need simple elementary things such as food , water and medical supplies , and they also need technical assistance .
Even the military on the side of the opposition need technical assistance so they can connect online with each other .
( PL ) Mr President , fortunately , it is not true that in recent years , the whole of Europe and all the world 's politicians have kissed Gaddafi , as Mr Eppink says is the case .
As long as 25 years ago , Ronald Reagan was in no doubt about Gaddafi .
We have needed 25 years to reach the same conclusion today .
Those kisses , of course , were not entirely without foundation .
They were justified with the word ' stability ' .
Today , in place of the word ' stability ' we have to write ' democracy ' .
This is an opportunity which we have to take , and we have to take it now .
In a few days , a summit is to be held .
We expect it to produce results .
We cannot afford to lose another 25 years .
Our problem is not that we do not understand the times .
We often say the right things here .
Our problem is that we are slow to act .
Our problem is that what we do is not effective .
This is , perhaps , our most important opportunity concerning all of our neighbours , including Lukashenko .
It is important that we manage to react in time , or in 25 years , we will be looking at photos with kisses again . Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all want to help the people of North Africa to achieve their legitimate objectives .
The people on the ground will choose the way forward , but we must be ready , if they ask us for help , with immediate humanitarian aid .
It is therefore a good thing that ECHO , the Humanitarian Aid department of the European Commission , is already on the ground in Tunisia and Egypt .
However , we are currently experiencing a real stress test in relation to the capacities and skills of the EU and its Member States , given that we have to do everything at once : fly our own citizens out , supply the basic needs of refugees from the neighbouring States and transport them home , deal with the refugees arriving in the EU by sea , and counter the illegitimate claim to power of a dictator .
What are the specific steps needed to de-legitimise Gaddafi ?
The first is that we must jointly pull our ambassadors out of Tripoli .
The second is that we must recognise the Transitional National Council as the legitimate body with which we deal in Libya and reach agreement with it over the provision of humanitarian aid .
The third step is that our Member States in the Security Council should jointly table a motion to establish a no-fly zone which can be voted on within a short space of time .
The fourth step is that , if the Security Council is blocked by a veto , we should support the development of regional international law .
In other words , if the African Union , the Arab League and the EU all agree , we should find a joint way within the region to implement the no-fly zone by suitable means .
Of course , over the medium term , we must discuss how we could generate the opportunities for development in these countries , for example , via a free trade zone , so that people can find a future in their own homelands .
( FR ) Mr President , I wish to lend my support to the resolution on the situation in Libya tabled by our Parliament .
Indeed , it provides food for thought for the European institutions .
It explains clearly and determinedly the way in which we can help to overcome the difficulties at a time when the situation in Libya is becoming worse each day .
I , for my part , would like to emphasise two issues : firstly , in the short term , our priority is , in fact , to protect the civilians , whether they be displaced persons fleeing the fighting or Libyans caught in the fire of Colonel Gaddafi 's attacks on his own people .
Any and all resources must be invested in emergency humanitarian aid , not least to help the neighbouring countries that are most affected by the need to provide refuge for people : Tunisia , Egypt and Niger .
Secondly , we have a medium- and long-term responsibility : to seize the historic opportunity being given to us , in favour of these uprisings , to support the democratic transition process and to look further into the future in order to reform the common European asylum and immigration policies on the basis of a truly balanced partnership that deals a final blow to the use of countries in the Mediterranean region as Europe 's policemen .
Mr President , ever since I was appointed as Vice-President for Democracy and Human Rights , I have tried to use my voice to speak for those who cannot speak .
As it happens , today in the Chamber we have guests from the Interim Transitional National Council of Libya who met the Vice-President / High Representative last night but who cannot take part in the debate .
In my view , and I think in the view of many in this Chamber , the European Union must recognise the Interim Transitional National Council of Libya before the weekend , whatever else it may do , and I have seen some of the ideas Mrs Ashton will bring forward .
The defeat of Gaddafi is not only vital for Libya : it is vital for the millions of Arabs elsewhere in the Arab world who are struggling for freedom .
If we recognise the interim council officially , it allows humanitarian and other needs , as well as the strategic necessities of the time , to go to that interim council .
The EU must be unequivocal in support of democracy wherever it begins to flower .
( FR ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , in these dramatic hours when Libya 's future is at stake , humanitarian aid is important but it is not enough .
The European Union must adopt a clear position with regard to a no-fly zone so as to put a stop to the fierce repression of the people .
We understand the hesitation and the risks , but this issue goes beyond Libya .
It affects the political future of that entire region and the political future of Europe .
The European Union must also urgently recognise the National Council as the legitimate authority of Libya .
We have an opportunity to send a strong message to all the peoples fighting for their freedom : ' Europe is behind you , because your struggle is our struggle , too ' .
The neighbourhood policy must also be reoriented towards assisting the democratic transition , supporting the economy , and strengthening relations with the other countries and organisations in the region .
Lastly , we must urgently help these countries to manage their migratory flows .
The scenes of people fleeing are proof that this is just as much a South-South issue as it is a North-South one .
Ladies and gentlemen , Baroness Ashton , the time has come to make a choice : either Europe sends a clear message of support and mobilisation to help these peoples , or it builds a wall so as to turn itself into an illusory , selfish fortress .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the spirit of this debate enables me , Baroness Ashton , to remind you that the Union for the Mediterranean 's Parliamentary Assembly concluded its meeting last week in Rome .
It set out several paths that the Commission would do well to return to , in particular , in terms of its suggestions on how to support the democratic transition processes in progress .
Hence , I urge you and I urge the Commission to follow the developments in Tunisia intently .
This country is objectively a driving force for democracy and is setting a benchmark for the entire region .
Regarding Libya , we need to be fully aware that having decreed it part of the international community , the severance of relations with Mr Gaddafi 's regime will have consequences , particularly given that his regime is showing greater resistance than those of Mr Ben Alì and Mr Mubarak .


This means that we must act on four fronts right now - and political timescales are decisive - with credibility , sincerity and consistency .
We must come up with a suitable European financial plan .
I understand the evocative note struck by many , but we need an Ashton Plan rather than a Marshall Plan .
We also need a European immigration and asylum policy , a deterrent policy including the closure of airspace , and full support for the opponents of Mr Gaddafi 's regime .
Baroness Ashton , it is up to you and your foreign policy ties with the Council to make these points count in the coming days , but also to avoid Europe 's foreign policy being caught unawares again by the events that are changing the Mediterranean .
( RO ) Mr President , a few days ago , the Gaddafi regime sent a letter to the United Nations Security Council in which it expressed its surprise at the sanctions adopted on 26 February , alleging that only - in Gaddafi 's words - ' moderate ' force was resorted to against some ' subversive acts ' .
This is a clear sign of a dictator who knows that he has lost the game and is no longer able to recognise the gravity of the acts he is committing .
This plays down in an incredibly cynical manner the brutality which has taken place in Libya during the last three weeks .
On the other hand , the reaction from the Gaddafi regime clearly shows us that it is not at all indifferent to the sanctions which have been adopted so far .
This is why I believe that we must apply the toughest possible sanctions , under a UN mandate of course .
However , I believe that we need to go beyond the no-fly zones by providing support to those who need to defeat Gaddafi , while also showing solidarity with our southern Member States which will receive a wave of refugees .
This is also obviously going to happen .
( MT ) Mr President , the events taking place in the Arab world , and in all the countries in the Arab world , are a beautiful dream that is coming true .
However , so as to prevent this dream from becoming a nightmare , we have to play our part and ensure that these peoples not only rid themselves of their dictators , but eradicate dictatorships too .
This requires that they undergo a transition phase , which calls for massive assistance from our end .
It is true that we have all forged relationships with these countries and their regime .
However , once we witnessed the shocking violence being carried out , we spoke out with one voice , against the violence and against the regime that is inflicting it .
The next step is to quash this violence , not only using words , but through our actions .
Every day that passes and which brings violence with it is another day where we will have allowed murder to take place and blood to be shed .
We must strengthen the European Union 's humanitarian presence .
This is already being done , and Cathy Ashton is doing a good job , but we must increase our humanitarian aid , both towards the Libyan people , as well as those who are fleeing the regime towards Tunisia and Egypt .
Moreover , if this influx makes its way towards Europe , then we must be prepared .
It is all very well to claim that we should open our doors to Libyan refugees , yet it still remains to be seen whether we will all shoulder the responsibility if the situation arises .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , you have repeatedly had to put up with critical comments from this place .
I would like to take today 's debate as an opportunity to clearly state that the European Union and , in particular , you personally and your staff , has and have acted quickly , well and efficiently throughout this crisis .
That has also brought Europe a step closer to the role that we envisage together as co-founders of a global world .
It is right and important to observe that the circumstances are different in each country , particularly in Libya .
In Libya 's case , the European Union has taken a timely political stand against genocide and in favour of civil society .
The pressure on the Gaddafi regime has rightly been escalated in conjunction with NATO , the United Nations and others .
Clearly , military action , too , cannot be ruled out where undertaken within the framework of conventions under international law .
Moreover , humanitarian aid - meaning food , medical supplies , a roof over people 's heads - must be provided for those forced to flee the war zone .
However , we also need to consider what happens on the first day of the post-Gaddafi era .
In this regard , I would like to refer , once more , to the Union for the Mediterranean Assembly in Rome , which has proposed some important positive steps - firstly , personal security for the citizens ; secondly , political security - which includes close cooperation with the interim government ; and , thirdly , economic security .
We must do everything in our power to ensure that economic life in these countries can return to normal and that the people find work .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , I think we also have to look at these events in North Africa and Libya as being part of a kind of historical process .
Not that long ago , we were all witnesses of the murders in the Balkans - unfortunately , to a certain extent , we participated in this - and of a situation in which people in Europe were killing each other .
Today , we must make every effort to avoid a repetition of that scenario .
Therefore , I hope that at the forthcoming European Union summit , we will show the determination needed to react quickly , and I think that such things as a no-fly zone or a de facto severance of diplomatic relations with the Gaddafi regime and with Gaddafi himself as a criminal are essential .
I think we also need to look at what happened in 1989 in Poland and other countries .
There is an opportunity here , because today , those young people demonstrating on the streets of Libya and other African countries really do want democracy .
We must help them achieve this .
Mr President , I was encouraged by your opening statement , Mrs Ashton , especially when you mentioned that our actions must be rooted in the EU core values , because spontaneous protests in North Africa have shown that undemocratic rulers cannot provide genuine stability .
We have to realise that attempts to domesticate brutal dictators like Gaddafi have failed , causing much embarrassment .
People in Libya are fighting for the same values we share and we need to clearly take their side .
The same value-based approach applies to our future policies towards states like Iran , Belarus , Cuba , China and Russia .
What we have to do in two days ' time is to back a no-fly zone , immediately recognise the Interim National Council , and address the social and economic causes of these revolutions .
I think we cannot do without a long-term Marshall-type plan .
( BG ) Mr President , Lady Ashton , in 1999 , in order to avoid unrest in the opposition city of Benghazi , Gaddafi needed scapegoats on whom he could pin the responsibility for the children infected with AIDS as a result of poor Libyan healthcare .
He found six Bulgarian medics and a Palestinian doctor to serve this purpose , who spent long , harrowing years in Libyan prisons .
However , Gaddafi 's manipulation of this situation failed in his own country , which is proven by the fact that Benghazi was actually now where the revolution started .
The nurses , who were victims of Gaddafi 's dictatorship , became a clear symbol of European solidarity .
This European solidarity is expected today from Libya 's citizens themselves and from the young people of Libya .
It is expected from those who do not see the Arab world facing a dilemma of ' either dictatorship or Islamism ' and who prove every day , including with their blood , that there is also a place for democracy in this world .
This is why today , when we are debating the future of Libya , we Europeans must be impartial in our assessments , definite in our actions and , most importantly of all , united in our decisions .
We must give our support to principles , freedom and democracy in this world .
( ES ) Mr President , there are thousands of refugees and thousands of displaced people .
The solution to this emergency is evacuation .
What is needed is transport .
As Mr Guterres said , these people do not want to come to the European Union ; they want to go back home .
There are 2 million immigrants , 1 million Egyptians and 80 000 Bangladeshis .
We must focus on the weakest of the weak : Eritreans , Somalis , the sub-Saharan Africans mistaken for mercenaries and Palestinians .
The United Nations High Commission for Refugees ( UNHCR ) says it needs USD 160 million over three months for water , medicines , food and transport .
We expect a resounding response from the Union on Friday .
Gaddafi cannot escape international criminal justice : mass attacks on his people constitute crimes against humanity .
Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo is already taking action .
Mr President , the European Parliament must be involved .
We are also a democratic instrument for applying pressure and informing the free world .
We need a mandate from this Chamber for a delegation of Parliament in the UNHCR , Red Cross and Red Crescent refugee camps .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the ever-growing and increasingly widespread uprisings that we are currently seeing in the Mediterranean certainly show a strong desire for democratic participation , above all , from young people , who are being pushed on by Facebook and Twitter towards a different world that is more responsive to their aspirations .
Nevertheless , the regions which overlook the Mediterranean represent very different worlds and are now , more than ever , made to suffer under the bloody violence of dictators with whom , it must be said , pretty much all world leaders have carried on relations at some point .
I have a few issues I should like to raise : a humanitarian emergency , protecting the dignity of refugees and , at the same time , remembering that this crisis could quickly turn into a public health emergency ; excessive concentrations of displaced persons without adequate healthcare ; putting a stop to violence ; the hypothesis of a no-fly zone to work out ; a new and different kind of solidarity - Mr President and Baroness Ashton - for a Mediterranean policy that genuinely protects the significant group of people who are standing firm in the Mediterranean ; changes to Frontex and , why not , let us remind the Council ( which is not here today ) that there are two directives to protect seasonal workers and intracorporate transfers of third-country nationals , which could also provide a response - including in employment terms - to these exceptional demands that we really have to tackle more effectively .
The catch-the-eye procedure begins now .
I should like to warn you straight away that I have 19 requests for the floor but I cannot meet them all ; I shall only be able to accept five or six requests .
I mean no offence to the other Members , but the debate ran on a lot , we had a very lengthy introductory report from Baroness Ashton and we cannot influence the next debate .
Please excuse me therefore .
I will give the floor to those who signed up first , obviously giving all the groups a fair representation .
( FR ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , you emphasised - and we are all aware of this - the urgent need to take action in response to the Libyan crisis .
You rightly pointed out what the European Union has done and has done rather well in humanitarian terms and in terms of the evacuation of European citizens .
Indeed , I think that the European Union would have gained from publicising these actions and making them much more visible , because people too often have the impression that the Member States alone carry out these operations , whereas you have pointed out that European mechanisms have worked here .
On a political and military level now , a reminder of the need for a no-fly zone is certainly necessary , if not just politically , then also militarily .
It will take more than that , however , because - let us not forget - no-fly zones did not prevent atrocities on the ground in Bosnia and Kosovo , even when , in the case of overflying , they were applied very rigorously .
While we await the UN Security Council 's decisions , we have European common security and defence policy instruments .
We can implement them for the purposes of maritime surveillance , monitoring the embargo and delivering humanitarian aid .
Europe has to make its voice heard on this point , and you have the instruments with which to act .
Mr President , I agree with everyone in this debate who calls on the European Union to engage , to act and to exercise the responsibility to protect .
I also welcome High Representative Ashton sending a mission into Libya with less incident than , for example , one of our Member States .
But all those who talk tough in this debate , were you also talking tough during 42 years of a brutal military dictatorship ?
Did you protest when 1 200 prisoners were murdered in cold blood over a decade ago ?
Or against Gaddafi 's historic litany of torture , enforced disappearance and extrajudicial execution ?
Did you complain when the European Commission started negotiations for a framework agreement with Libya and which were on course to be happily completed this year ?
Tough sanctions against departing dictators at a time of crisis look good to European public opinion , but tough standards before a time of crisis look even better for the people we say we are trying to help .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as some have said , Baroness Ashton , you have shown great courage by taking the bull by the horns in this case , but I think there are a number of basic steps to be taken .
Meanwhile , you have spoken about bringing the guilty parties to justice .
Let us call them by their real name : we need to bring Mr Gaddafi to justice .
You also spoke about violence .
Instead , I think it is right to say that genocide is taking over in these territories , yet again .
We cannot continue to bury our heads in the sand .
I think the first thing we need to do is to recognise the Libyan National Council , a transitional council .
We must have an interlocutor ; we cannot carry on speaking only of sharply reduced humanitarian aid .
There is no doubt that we must all speak up for a no-fly zone .
We cannot continue accepting the vetoes of China and Russia , countries that are run by dictators .
China censors the Internet while Russia kills journalists such as Anna Politkovskaya .
I think that right now , the first thing to do is to begin setting out our stall and recognise the Libyan National Council .
( DE ) Mr President , I would just like to deal briefly once again with the issue of the Southern Neighbourhood Policy
and the proposals made by the Commission and Mrs Ashton yesterday .
I think what we are lacking is a realisation of what is still going on , for example , concerning our relations with Saudi Arabia and the negotiations with Syria .
How will you change them ?
How will they be changed ?
Will you continue with the status quo on these negotiations with Syria , and what will you do with Saudi Arabia ?
How will we interact with these countries ?
What I see as lacking in your proposal - which I think on the whole is good - is a process for how we will establish criteria for upgrading relations .
How will you do the ' we will pay more ' : based on what criteria and verified by whom ?
I think we need a process like an enlargement process , with a Commission to set criteria and a Commission to verify them .
( PT ) Mr President , we are in solidarity with the Arab peoples in their struggle for freedom , democracy and social progress in Tunisia , Egypt and Libya , bearing in mind the specific circumstances of each of these countries .
However , we cannot forget the support that that EU governments and leaders gave to the dictators , selling them weapons which they are now using to kill their people .
Likewise , we cannot accept any foreign military intervention or interference in the struggles of these countries ' peoples .
We know how foreign interference begins , but we never know how it is going to end , as the examples of Iraq , Afghanistan and so many other places have demonstrated .
The political , economic and social choices of the peoples of these countries in the immediate future need to be respected , and they need to be given all the humanitarian aid that they seek , without preconditions or any interference .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , of course we must recognise the serious errors of the West .
We in Italy have made the mistake of thinking of Mr Gaddafi as ' our son of a bitch ' , as President Roosevelt would have said , while instead , he was simply one of the many sons of ... that rule over their people and now even fire on them or make other people fire on them .
How on earth has no one in Parliament mentioned the responsibility of the African Heads of State or Government , who , until yesterday morning , thought of him as a brother , pampered him , sent him to the United Nations as a representative leader for the defence of human rights , even leading him to declare himself the king of kings amongst African countries , or have I got the wrong person ?
Now , Europe is making another mistake : it pretends to ignore an obvious danger , as a great flood of Somalis , Eritreans and others flee Libya 's borders .
We need to tackle this with real energy .
We should use a Marshall Plan involving the network of small and medium-sized enterprises to help these people , not send weapons .
Before giving the floor to Baroness Ashton for her reply , I should like to let you know that two representatives of the Libyan Transitional National Council are here in the visitors ' gallery , Dr El-Welfali and Dr Al-Eisawi , whom we welcome .
The strength of the applause is symptomatic of Parliament 's backing and solidarity , and of the strong support shown in the debate for freedom and democracy in Libya .
Thank you and good luck .
We are right behind you .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , honourable Members , thank you very much for what has been an important and , I think , very significant debate in this Parliament .
The common theme , of course , is the desire to see change in Libya that puts the wishes of the people at the forefront of the energy of the European Union and the international community .

I think Mr Schulz said it first , but it was repeated very often : we need to be very clear-headed about what we do and very determined on what we should do .
We have to make sure , first of all , that the humanitarian aid and support goes in and gets to the right places .
We are in touch with Médecins sans frontières and the ICRC all the way through the country from Benghazi to Tripoli .
But I know from my discussions that there are areas where it is exceptionally difficult to get aid and medicines into the country because of the fighting that is going on and because people cannot get through .
This is something that Mrs Georgieva , as Commissioner for humanitarian aid , is working on , and Mrs Amos in the UN is also coordinating efforts from there .
The good news is that in some places , we are getting messages that they are coping well and support is getting through , but there is , of course , much to do .
I have also listened to what honourable Members have said about the issues of refugees .
We have worked hard with Member States to try and support getting people home .
For a lot of refugees who arrived at the Tunisian border , their home was Egypt , and some Member States have been working closely with the Tunisians to provide transport by sea or by plane to get people back home , and also to watch over those who will be heading back to Africa .
But there is much more to do .
My belief is that , if we can make the country more stable , people can stay at home - which is where they want to be .
So one of the challenges for the EU - and I am very open about this - is that by providing stability in our southern neighbourhood , we enable people to stay where they wish to stay , with economic prosperity and democracy , rather than feeling that they have to flee because of violence , lack of opportunity or other issues .
Then there is this whole question of a no-fly zone and the role of military options .
I indicated the work on what we described as prudent planning that has been going on with the Political and Security Committee ( COPS ) and which continued last night .
Those discussions are referred to in our discussions with the United Nations , which I have also indicated are ongoing , and NATO , where I will attend a meeting tomorrow .
Of course they are done in conjunction with our partners .
The Arab League will discuss a no-fly zone on Saturday .
But what I am also very mindful of is something that the Secretary-General of the Arab League said to my delegation visiting him yesterday : we have to define what we need , because a no-fly zone by definition means different things to different people .
Ensuring that whatever is done can be done properly is something I think this House would be very keen to see .
We have to be sure that whatever options are taken , they are taken with the full knowledge of what we are doing and with the support of the people who are going to be affected by that .
In that context , I refer again to the need for our continued discussions and dialogues with the African Union and with the Arab League .
We could have a big debate - and perhaps we should - about a subject that I started to write about in the press , which is isolationism versus engagement .
It is a real challenge , and what I would say to the gentleman who held up the photos is , of course , if you are the President of the European Council and you go as President to the African Summit which is held in Libya , you will find that there is a picture of the President with Gaddafi .
Of course .
There are pictures of many people .
There was a picture shown in the same group of our esteemed ALDE Group leader .
There are pictures that you can take on many occasions where those of us who are given positions of responsibility have to engage with people who we probably would not wish to .
So I think it is unfair to show a picture of Herman Van Rompuy performing his responsibilities as President of the European Council on behalf of all of us in the host country with the person who was hosting the event .
Whether we would prefer the African Union to have held its summit somewhere else is another question ; whether , indeed , we would have made some remarks to them on many occasions that perhaps they should .
But in the end , we go to meet the African Union largely where the African Union suggests .
We may not like that , and it is a genuine debate .
I think we have to engage in that at some point , because my general principle is that engagement is better than isolation .
Isolation is effective in some circumstances , but engagement is better .
Having said that , as I have also made clear , we may have brought Gaddafi out of the cold .
It is now time to send him back into the cold , fully and properly .
This is also very important : to have an assessment of what we engage and how we engage and be prepared to review that and stand up and say : we have done this for a set of reasons we think are right , whichever country it is ; that we believe engagement in these circumstances is better , but there are circumstances when that is not appropriate and circumstances where , even if that is what we did , it is not appropriate now .
But let us be honest , let us not throw down challenges with photographs or other things , where people did this and people did that .
People mainly do their very best in circumstances that are very difficult , and I think we should take pride in the President of the Council trying to be the representative of the Member States .
I want to just also say something about labels .
We hear a lot about a Marshall Plan : somebody even called it an Ashton Plan .
No , let us have a Libyan Plan , or an Egyptian Plan , or a Tunisian Plan , owned by the people of those countries in which we engage and offer our support .
I do not want to make a plan that we arrive at and about which we say : guess what , we have come to bring you our plan for your country .
No , let us not do that .
Let us actually be the people who offer the support to ensure that their plan is able to be everything that we would want it to be to support democracy .
There are people in this House who have years of experience , who have come through revolution and change and who have a huge amount to offer .
I firmly hope - and I have said this in these countries - that they will call upon ( if they feel it would be valuable ) those people who have lived it and who not only know what worked but also can tell them what did not work .
Perhaps the things to avoid can be just as important as the things to do .
I agree that we need to review what the EU does , what tools we have available to us , whether we have enough , whether we need to think again about what we are able to do .
Because you are right , I operate within a mandate that I am given , and I can only operate in that mandate .
That mandate allows me to do some things , but it mainly requires me to gather together the institutions and the 27 countries in a concerted and joint effort .
One final thing about publicity and listening .
I have done more press , I think , than anybody else in the world on all of this .
I have been wall to wall on the airwaves .
We were the first out on the resignation of Mubarak , and I have done a huge amount of press .
But I have also done far more without the press in the room .
Again , that is what I think is important , because more than anything , we need to listen .
We are all visiting these countries , and they have so many visitors from across the world , and that is great - though I think sometimes we need to give them space and time to be able to work together to plan and then have an even more informed conversation with us .
But we also need to listen , and if there is anything I urge upon all of us it is to take the time to really listen - I will say this to Member States as well - to what people on the ground are saying , to go to Tahrir Square as I did , to talk to the young people in Egypt , to talk to civil society in Tunisia and to engage with the people of Libya wherever we can : to discuss what they want for their future and do everything we possibly can to back them .
Mr President , perhaps Baroness Ashton could comment on this .
There has been practical unanimity in the House that recognition of the Interim Transitional National Council , currently based in Benghazi , by the European Union would be an extremely important political signal which would allow humanitarian and other strategic aid into the country .
She has not replied on that point .
Many speakers have raised it .
Perhaps she could just tell us what her views are and whether she could convey the message to the Council on Friday .

Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I did not reply to it ; I heard it , and I am very well aware of it .
There are two reasons that I did not reply .
One is that I have assumed the President of the European Parliament , who will be speaking at the European Council , will convey - as he always does - what Parliament has said and what it has agreed in its resolutions .
I think that is an appropriate way forward for this Parliament to be properly represented .
The second is because it will be for the Member States to determine .
So it was not a failure to recognise ; I met , indeed , with a gentleman last night .
Simply , I was trying to honour Parliament by recognising the role of the President .

( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the light of what Mr McMillan-Scott has said , I cannot work out whether the proposal to recognise the Libyan Transitional National Council will be among the proposals that you and the Commission will be making to the Council .
I have gathered that you are happy for Parliament to talk about it , but will the Commission and Baroness Ashton propose it at the Council meeting on the 11th amongst its proposals or its own-initiative proposals ?
That is our question .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I can only do what , within my mandate , I am allowed to do .
My personal opinions do not count in this .
Honourable Members have to understand that .
I have met with the Council and I have heard what Parliament has said .
The President of Parliament will report .
As Mr Cohn-Bendit says , it is very important , but I cannot stand here today and say ' I will therefore recommend ' .
We have to go forward with what Parliament agrees when it passes its resolution , and I have seen what it is suggesting .
We then report to the President of the European Council for the conclusions of the European Council - which rest within his hands - for the Foreign Affairs Council to meet and discuss and for Parliament , through its President , to put this forward .
Then , the European Council will take a decision .
I am not trying to avoid the issue .
I am simply saying that you have to pull all those things together and then make a decision .
I mean no disrespect to the Transitional Council , but again , we have to do this properly and make sure that we do what we are confident and comfortable with .
I am giving the floor to Mr Cohn-Bendit for the last speech , after which we shall finish .
I should merely like to remind Baroness Ashton - though I am sure she knows - that she also gets her mandate from Parliament as Vice-President of the European Commission , and not therefore from the Council alone .
Mr President , I would like to say to Baroness Ashton - and I can say this in English - that it is also written in her mandate that she has to make proposals to the Member States .
It is in her mandate , so we want her to take her mandate seriously .
After a debate in the Parliament and after a resolution that you will read , Baroness Ashton , you know that there will be an overwhelming majority to take this seriously and to make this proposal to the Council .
If not , there will be a big crisis between you and the European Parliament .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I do not accept this big crisis idea .
I have been very clear with you , Mr Cohn-Bendit , about exactly what my mandate is .
The recognition of a government is the recognition that is given by the European Council .
The mandate of the High Representative is to come forward with the ideas that are put to her , to discuss those with the institutions beforehand , and to put forward , on Friday to the European Council , the views that are being expressed .
It is for the Member States to take the decision .
I will go from this to discuss with the President of the European Council - whose representative is here - and I will discuss this with the President of the Commission .
We will also take the views , through the institutions , ready for Friday and the Foreign Affairs Council which meets tomorrow .
I am not avoiding that , but it is absolutely right and proper that Member States take the decision on recognising a government .
I hear very loudly what Parliament says .
Let this not be a crisis .
I am not avoiding anything .
I am simply telling you that the way we should do this is to do it properly , for the benefit of these people and the people of Libya .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 10 March 2011 .
in writing . - It is unfortunate that Europe has drawn few lessons from its past .
The Union 's delayed response to Libya is proof that Europe to date maintains an incoherent and fragmented approach towards the Southern Mediterranean .
If Europe holds onto this mindset , there is the possibility that a humanitarian crisis of this magnitude will reoccur .
Europe must act on two fronts :
1 ) Political and humanitarian response : To ensure that the legitimate aspirations of the Libyan people are achieved through home-grown democracy , whereby the regime steps aside to allow the people of the region to actively bring about the country 's transition to democracy ;
2 ) Migratory flows : Presently , the eventuality of large flows of migration from the region is a secondary concern , yet it must be addressed .
The Union has , in the past , acknowledged it , but failed to put any concerted and comprehensive plan into motion .
This is why I call for the creation of a Marshall-type Plan , one which will include an integrated immigration policy , based on the principles of solidarity and burden-sharing , whereby all Member States acknowledge that no single country will alone be able to tackle the great and complex difficulties brought about by large migratory flows , particularly in the case of smaller Member States .
The uprisings in the Maghreb have already had their impacts in Europe - in the form of boats packed with refugees , falling share prices and price shocks at filling stations , with the EU naively having anticipated only the last of these , at most .
Taking the higher prices for crude oil in combination with a strong euro and the rate increase by the European Central Bank , there is little hope of fuel oil prices falling .
This shows us , once again , how dependent we are on crude oil supplies and that we must press forward on alternatives .
The rebels ' calls for a no-fly zone pose us a dilemma .
It requires the United Nations to sanction this direct interference in the sovereignty of a State and , as a consequence , the destruction of its anti-aircraft capabilities - as the experts are warning .
The States of the EU must not only consider this but also the consequences of open civil war .
Furthermore , what would the EU 's position be should Gaddafi change course ?
It is clear that a dictator cannot be cowed merely by aggressive posturing .
Gaddafi has shown how it is possible to ride roughshod over the West and the rest of the dictators are watching on with interest .
The EU must now reveal its foreign policy muscles and take clear steps towards de-escalation and the democratisation of Libya .
Muammar Gaddafi 's departure is a matter of urgency today .
Yet there is everything else , too , and what matter are the people .
We focus on the dictators , but we often overlook the people , who are the first to suffer the consequences .
The process of liberating the Libyan people cannot be undertaken without a genuine political transition within the country .
However , a democratic transition will never succeed without real opposition leaders .
At the moment , that opposition is very weak .
Giving it greater visibility is a first necessary step towards creating momentum .
On the other hand , a strong regional strategy is also necessary .
On the refugee issue alone , the neighbouring countries cannot reach an agreement so as to prevent the influx of refugees from being held up at the borders .
The result : health conditions are worsening , which is fuelling intracommunity tensions .
If this humanitarian crisis is not tackled , we risk being faced with a situation that quickly spirals out of control .
in writing . - I congratulate my colleague , Ana Gomes , on her resolution .
However , I am disappointed by the lack of support from the PPE for an agreement urging the EU to prepare a plan and equip itself to cope with the aftermath of the Libyan crisis , particularly concerning migration policy and relocation .
We do not even have a plan A , let alone a plan B.
To date , a small island Member State close to Libya has helped in all the ways it could : Malta .
Thirteen thousand people of 89 different nationalities were evacuated by Malta 's own boats and its own airlines , putting both at great risk .
The Maltese did this not because of any EU legislation and certainly not because of Frontex .
Instead , they acted on humanitarian grounds and waived visa requirements .
It was a principle of solidarity .
Whether or not we are facing an immigration influx of biblical proportions , we cannot tell .
For sure it will be large and very significant for Malta .
The Maltese people ask not for an application of the Dublin II or Frontex regulations .
They demand solidarity and a relocation policy based on the principle of burden-sharing .
It is very disappointing and incomprehensible to see the PPE shirking this responsibility .
in writing . - The events in Libya and in the southern neighbourhood of the EU are a rebuttal of past policies and a test for future policies .
The status quo approach was the prevalent choice for almost 40 years .
This policy gave Europe the benefits of stability and safe access to energy .
But it ignored the societies of North Africa and of the Arab world .
We know this because these societies re-emerged dramatically and took everybody by surprise .
A major policy shift is required towards active support for the fledgling civil societies in the Arab countries .
But this should not be an excuse for rushed decisions that would shatter our neighbourhood policy .
The European Neighbourhood Policy should stay in place as a policy .
It should not be replaced by uncoordinated measures .
The idea was mooted that financial resources should be taken away from the European programmes of the Eastern Partnership and reallocated to the South .
This would send a negative signal towards the societies in our eastern neighbourhood .
Moreover , this reallocation has no rational basis .
The per capita spending in the South and the East is not unbalanced .
It is roughly equal .
The problem is not how much we spend but how we spend .
Amendment of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union with regard to a stability mechanism for Member States whose currency is the euro ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the amendment of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union with regard to a stability mechanism for Member States whose currency is the euro ( 00033 / 2010 - C7-0014 / 2011 - 2010 / 0821 / NLE ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the euro is a major success story .
It is one of the most stable currencies in the world and has outperformed the dollar on the markets .
We can see that the economic figures coming out of the United States are far worse than those for Europe .
Yet , given that we do not have uniform conditions , we still see that individual parts of the euro area , individual Member States , are having difficulties and we have to respond to that .
It is the case that a failure of the euro could be extraordinarily costly for all of us in this globalised system , and I want to spell out that my country - which sometimes depicts itself as if it had to make major sacrifices - is the main beneficiary or joint main beneficiary of the euro .
We are thus not performing self-sacrifice here .
Instead , we are also acting in the common interest of all the States - large and small , rich and poor - and we need to appear to be unified .
We must also make clear that we need to present a unified front in order to be credible .
We cannot allow a credit ratings agency such as Moody 's to downgrade a county by three levels overnight .
When that happens , we get in trouble once again thanks to pressure from the United States .
Here , too , we need to have the ability to present ourselves more strongly as unified .
I am therefore pleased that we are attempting , in three ways , to create the conditions to make us credible .
These are : tightening up the Stability and Growth pact , with greater options for intervention ; bolstering the role of the Commission ; and an early warning system , the European semester , as part of which it is to be observed at an early stage whether , and to what extent , budgetary discipline can and is to be followed through by the Member States .
All of this reinforces our abilities so that we do not find ourselves in a situation like the present one again , and this will enable us to achieve credibility on a durable basis .
Secondly , we cannot overcome this crisis with budgetary discipline alone .
We will only emerge from this debt trap through a combination of budgetary discipline and growth .
For that reason , efforts to promote growth and competitiveness make sense .
I am pleased that the proposals that have been made in this area are slowly being modified so that they are not based on a purely intergovernmental approach but increasingly also integrated into the Community method where the European Union has the relevant competences .
The result of this is that many of the concerns that we in this House rightly had about a particular proposal are slowly being resolved .
Yet these two factors - competitiveness and budgetary discipline - go hand in hand .
My third point relates to the revision of the Treaty that we have paved the way for and on which the European Council can only decide on 24 March if we have given our opinion by that point .
An amendment of Article 136 ( 3 ) of the Treaty has been proposed .
Mr Gualtieri and I , as well as the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , are of the opinion that it would be better to amend Article 136 ( 1 ) , rewording it in order to better meet our demands .
We also know , however , that this approach could possibly be harder to implement as , for reasons of politics and time , the simplified procedure should be our aim and no referendums should be held .
If , for the reasons stated , this is not possible , we should at least ensure that the Council undertakes obligations that make clear that the intergovernmental approach in this case does not mean that permanent new structures are created in the European Union but that it will continue , as in the past , to only be used as a method where ground-breaking is required .
These conditions must thus be adhered to in order to create the conditions for there to be the possibility of link-up in the event of transfer to the Community method and in order to carry out an improvement of this kind in such a way that we can act in a communal way in the long term .
That means that we also see the weakness of the intergovernmental approach .
An intergovernmental approach means no , or hardly any , parliamentary legitimacy and results in a complete inability to act in many areas due to the requirement for unanimity .
That means that the Community solution - the ' Monnet method ' - is also always more legitimate and gives rise to a greater ability to act .
We should not forget that in this debate .
The European Parliament wants to create the conditions so that , in the measures taken in the various fields , we revert to the approach of using Community institutions .
In this regard , it is not especially the European Parliament that is at issue as , when it comes to an intergovernmental approach , we have , at most , a right to be consulted .
What is at issue is a greater involvement on the part of the Commission , which does the groundwork , performs an evaluation and tables proposals .
The Commission should also propose a regulation governing such matters in order to incorporate them into Community law .
I hope that the European Council is ready - and I welcome Mr Corbett , as representative of the European Council - to create the necessary conditions in the talks with us by 24 March and to give Parliament the assurance that this approach can be used in such a way that the necessary steps can be designed in a sensible way and so that we can bear our responsibility together .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it would not be an exaggeration to say that this is an historic time in the process of Europe-building .
The economic crisis has made it clear that the single currency needs real European economic governance and , for the first time , significant and innovative steps are being taken in this direction .
At the same time , we are seeing a dangerous trend of giving this new governance an intergovernmental flavour , which not only risks threatening the institutional structure of the European Union , but also making the new mechanisms ineffective .
Hence , the permanent stability mechanism is an issue of symbolic and central importance .
Indeed , on the one hand , the establishment of a permanent stability mechanism represents a decisive and important step forwards .
Parliament supports this decision , although it is important to stress that it must not rule out the possibility of using extraordinary solidarity mechanisms , such as those based on Article 122 , which are currently in use .
On the other hand , if the establishment of a permanent mechanism is therefore positive , the European Council has chosen to create a purely intergovernmental mechanism , thereby denying in a unique manner the European institutions any role , including in the procedure leading up to its establishment .
Amongst other things , this could stir up disputes during the ratification process about the appropriateness of a simplified procedure , given that it is hardly in doubt that cutting back the competences of the European Union would require an ordinary revision procedure .
Furthermore , since the treaty states two clear things ; that the monetary policy of the Member States whose currency is the euro is an exclusive competence of the European Union , and that the Member States must coordinate their economic policy within the framework of the Union , as the treaty states , a mechanism that operates completely outside the European Union 's institutional structure would scarcely be compatible with these principles and would therefore result in a reduction of the European Union 's powers , which would not be compatible with a simplified revision procedure .
This problem could also be raised by a number of national parliaments during the ratification procedure which , as we know , will be a complicated and risky process .
Likewise for this reason , Parliament would have preferred a different , more institutionally appropriate and less politically risky procedure , such as Article 352 , either alone or in combination with Article 136 .
The report sets all this out in black and white , but we preferred to concentrate on the substance rather than on procedures so as to reach a realistic yet determined approach .
The central point is that the permanent stability fund will be created by the Member States because that is what they decided , but it may also lay the foundations for a new structure lying outside the EU institutions or it might be an intergovernmental wagon within a European Union train , travelling down the tracks of European law .
Parliament wants to make a contribution because we are following the latter of these two paths .
Hence , we asked in our report for two conditions to be respected : the proposal for an amendment must be redrafted so that the establishment of the mechanism 's distribution is somehow placed within an EU procedure , or that the EU institutions are heavily involved in the practical implementation of the mechanism and , above all , in defining the conditionality measures .
What principles and rules should be established for providing assistance ?
Who shall establish them and how ?
For this , we need a regulation with an ordinary legislative procedure and we are waiting to consult with the European Council and the Member States on these issues .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , in today 's interconnected world , no country can remain unaffected by what is happening to its neighbours .
Just look at the events in North Africa and just look at the debate which has just been concluded in this House , and I think that what is true in politics is definitely true in economics as well .
The crisis has shown just how great the risk of contagion is - particularly for the countries in the euro area - when one Member State finds itself in serious economic difficulty and how quickly this spreads to the rest of the countries .
Last year , we showed our determination to do whatever it takes to defend the single currency .
Temporary instruments like the European Financial Stability Facility and the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism have proved their worth , but the time has come for a permanent solution .
So as a complement to our reinforced system of economic governance , which was launched this January with the first Annual Growth Survey , we need to set up a robust institutional and financial mechanism to deal with possible future crises .
That is why the Commission supports a limited change to Article 136 of the Treaty .
I know that some of you are disappointed with this approach .
I have to say , the Commission shares your disappointment .
Like both rapporteurs , Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri , - who I very much thank for their excellent cooperation on these files - and , I am sure , most of Parliament , we would have preferred the Union to be fully in charge of this permanent mechanism .
But we understand why members of the euro area opted for an intergovernmental mechanism at this stage .
Rest assured , however , that the Commission will be fully involved in work to set up the future stability mechanism with the finance ministers of the euro area and we stand ready to bring our expertise to the management of the stability fund if required , just as we did for Greece and just as we did for Ireland .
At the same time , the Commission will be vigilant in ensuring that the EU 's competences are not affected in any way .
In particular , although European Heads of State or Government agreed that Article 122 , the legal basis for the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism , should no longer be used to maintain financial stability in the euro area as a whole , President Barroso did not - as you know - associate himself with this declaration .
Therefore , we are not speaking about the European Council conclusions , but the statement of the Heads of State or Government , in this respect .
The Commission considers it to be a purely political declaration that does not affect the EU 's competences .
The Commission will also take whatever measures are necessary , both legislative and otherwise , to ensure that this new mechanism operates in full harmony with the EU 's responsibility for coordination and surveillance of economic and financial policies in all Member States .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I agree , of course , with what Mr Brok said .

I should just like to draw attention to two points : the important thing today is to have legal certainty .
In other words , there should be no ongoing debate regarding the legal bases of action that may be taken at European level , whether it be intergovernmental or Community action ; our preference , of course , is for Community action .
Why do we need this legal certainty ?
Because Europe and the euro area are under constant pressure from the markets .
We cannot destroy the markets but we can try to bring them under control .
To do so , we must eliminate uncertainty , the decisions that are put off each day , and we must stop constantly wondering whether or not we can take decisions .
It is therefore a matter of urgency , Commissioner , for you to heed Parliament 's requests and for us to quickly amend the Treaty so as to guarantee this legal certainty , which is necessary in order to respond effectively to the difficult economic circumstances we are facing .
Mr President , we all agree that there needs to be a permanent financial mechanism for euro area countries .
The mechanism 's function is to mobilise financing under strict conditions for the benefit of euro area Member States that are experiencing severe financial problems , so as to safeguard the stability of the euro .
The issue is that although everybody is in favour of this concept , it is , however , not defined anywhere in the Council 's proposal .
We have a proposal that explains why and by whom this mechanism is to be financed , but it does not specify who will benefit from it .
The Parliament is doing what the Council failed to do : it clearly lays out who the beneficiaries are , and specifies that it must apply to all Member States , and not just the euro area as a whole .
What happens if a small country finds itself in a crisis but is not large enough to impact negatively upon the strength of the euro ?
As it stands , the draft proposal of the Council does not provide any legal guarantees that a country would have access to this mechanism in this case .
Small Member States will be contributing to this fund without being able to access it in the event of a financial crisis .
This is unacceptable and it would infringe the principle of solidarity that the European Union embodies .
It is like paying into an insurance policy which never pays out .
That is why I welcome the report , which clearly states that no euro area Member State that contributes to this fund can be left out for reasons related to size .
Secondly , there is the question of interest rates , which should not be calculated at punishing rates , as is happening in Ireland and Greece .
The Council must therefore examine this issue in light of paragraph 14 and heed the Commission 's programmes in this regard , such as the Balance of Payments facility and Macro-Financial Assistance .
The fact that only an intergovernmental approach is being adopted on such an important subject is worrying .
The Commission needs to become involved in order to draw up regulations which govern , implement and monitor this mechanism .
This is why I am very pleased with the work carried out by the Parliament on this proposal and I believe that it is important that the Council accepts them as they are and as they have been agreed upon within the two parliamentary committees .

Mr President , the first point that I think needs to be stressed here follows on from what my colleague , Mr Brok , said about the involvement of the EU institutions and what Parliament is requesting from the Council with this report : namely , that the EU institutions and the Community method be involved in resolving this issue of the permanent stability mechanism of the stability fund .
The report calls specifically for this involvement , while respecting the role of the Commission .
This is essential for Parliament , and I believe that it is essential for this mechanism .
The second point , and it is one that is very important for us , is that the stability fund is only one of the factors .
Economic governance and , potentially , EU matters are other factors in resolving the financial and economic crisis that is currently plaguing some of the euro area Member States , and therefore , the Council should be aware that the fund does not solve everything by itself , and that it must be integrated into economic governance mechanisms and into the Europe 2020 growth strategy .
Having said that , I would like to highlight three very important paragraphs of the report : paragraph 6 , which involves all Member States regardless of their size ; paragraph 12 , which states that access to the fund cannot be denied to any state based on its small size ; and paragraph 14 , which I believe to be the most important , as it establishes , on the one hand , that interest rates must be offered on favourable terms , so that there is not a repeat of what is currently happening with Greece and Ireland , whose problems are not being solved by aid from the EU or International Monetary Fund .
It is vital that there be favourable conditions and a back-to-back approach without margins on borrowing costs , so that the financial crises in the most fragile Member States can be resolved .
Mr President , I would like to underline the importance of the consultation that Parliament must issue .
This is the first reform of the Treaty of Lisbon since it was adopted and came into force .
This is a step towards building the economic governance of the Union , and it is probably the first example of how possible future reforms of the Treaty will incorporate some of the elements of this economic governance .
Parliament , in my opinion , must do what is needed , which is to establish this mechanism , to help to put this financial stability mechanism into action , while , at the same time , ensuring that what is needed is done in the best and most desirable way .
We need a mechanism that is stable , which means it will be able to prevent and discourage speculation and have the capacity to respond as and when needed .
It should be a mechanism that is secure , with the legal basis that today 's temporary mechanism does not have , and it should have sufficient economic scale .
I am , therefore , in favour of the simplified procedure , although it is preferable that this be an exceptional step ; that reforms take a different form ; that Union elements be incorporated into intergovernmentability , with a fundamental role for the Commission ; and , finally , that Parliament have a say in accountability .
Lastly , following the adoption of our report by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , we hope that the Council will be sensitive to our request , because we believe it will strengthen this permanent stability mechanism and therefore contribute to the economic governance of the Union .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the Prime Minister has told us that we should do whatever needs to be done to stabilise the euro but , in fact , this is only the minimum that is required to be done .
The Liberal Group here sees it as only the first step in a series of measures which will lead eventually to the construction of a coherent , credible economic government .
The key is clearly that the mechanism is crafted so that it can , in future , be fully incorporated into the Union system .
It is important that the Commission is to be on the board of mechanism and , above all , that the rules for the operation of the mechanism , including the terms of the strict conditionality , are prescribed by a regulation proposed by the Commission and codecided by Parliament and the Council .
This is the first substantial change to the Treaty of Maastricht on economic and monetary union .
It is critical that we get it right .
I trust Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri to negotiate further on behalf of Parliament before 24 March .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , I would like to ask the speaker this : in his view , what mandate does the EU and the Commission have for economic government ?
Would the speaker not agree that , in the absence of a mandate , the party which he represents is neither liberal nor democratic ?
Mr President , I would say to the Earl of Dartmouth that the mandate for the construction of an economic and monetary union was clearly established by the Treaty of Maastricht , which was negotiated by a Conservative British Government and confirmed by the Westminster Parliament on several subsequent occasions .
I have to say that if British Members think they can play glibly with the future of the single currency , they are committing a profound mistake .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe , in all seriousness , we can say that we in Europe are standing at a crossroads , and it is a crossroads where two major crises require action on our part at the same time .
The first of these is the economic and financial crisis and , in its wake , also the euro crisis - dramatic consequences , in my view , of a one-sided and unsustainable development model based on debt and deregulation that , in our Member States and throughout Europe , increasingly destroyed the sustainability as well as the social cohesion and the achievement potential of the public budgets as the basis for that .
The other major crisis , of which we are much less aware , is what I see as a crisis of democracy and legitimacy , linked to the fact that we are able to take more and more decisions not in the nation state but beyond it , the result of which , as this is associated not with more but with less democracy , is that we lose the consent and the acceptance of the people .
We should therefore consider very carefully what we do .
We believe that we do need a stability mechanism , it is just that we think that this one does not go deep enough , as it deals with the symptoms and not the causes .
Intervention is one-sided and affects public expenditure , wages , salaries , pensions and social welfare .
The enormous profits from speculation that have been and continue to be made and the increasingly unequal distribution of wealth and income in Europe are not being tackled .
We are not asking those who have made their profits from such speculation to dip into their pockets , and that means we are not going far enough .
My second point is that what we are doing here is establishing a mechanism outside of the Community method .
Yet Europe is exactly the model of how such collaboration between States on their free initiative can be based on social cohesion and more democracy .
Through the Treaty of Lisbon , we promised to prepare future Treaty revisions by means of a convention so that they would thus be subject to intensive democratic debate .
Now , with the very first revision of the Treaty , we are doing the opposite .
We do want this stability mechanism , but we do not want it at the expense of European democracy , citizen participation , at the expense of giving up the Community method .
We do not want it in the form of a retreat to an intergovernmental Europe again but as a step forward to a more communal Europe with more participation and more democracy .
We have therefore tabled amendments to this effect relating both to the content and the methodology .
We are in close contact with the rapporteurs .
We have decided not to have a final vote today .
I am hopeful that the progress that has emerged over recent days will mean that , in the end , we will be able to give our approval .
We will only give our approval , however , if this pact takes us forwards and not if it leads to backward steps in our construction of a communal , democratic and social Europe .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , my group is happy to support the Treaty amendment proposed by the Member States .
We do so because we want the euro to survive and the countries that use it to prosper .
We in the United Kingdom are glad that we are not part of the euro , but we wish you well .
While we support the Treaty amendment , however , we do not support this report because what we have here is a wish list of unnecessary changes dreamt up at the last minute .
It really is unfortunate that the Parliament is behaving in this manner .
Such posturing is all the more bewildering given that we will vote on this opinion only hours before the European Council formally agrees the Treaty change .
Does anyone here really believe that the Council is listening to us ?
If the Parliament wants to be taken seriously , we must stop grandstanding and instead start delivering for the citizens of our Member States .
Mr President , I find it remarkable that unease now reigns in the majority of the groups in this House in respect of approving the use of a fast-track procedure for the amendment of Article 136 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
This report clearly confirms our expectation as MEPs that any future crisis-management mechanism will not create parallel structures outside the Union and that parliamentary democratic supervision should be maintained at every stage .
It is just that I find myself somewhat lacking in belief in this regard .
Mr Barroso did make clear yesterday that he supports both the goal of social cohesion within the Union and the Community method .
All the speakers agreed with him .
Thus far , however , this has not been made into a motion for a resolution and that , it strikes me , is something lacking .
What there was - or not - was the Merkel-Sarkozy pact .
That awakens my mistrust and a certain degree of scepticism .
For my group , it is clear that we cannot give our approval to any policy that aims to consolidate the budget by means of further cuts in the social sphere .
The European Parliament must first be given a vote on the specific proposals for the Union 's future economic and monetary policy and the related mechanisms , as these are what this is about at its core .
That , in turn , is such a fundamental decision that it must not be taken on the basis of ' Europe by decree ' but only in accordance with the convention method laid down by the Treaty .
My group is thus unable to vote in favour of what is , in many respects , a positive report .
Ultimately , despite constant assertions to the contrary , this would , of course , set a precedent .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I have been here six and a half years , and , my goodness , I have heard some nonsense .
But I have not heard so much nonsense spoken as I have today .
Many years ago , I used to lecture on this subject at Cambridge University , and I would suggest that you would do well to read some of my old lecture notes .
None of you , it appears , seems to understand the concept of international money .
Herr Brok , who has not come off the phone since he came in only to listen to himself , was rather interesting .
He started off this debate by suggesting it was a great success - the euro .
One wonders what planet Herr Brok lives on .
Dear oh dear !
It is a complete disaster .
If he thinks it is such a success , I would argue that he speak to the millions of unemployed people , youngsters mainly in the Iberian Peninsula , southern Italy and the rest of Europe , who are suffering from this disgraceful , fraudulent and deceitful currency which was rammed down the throats of the people of Europe against their will .
There is no mandate , Mr Duff .
There is no mandate , with your blue card hanging up there , let me tell you .
There is no mandate for this .
The British people have not been given a vote on this whole shebang of European Union , and neither has anybody else .
There is only one way this ridiculous currency spanning many different economies against a whole background of failed ideals can survive - and if you understood international money to any degree , you would understand this - and that is by having a financial , central , statist fiscal policy .
If you think you have a mandate for that , you are a disgrace and a scoundrel .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , I would like to ask Mr Bloom just how his diatribe was received at Cambridge .
I cannot imagine an economics class tolerating such fatuous and intemperate nonsense .
I would also like to ask him this : does he not find that there is unemployment in the United Kingdom ?
Does he not know of the excessive deficit position of the UK ?
Does he not care that inflation in Britain is greater than it is in the euro area and that sterling is a fragile currency ?

Mr President , I have to say to Mr Duff that at the time , in the mid-1990s , some of the class greeted my views with some scepticism .
I still now go back to the occasional reunion dinner and most of them come up to me and say , ' My god , Godders , you were right ' .
And I am , by god !
I was right in spades , was I not ?
( Applause )
Mr President , there is a temptation for the British to regard the stability mechanism as something that has nothing to do with us , simply because we are outside the euro area .
I think that would be a grave mistake .
There is no doubt that there are many UK politicians , here and at home , who would like Britain to join the euro .
There was a pledge by all the parties that there would be a referendum before there was any attempt to join the euro , but we all know how valuable referendum promises are in the UK .
Both the Labour Party and the Conservative Party pledged to have a vote on the Lisbon Treaty .
The former wriggled out of it on the spurious ground that the Constitutional Treaty and the Lisbon Treaty were different ; the latter wriggled out of its obligation on the ground that the Lisbon Treaty had been ratified and therefore , it was impossible to have a referendum .
Furthermore , the present government has decided there will be no referendum on this Treaty change .
The proposed amendment to the Treaty provides for expensive involvement in the stability mechanism of those countries that are not in the euro area .
The whole stability mechanism , of course , is an admission of the innate flaw in the euro experiment .
A currency value should reflect the relative value of a country 's imports and exports - the state of its economy .
A single currency cannot reflect accurately the state of 17 - or eventually 27 - different economies .
Our priority must be to make sure this disastrous experiment is never extended to the UK .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the strange thing about the Council 's proposal is that once it has been approved , it will pave the way for the creation of a permanent stability mechanism through an instrument of international law , and hence without a direct link to the institutional structure of the Union .
This fact caused great concern in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , which I chair , and which has the task of keeping an eye on the coherence of the Union 's institutional framework .
The simplified revision proposal therefore sparked a lively debate in which arguments based on the solid principles of the process of European integration came up against pragmatism and realpolitik .
In short , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs thinks that in order to deliberate on the proposal to amend the treaty , Parliament must assess the economic governance context under which the proposal falls .
We need to know more about how the future mechanism will tie in with existing institutional structures .
It would be a mistake to create twin structures which , in the long term , would carry the risk of the Union breaking up .

The proposals and suggestions in the report by Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri aim to build suitable bridges between the Union 's institutional structure and the new mechanism .
Moreover , I should like to emphasise that the Council must see these issues as fundamental for harmonious cooperation between the European institutions .
I therefore strongly urge the European Council to take heed of this requirement and the consideration that it must give us , ahead of our vote on 24 March .
As we await a positive sign , I should like to offer my heartfelt thanks for the brilliant work of the rapporteurs , Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri .

Mr President , I have no doubts whatsoever that Europe needs a permanent stability mechanism .
I have fought many political battles and referendums over democratically legitimate community decision making .
I therefore have deep reservations about the Treaty mechanism being proposed by the Heads of State to establish and manage the ESM .
I urge the Heads of State to reflect very deeply on the consequences for Europe if they reject the broad consensus of this directly elected Parliament .
Yes , we need a speedy decision , but for such a fundamental issue , we must comply with the Treaties .
The elephant in the room is a concern that a change in the wording , or switching to the ordinary procedure , might trigger a referendum in Ireland .
My reaction as a democrat is quite simple : so what ?
I respect the people .
I do not fear the people .
I believe that Ireland is a mature democracy capable of recognising where our best interest lies and that is at the heart of Europe .
Mr President , response to the sovereign aspects of the economic crisis was slow .
Initially , the markets punished inadequate responses .
Recently , there has been a respite .
Now , some bond interest rates are creeping up again into the unsustainable zone .
Rescue arrangements that were made have been shown to need change and with the best will , I doubt that the next attempt will be one hundred percent correct , let alone future-proof .
Therefore , we need a permanent funding mechanism that is flexible , not least to enable early intervention if that is the most effective remedy .
This is not such a wild idea .
The IMF does it .
But , of course , there have to be boundaries , priorities and governance .
So we need a Treaty change that enables evolution , not a Treaty change that leads to embroilment in what is meant by ' indispensable to the euro area as a whole ' , which , at the very least , suffers from size discrimination .
Even strong euro area countries need the stability mechanism because of the interconnectedness of the banking system and sovereign debt .
It is not a coincidence that the ECB calls for a fund large enough to cope with euro area bank recapitalisation .
And on interest rates , a balance has to be struck between sustainability and moral hazard , but the end-of-the-day position cannot be that Member States extract rent greatly in excess of costs .
Mr President , Treaty change is a sensitive subject in my Member State where , despite promises , the Lisbon Treaty was passed without a referendum .
But I understand why the crisis in the euro area is prompting you to establish a permanent stability mechanism , and although the UK is not a member of the euro area , we do wish to see your economic success .
For these reasons , my government has said that it will not block the Treaty change required to establish the mechanism .
But this resolution goes further , and we know from history that introducing vague language leads to uncertainties .
The recitals raise the concept of Eurobonds , woolly-worded and with no details .
Members from my group are concerned .
Does this hand over the sovereign right to manage one 's own treasury ?
What about moral hazard issues ?
To summarise , we will not vote against the Treaty language agreed by Member States , which is specifically to enable this mechanism to be created , but we cannot support this resolution with creeping , vague concepts .
( DA ) Mr President , it is only a little over a year since the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force .
Nevertheless , we are already in the process of making a second amendment to the Treaty .
I actually think it is very interesting that the Treaty of Lisbon was clearly so poor that it constantly has to be amended .
Why is it being amended , and how are we going about it ?
Not via the usual procedure , but by means of a special ' fast track ' procedure .
Why is this ?
Is it because the amendment of the Treaty is unimportant ?
No , quite the contrary in fact .
Nevertheless , it is intended to proceed so quickly that there is no real opportunity to involve the people in an in-depth debate .
When the Treaty of Lisbon was sold to the people , one of the arguments presented was that it would give the European Parliament more influence .
However , the proposed amendment will mean that major decisions can be taken at EU level without the European Parliament having any say in the matter .
So , what will be the result of the amendment of the Treaty ?
In this regard , we are in complete agreement with the European Trade Union Confederation ( ETUC ) .
The amendment of the Treaty will pave the way for top-steered assaults on collective agreements throughout Europe and thus , for a lowering of conditions for workers .
Does anyone really believe that this is the way to win the support of the people for a joint European project ?
Thank you for giving me the floor .
( DA ) Mr President , the main thing that comes to mind when I read this report and this amendment of the Treaty is that this is an absolute insult - an insult to the electorate , who now , for the second time , find themselves totally disregarded in relation to the Treaty - a Treaty that they were not even asked whether they wanted the first time around .
It is an insult to taxpayers , particularly those in northern Europe , who are having to pay for the overspending in a number of southern European countries .
It is also an absolute insult to the southern European economies , which may have the impression that it is a question of a lack of money in the countries in question .
That is not the case .
The problem in these countries is structural shortcomings .
These countries should undergo a number of structural reforms if they are to fit into the model that the euro requires and aspires to .
Only by changing their financial policy to be more like that of Germany will these countries be able to kick-start their economies .
We might just as well say it like it is , and to constantly give them more money and ever cheaper loans will only prolong the pain .
Thank you , Mr President .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to say that I agree with the opinion of the members who have spoken here this morning and who insist on respect for Parliament and for the Commission .
This is why my modest vote in favour will depend on whether the European Council is prepared to accept the role of these institutions .
This is because the new mechanisms we are talking about must be a significant component in economic governance , driven by a European Union that is capable of ensuring coherence between common economic policy , which must set clear , precise and limited objectives , and this stability instrument .
In other words , we must ensure at all costs that this effort we are involved in does not end up going down the intergovernmental route , which is a blind alley or one dominated by just a few countries , because that would obstruct the reform .
Fellow Members , Europe is being built one brick at a time , and this is one brick that will reinforce and balance this delicate building .
( DE ) Mr President , we must not forget , in this debate , that we are dealing with a simplified Treaty revision pursuant to Article 136 and that we , as Parliament - in connection with whatever mechanisms - are supposed to be more heavily involved .
That is the starting point .
A wish list has been put forward in this regard .
I would like to give my specific backing to Mr Brok when he says that the participation of the Commission and of Parliament must be envisaged .
That is why we are having this debate and will not be taking a decision until 24 March , in order to give the Council the chance to actually bring about that participation in reality .
The full inclusion of the Commission throws up questions , as the Commission has failed , in the past , to observe its obligation to act as guardian of the Treaties by failing to instigate proceedings .
The Member States themselves have likewise failed to observe their obligations .
It is therefore imperative that , in this simplified Treaty revision , we take a new step towards completing economic and monetary union .
I also have an idea of how that can be brought about , which is for the Commission to prepare everything - including proposals and drafts - on behalf of the Council , and the Council to then be obliged , much like in the monetary dialogue that we have with the independent European Central Bank , to report to us here and discuss matters with us .
That would be a sensible approach .
( SK ) Mr President , from a legal perspective , the amendment to the agreement is essential for the introduction of a fixed Eurobond .
It is also undoubtedly necessary to introduce a euro area stability mechanism .
A mutual assistance mechanism , if properly set up , can bind the Union together and lead to greater integration and solidarity between Member States .
However , we should definitely not stop there .
If the mechanism is to be significant , coordination must be improved in the economic area , but also in the area of social policies .
At the same time , I consider the intention to establish a stability mechanism outside the system of European institutions to be a bad signal .
The intergovernmental or even private-law nature of the proposed mechanism may put the European integration project back several years .
I would therefore like to call not only on the Commission , but especially on Member State representatives , to abandon such ideas .
If we are to exploit the crisis at least in some positive way , then we must see it as a chance to mobilise and not to split apart .
The establishment and operation of a permanent stability mechanism should happen in the closest possible connection with the framework of the EU , and should involve the institutional procedures of enhanced cooperation .
I would like to end by expressing the hope that only the good signals from the submitted proposal will come to fruition .
( PL ) Mr President , we are amending the Treaty of Lisbon , which , in fact , we only recently adopted .
Perhaps this should cause us to consider whether the Treaty , which was so greatly trumpeted and said to be a panacea for all of Europe 's problems , has nevertheless proved basically to be completely overrated .
Of course , the crisis , which is , at the moment , a problem for the Union , requires very resolute action .
Only there is a question as to whether what the Commission and the Council are proposing really is a good solution .
This is not only a matter of the euro area , because it is going to affect countries which are outside the area .
What is more , those countries - and that includes my own country , Poland - are basically going to have decisions imposed on them which were made without their involvement .
This is not a good signal for the citizens , who were once told that the Treaty of Lisbon would be a panacea for every problem .
Mr President , I have three points .
Firstly , deficits are not caused by currencies .
They are caused by governments and overspending .
I think that is perhaps bad news for Mr Bloom , who spoke here earlier , because if he was right and the responsibility was that of the currencies , that would be extremely bad news for the pound or the dollar , where we have the biggest deficits globally today .
The responsibility lies with governments .
That is why it is important that we secure and structure the stability mechanism in a way that helps Member States get out of difficulties , but also helps to ensure that Member States do not get into difficulties .
That is why I think it is important that the financing of the stability mechanism is structured in such a way that those who are exposing us to bigger risks by having bigger deficits should be obliged to pay more in order to contribute to the mechanism .
Then you have some kind of ' polluter pays ' principle and you also have a preventive action in the stability mechanism , contributing to the stability of the euro as such .
That is why I think we need not only to discuss the formal structure of the stability mechanism , but also how we finance it .
We need to secure stability in a long-term perspective as well as in the short-term perspective .
( PT ) I can summarise my position in three points .
Firstly , the idea of a permanent stability mechanism for the euro in itself constitutes a vital contribution to strengthening the single currency , to greater monetary integration in the EU , and to making the public debt markets more stable .
We should therefore support it unreservedly .
Secondly , the permanent stability mechanism can only be created with security and legal certainty if it is included in the Treaties in a clear way .
We should therefore support the careful amendment of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
Thirdly , it would obviously be preferable if the aforementioned mechanism were created and managed by the European institutions themselves , rather than emerging as an intergovernmental initiative for the euro area .
Nonetheless , we are well aware that this is impossible in the face of insurmountable objections from certain Member States , and it only takes one such objection for the amendment to the Treaty not to be passed .
We should therefore support the Council 's proposal for the amendments of the Treaty as it is .
Mr President , first , I would like to thank the rapporteurs for the excellent work they have done .
It is quite heartening that we are speaking with the same voice as the European Commission .
Most importantly , I would like to thank them for defending the prerogatives of this House .
To my colleagues from the ECR , I would say that this is not grandstanding but legitimately asserting our role in this process .
In times of crisis , we need effective solutions , stability and predictability , and all these features can be achieved best when we avail ourselves of the Community institutions .
Intergovernmental solutions will not , in the long run , lead us anywhere .
Most importantly , if we are serious about fighting economic crisis and being competitive , we have to do it together , regardless of whether a given Member State is a part of the euro area or outside it .
Therefore , I welcome the fact that , in our position - voted on yesterday in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs of this House - we have agreed to open the mechanism to all countries willing to participate in it , thus dispelling the ungrounded fears of a two-speed Europe .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon , on which work went on for so long , had two clear messages : firstly , the strengthening of the Community method with a central role for the Commission and , secondly , the strengthening of democracy with the participation of the European Parliament .
Little more than a year after the entry into force of the Treaty , the spirit of Lisbon is already being ignored and ridden roughshod over .
What the European Council has devised with this revision of the Treaty is unequivocally contrary to both of these messages of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Community method is not being strengthened - instead , what we have is renationalisation , intergovernmentalisation , in an important area of future EU policy and the complete exclusion of the bodies of the EU .
That is unacceptable and Parliament actually has to be opposed to this proposal .
It amazes me that the Commission , as guardian of the Treaties , has not spoken up more clearly and that we here in Parliament have to act , to some extent , as representatives of the Commission .
We must push the Commission into action that it should already have taken .
A dangerous precedent is being set here .
We are observing as a result of the economic crisis that monetary union cannot exist alone .
Given the influx of refugees from North Africa and the uncertainty in our neighbourhood , we are seeking additional EU policies and we do not want renationalisation .
I hope that the rapporteurs can still make improvements as otherwise , I cannot vote in favour of this revision of the Treaty .
( FR ) Mr President , the stability mechanism before us has been designed from the point of view of previous emergencies .
It is a rescue mechanism .
However , in the long run , the States cannot be saved , and they should not be saved .
The aim should be to perfect Europe 's economic union and to create a European budgetary area capable of supporting the Member States and the single currency .
To this end , we must go further than current emergencies dictate .
Ultimately , the European institutions must take the lead , and we must stop depending on endless intergovernmental initiatives , be they Franco-German or from elsewhere .
Pierre Werner , whose plan may be regarded as the fundamental basis of the euro , included in his work the notion of a European economic decision-making centre that is answerable to Parliament .
Well , today , that economic decision-making centre can only be the Commission and Parliament .
The next step , after we have overcome the hurdle of the small amendment to the Treaty , on which we are about to vote , must therefore ultimately be to go back in time 40 years and finally fulfil Pierre Werner 's wish .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , amending a treaty is always a complex and sensitive subject , even more so the first time because it can set a precedent for future interventions .

Likewise , for this reason , I think that the work of Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri is very careful , balanced and utterly worthy of support .
There are three issues that I should like to emphasise in the report that they have presented to us .
The first point is that the permanent mechanism cannot , and must not , lie outside Europe 's institutional framework .
For this reason , the presence of the Commission on the board will be the key to providing a common thread to the relationship between the current institutional framework and the mechanism to be amended .
The second issue is proper continuity of the temporary measures with the current situation : there will be trouble if this is not achieved .
Lastly , the relationship with the economic institutions is crucial for the future development of economic governance .
We must avoid creating dual systems that would do more harm than good .

( ES ) Mr President , we will not be going ahead with the vote on the Brok-Gualtieri report this morning : we will do it during the Brussels sitting .
We will do it then in order to give Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri time to negotiate the conditions for applying Article 136 with the European Council .
We are doing so because , as Mr Leinen said , the European Parliament is also der Hüter der Verträge - the guardian of the Treaties - and because we want the euro to function with everyone involved and with everyone committed ; in the end , Mr President , we want it to be effective .
That is what we asked for .
It is not about any dispute between the institutions .
It is not about gaining power for Parliament .
It is about the result - the mechanism resulting from this - being effective for the European public .
( PL ) Mr President , only a year ago , in view of how difficult it was to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon , none of us considered the possibility of having to amend its provisions .
However , the economic situation in Europe has meant that what was impossible only a year ago has become something which can be done , and that this even has the consent of the majority of Member States .
The economic and financial crisis is not only teaching us solidarity , but is also revealing strong economic relationships between the individual Member States .
Being outside the euro area does not protect countries which do not use the common currency from the budget crisis inside the euro area .
On the contrary , the financial problems of members of the euro area are having an adverse effect on the situation throughout the Union .
Therefore , the permanent financial stability mechanism should be open to all Member States , including those from outside the euro area .
Withdrawal from Member States which are not part of the euro area , including by stronger economic and social integration as is proposed by the Franco-German competitiveness pact , will foster a widening of the divide in the two-speed Europe , which will not help us in building a strong , cohesive and competitive Europe and will not create conditions for the Union to work together , which Mr Brok encourages us to do .
Thank you .
Mr President , we are all aware of the current economic crisis and the danger it presents in general to our lives , in particular , to the euro , which is crucial for the European political and economic project .
We need to maintain the stability of the eurozone in the principle of responsibility and solidarity for all Member States in need .
That said , I would like to underline three points .
Even when desperate times call for desperate measures and simplified procedures , in the long run , it is not possible to ignore transparency , parliamentary scrutiny and democratic accountability .
The stability mechanism should represent the first part of a complex approach and permanent measures aimed at working towards the Union 's economic governance .
The permanent stability mechanism , once established , should not exist outside the EU institutional framework .
Let me finally thank our rapporteurs for the outstanding job they have done on this extremely important , urgent and complicated matter .
Even without much information on the stability mechanism , it deserves a place in the EU institutional framework .
I am very pleased that the President of Hungary will be coming here soon .
( FR ) Mr President , three years ago , we were told : ' This is the treaty to end all treaties ; it will not be revised ' .
Realism has today led us to revise it .
For the first time , the Treaty of Lisbon provides real powers for the European Parliament where revising the Treaties is concerned .
We have before us a proposal that ignores the rights of this European Parliament and which is proposing an intergovernmental mechanism for a Community matter - monetary policy .
I have drawn two conclusions from this .
Firstly , I hope that our colleagues who are going to negotiate on our behalf are able to amend as much as possible the proposal that has been submitted to us , so as to ' recommunitise ' the mechanism .
Secondly , I also hope that this revision of the Treaty will be the last one carried out without the agreement or the involvement of the European Parliament .
This European Parliament has proposals to make , and we know that we will have to go further in terms of revising the Treaty and in terms of enhanced cooperation if the euro area is to survive .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are now three different economic governance packages before us : the Commission 's six proposals , the competitiveness pact - currently being negotiated under the leadership of Mr Van Rompuy and Mr Barroso - and the proposals to amend the Treaty and the associated establishment of the European stability mechanism .

It is clear , after this debate , that all of this must take place under parliamentary supervision and on the basis of a proposal from the Commission .
The fact is though , that , under the Treaties , Parliament has different rights in relation to the three different packages .
At the same time , these packages do overlap .
What should we do politically , therefore ?
In my view , it is crucial that we link our consent for the Commission 's six proposals to having our demands met in the other areas , so that everything becomes one well-balanced package in the interests of the citizens .
( SK ) Mr President , a number of EU Member States agreed to create and use one common currency .
However , differing economic potential has led to a situation where , for some Member States , the link to the common currency complicates the options for using standard procedures for handling insolvency .
All countries using the common currency have therefore agreed to create a mechanism enabling them to resolve existing financial problems and also to prevent these in the future .
The solution agreed on by the countries involved , however , requires an amendment and a supplement to Article 136 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , and acceptance of this solution by all EU Member States .
However , responsibility for the common currency is currently borne mainly by the 17 countries of the European Monetary Union , and it is therefore logical that the European stability mechanism should have an intergovernmental character , and the position of the European Commission as a simple observer is , in my view , sufficient .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , as has been said several times , sometimes , for the Commission to be heard , it must speak up .
I will try to do this now .
Firstly , I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation and the Members for a very important debate .
I think that we can definitely agree with many points which have been made in this discussion , especially that we need strong action at European level and that a future mechanism should be as close as possible to the Community spirit and the method .
To react to the comments on our assistance to Greece and Ireland : I think our experience clearly demonstrates that we should be constantly searching for a delicate balance between preserving the sustainability of the debt and avoiding moral hazards .
The fact that we are learning from the experience has , I think , clearly been demonstrated by the statements of my colleague , Commissioner Olli Rehn , in the last few days .
At the same time , I think we have to remind ourselves that the circumstances we are living in are truly exceptional .
The crisis is still here , recovery is fragile and markets are in turmoil , as we can see in the constant movements of the spreads .
More importantly , European countries are suffering unacceptable pressure and they see their future as mortgaged by high interest rates on their debts .
We therefore need to act , and we need to act fast .
We clearly need to demonstrate our resolve .
Setting up the permanent mechanism must therefore be done in the shortest possible time and as quickly as possible .
What is very important - and this was the one condition on which the Commission was very insistent - is that it must be done within the framework of the Treaties .
I agree with Mr Gauzès that swift action is needed , because we need legal certainty .
I also agree with Mr Guerrero Salom , who said that we should not treat this as a precedent .
I can assure him that the procedure which is used , and the type of cooperation which is proposed , is definitely not seen as a precedent by the Commission .
I have to inform you that the Commission is closely associated with the preparatory work and that we consider it essential that we are also involved in setting up and operating this mechanism .
As stated in Annex 2 of the European Council conclusions , the role of the Commission is expected to be central in the preparation of analyses and programmes for the future countries in it .
But we believe that the Commission 's central role should be underlined even more strongly .
Regarding the criticism of the method which was chosen , I have to say that we have seen good examples which such a method can result in , for example , Schengen or the third pillar .
To conclude , just one sentence .
When the Lisbon Treaty was being drafted , this type of cooperation , this area of cooperation , was considered to be too ambitious for the Member States .
Now , however , real life , the real experience we have with interdependence and with economic cooperation , is clearly demonstrating to us that what we need is a European solution to this very important European problem .
I believe we will achieve it .
Thank you , Mr Šefčovič .
Mr Gualtieri has the floor , though I would strongly urge him to keep to one minute .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this has been an important debate which I think has clearly shown the existence of broad consensus among the political groups over the assessments and general direction of the report .
With a few exceptions , Parliament is truly speaking with one voice and that is important .
We are saying yes to the permanent stability mechanism though we cannot hide some confusion and concern which , as we have learnt , is also shared by the Commission , even though we would have liked to read of these concerns in the opinion of the Commission on the procedure selected .
We are open to showing practicality and a sense of responsibility in noting that the political conditions do not exist to set up a European mechanism today and , nevertheless , we have shown and continue to show determination in our desire to help insert the mechanism into the Union 's legal and procedural framework , whilst also respecting the Treaties .
Our proposals are clear , but now I think the crucial issue is another .
Is the European Council willing to start up a real discussion with Parliament on its proposals and is the Commission willing to take an active role in this discussion ?
I should like to underline that Parliament has taken what I would call a customary decision to postpone the vote to 24 March .
I think this is an important sign : this is a responsible Parliament , but I think the Council also needs to show this sense of responsibility by taking Parliament 's proposals into consideration .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Against the background of the current economic crisis , the suggestion to introduce a financial stability mechanism meets the urgent need for solidarity between Member States and is a positive step .
However , modifying the Treaty in the format envisaged at the moment could create a mechanism devoted exclusively to a limited number of Member States .
This does not allow , for example , Member States which do not have the euro to be included under its remit .
I believe that for this mechanism to be truly European , it must be created inside the European Union 's institutional framework , with the involvement of the Commission and European Parliament .
It must also take into account the participation of all 27 Member States .
We must not forget that the economic fluctuations which occur in Member States outside the euro area have an impact on the economic and financial stability of the whole Union .
What is currently happening with the announced amendment to the Treaty of Lisbon shows that everything that EU leaders have said about the importance of the national parliaments and the European Parliament , the deepening of democracy , and the sustainability of the Treaty itself , has been nothing more than propaganda .
A year and several months after the Treaty of Lisbon 's entry into force , everyone is being sidelined for an amendment to be drawn up using a mechanism of the Treaty itself which not only allows an amendment to be made without any democratic participation whatsoever - continuing , in fact , with their rejection of the national referenda to approve the Treaty - but also creates a mechanism enabling permanent control of the Member States ' economies .
This report is heading in the same direction , by tabling certain proposed amendments to the Commission 's proposal regarding the amendment to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union as regards a stability mechanism for Member States whose currency is the euro .
In practice , everything is aimed at consolidating the boost that they are attempting to give to this economic governance with the creation of the ' European semester ' : the deepening of the penalties relating to compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact , of the economic policy guidelines , and of any indicators that may be adopted .
They are trying to impose a veritable straitjacket on the Member States .
In May 2010 , the long-term fiscal imbalance in Greece resulted in a major rescue package amounting to EUR 720 billion from the resources of the EU and the International Monetary Fund .
Despite the fact that the special European Financial Stability Facility ( EFSF ) was created for euro area countries , with resources of up to EUR 440 billion , it cannot be said that all of the EU 's problems have been overcome .
Moreover , the operation of the EFSF terminates at the end of 2012 , and a measure of uncertainty prevails among investors as to what will happen with the debts of problem euro area countries after this date , or after the guarantees provided run out .
It is for this reason that a change to Article 136 of the Treaty , creating a stabilisation mechanism after 2013 , is desirable for the EU 's future financial and fiscal stability .
Nevertheless , I would like to point out that this mechanism will not be a panacea for the actual protection of the budgets of problem ( or peripheral ) states , and that we also need to consider a comprehensive solution to this problem ( public debt reduction , renewal of confidence in the banking sector and structural reforms , including fiscal consolidation of the peripheral states in order to boost their competitiveness ) .
On the whole , I think that the report submitted by Elmar Brok and Robert Gualtieri presents an accurate analysis of the issue , referring to the relevant EU legislation as well as the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , and I therefore recommend approving the amendment to Article 136 of the Treaty in its proposed form .
in writing . - ( LV ) In the last few years , the euro has experienced several shocks , which would possibly have destroyed another currency .
The actions of EU leaders , albeit they have not always been sufficiently swift or convincing , have enabled the euro to be defended .
The situation is still fraught with difficulty , but I am convinced that Europe will overcome this crisis and become economically more powerful .
This crisis has revealed the EU 's weak spots and more clearly shown what amendments are necessary to European Union legislation , including the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , with respect to the stability mechanism for euro area countries .
I am convinced that the establishment of the European financial stabilisation mechanism ( EFSM ) is one of the most important steps that can be taken for the EU to avoid serious economic crises in the future .
Of course , the establishment of the EFSM will not solve all problems , which is why it is important that governments recognise their responsibility for compliance with the Maastricht criteria , and implement a sensible , well-considered economic and monetary policy based on long-term objectives .
We cannot afford a repetition of the scenarios of recent years , when Member States pursued ' foot hard down on the accelerator ' economic policies , disregarding the Maastricht criteria and breaking other fundamental laws of economics .
The euro is not only a currency ; it is a political covenant , demonstrating the EU 's ability to be united in diversity .
The euro is the guarantee of European stability , growth and unity .
That is why I do not have the slightest doubt that we shall be able to be sufficiently clear-sighted and wise to overcome this crisis and give a new stimulus to development .
1 .
Parliament 's calendar of part-sessions - 2012 ( vote )
2 .
Parliament 's calendar of part-sessions - 2013 ( vote )
3 .
Guidelines for the 2012 budget - other sections (
4 .
EU strategy for the Atlantic region ( vote )
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Mr President , I rise yet again to complain about the time management of this Parliament .
Both yesterday and today , we were given a time to vote , and we have abused it yet again .
Surely , the sign of a well run and effective Parliament is one that can manage its affairs properly and to time .
Can you please urge the authorities to get a grip of this ?
Otherwise , we will be treated with the contempt we deserve .
Mr President , my point of order regards the first two votes we have today on the calendar for next year and the year after .
I have two points to raise , if you please .
First of all , these votes simply illustrate how powerless this Parliament really is .
Everybody here thinks they are getting more and more power , and more and more influence .
But , in point of fact , these amendments are simply to get round the fact that we are obliged to have 12 part-sessions ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Clark , you have a point of order not a speech .
I am sorry , but I have to stop you .
We now move on to the vote .
Mr President , I would not normally rise on such a point .
As a Vice-President , I respect the Chair .
However , the groups have all been told that the calendar votes , which are very limited - I think there are two amendments - will take place at the beginning of the voting session and not after Mr Schmitt has spoken to the House .
I think it is disrespectful to Mr Schmitt to allow people to go and then ask them to come back again for two votes after his speech .
I therefore ask you to put to the House the proposal to modify the agenda that all votes today take place before Mr Schmitt 's speech , and we start on the basis of the calendar votes .
( Applause )
Mr McMillan-Scott , I have an answer to what you have just said and it is that on Monday , this Parliament voted the agenda .
You will see in the agenda that Parliament voted that the calendar votes would take place from 12 : 30 to 13 : 30 .
This is a decision that Parliament took on Monday .
Mr President , I am sorry to prolong this but as it happens , the voting lists have been circulated to all the groups .
If this was an error , it needs to be corrected .
It is ridiculous , and disrespectful to the President of one of our Member States and currently in the Presidency , to call the Members back to the House , back to the Chamber , after he has spoken .
Let us do it now in the order in which it is on the voting paper .
There is no justification for changing this again .
( Applause )
This is how it goes . Every Monday , we vote on the agenda .
Listen to me .
Do not aargh and oooh .
If you want to change the rules , you can do so , but the rules we have say that we vote every Monday on the agenda .
We did so this time with those Members who were in the Chamber .
Nevertheless , the President has the right to put the agenda to the vote again if a majority of the Members want this , so what I will do is exercise my discretion and ask you : would you like to vote to change the agenda for today ?
Who is in favour of voting to change the agenda ?
Who is against ?
Abstentions ?
( Applause )
Having said this , dear colleagues , I remind you that if you want to have a say on the agenda , be here on Mondays .
Mr McMillan-Scott 's proposal was to vote on the calendar before the address by the President of Hungary , if indeed time allows - because , as you see , we are actually losing time .
Given the time now , I expect that we will have a lot of votes to continue with after the speech by the President .
So , who is in favour of voting on the calendar before the President of Hungary 's speech , if , in fact , we have the time to do so ?
Who is against ?
Abstentions ?
So we shall do that : we shall vote on the calendar if we have time before the President of Hungary 's speech .
( Objections )

Colleagues , it makes no difference ; we will continue the votes anyway after the President has spoken .
( Murmurs of dissent )
I shall exercise my discretion .
In order to stop this ridiculousness , I will take the vote on the calendar as the first vote .
Is everyone happy now ?
( Applause )
OK , you will still be here to vote after the President 's speech , but let us go ahead now with the vote on the 2012 calendar .
Formal sitting - Hungary
President Schmitt , honoured guests , ladies and gentlemen , we welcome you , Mr Schmitt , as someone who , not long ago , was a fellow Member of our Parliament .
You are with us , today , in a completely different role than before .
You sat many times in this seat , Mr President , and chaired the proceedings of our Parliament .
It gives us great pleasure that you are supporting the Hungarian Presidency today , and also that you are working today to create a friendly climate for the European Parliament in Europe , because you know how important this House is - how important it is for the people who live in our country and for the decisions which are made in the European Union .
We are going to vote , today , on the report drafted by Mrs Járóka .
This is an important matter for us all , because the Roma minority is the most persecuted minority in Europe , and it is also the largest minority in Europe .
We have both the will and the means to be able to solve this problem gradually .
The Járóka report will contribute to this greatly .
We are sure of this .
It is also important that we are opening up to the Balkan states .
We remember very well , Mr President , that during the six years in which you worked with us , you attached very great importance to enlargement of the Union to include the Western Balkans .
There are indeed many problems to be solved there .
The countries concerned have to prepare first , but after that , their participation in the European Union will help us , too , to solve many problems .
We would also like to thank you for your work on this .
Perhaps my fellow Members remember the days , many years ago , when you won Olympic gold medals .
Then you put your whole heart into serving the Olympic movement , and now , as a statesman , you represent your country , and the European Union too , both outside the Union and in Europe .
We would like to thank you for this .
We are very interested in what you are going to say .
President of the Republic of Hungary . - ( HU ) I shall speak in my mother tongue , Hungarian .
Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , I stand here before you with great pleasure and pride .
I was glad to return to this important scene of my life and career , to my friends and associates , to the European Parliament , where I was a member for six years .
Thank you for inviting me .
Mr President , what would I not have given a year ago for twenty minutes ' speaking time !
This is an influential place , where every politician , every public actor can learn a lot .
I think it is no coincidence that many presidents and ministers have emerged from these benches .
This is good news for Europe because it gains leading politicians who have graduated from the not-always-easy school of European dialogue , who see their national affairs in a community dimension , and who are not only able to represent interests , but have also learnt to reconcile them .
This is Europe 's civilisational legacy and this is its mission today as well .
The European Parliament is a prime example of the important role parliamentarianism and the culture of public debate plays in European thinking .
Parliament , endowed with increased powers since the Treaty of Lisbon , is the guarantee of democratic decision making .
Clear-mindedness and open attentiveness towards each other befit its traditions .
Thus , Hungary , as the current President of the Council of the European Union , readily cooperates with the European Parliament , because this here is not simply a melting pot of legislation but , if I may put it like this , far more than that : the soul of Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , indeed , Europe not only has a market , a currency , policies and laws , but it also has a soul and a spirit .
I know full well that the day-to-day work here is mainly about practical details .
However , the crises of the recent past have also illustrated what can happen when the fate of people is approached from a purely financial or technocratic aspect and the major objectives , the principles holding things in place , are forgotten .
Jean Monnet , whom we revere as one of the fathers of post-war cooperation and who , even as an economist , did not dream of merely economic unity for Europe , said this at the time : ' We need true European efforts . We are not forming coalitions of states , we are uniting men ' .
The following ideas expressed by Jean Monnet are still relevant today , even though they were put into words sixty years ago : ' We are here to undertake a common task - not to negotiate for our own national advantage , but to seek it to the advantage of all .
Only if we eliminate from our debates any particularist feelings shall we reach a solution .
In so far as we , gathered here , can change our methods , the attitude of all Europeans will likewise gradually change ' .
More than six decades have elapsed since then .
Do we , however , still take these thoughts which showed us the way seriously ?
From the very beginning , this alliance was more than a community of coal and steel .
Its founding fathers brought it to life as a pledge of peace , as a mission to create a strong Europe .
I admit that it is not easy to find a common denominator for half a billion people in today 's expanded Europe , a Europe with 27 Members States .
I - if you allow me - see a special grace in the fact that Hungary could take over the mantle of the rotating Presidency precisely now amidst grave dilemmas , hard struggles and momentous issues , because it is at such times that there is the greatest need for the qualities which my country has .
True , the battles of the present can never be fought for us by the spirit of our forebears .
Nevertheless , we Hungarians can be rightly proud that , to quote the Hungarian composer , Ferenc Liszt , born 200 years ago , ' we are the sons of an inherently free people ' .
We live in a country which , thanks to Saint-King Stephen , was created as a tolerant , welcoming , multi-ethnic Christian community , has more than a thousand years of statehood , and has testified to its profound sense of freedom through revolutions .
As Hungary 's national holiday on 15 March is approaching , we must remember the many , many struggles of the Hungarians , such as the 1848 war of independence and revolution , and , to be sure , the 1956 revolution and fight for freedom , which some of you , many of you who are older , may remember , by dint of which we won ourselves a kind of right and respect here in Europe .
Moreover , this never allowed us to forget fraternity and solidarity .
We Hungarians have fought too much to be indifferent to the struggles of others and pass other people 's problems by without a word .
For this reason , we are watching with particular sensitivity all the events which are now unfolding to the south of us in the Arab world .
We show understanding for people 's desire for freedom , for a trait that no doubt lives in the heart of every person and every nation .
It is no wonder , and actually not unexpected , that this has happened .
The desire for freedom of any nation cannot be suppressed forever .
Sooner or later , it will break loose .
It is the European Union 's common duty to protect the interests of its own citizens and to remain true to its humanitarian obligations .
Through its own means , it must promote peaceful transition and - there , in the countries concerned - prosperity in one 's native land .
Ladies and gentlemen , or if I may so address you , colleagues and friends , as we are talking about solidarity , allow me to list a few of the concepts of the Schuman Plan , such as ' de facto solidarity ' , ' creative efforts ' , ' fusion of interest ' and ' deeper community ' .
I sincerely believe that these terms , which we may come across in every EU document and every speech , have not lost their meaning .
I am sure that these are profound emotions on which once European unity and post-war reconstruction could be built , and which eventually also brought the countries of Eastern and Central Europe oppressed by dictatorships back here , into this community .
Every point in the Hungarian Presidency 's programme sets these basic values as goals .
Everything that we are planning and working for can be described by two words , two words that are often used but which have lost nothing of their power : responsibility and solidarity .
Please allow me to expand on a few points .
What do we mean by solidarity and responsibility ?
Solidarity is required in financial affairs .
We know that protecting the euro is the first of all our common tasks .
This is a matter for all Member States , I repeat , all Member States , because the European Union 's competitiveness is important for countries both within and outside the euro area , and it depends on us all jointly .
Already now , Hungary is setting a good example by laying down a strong legal restraint on state indebtedness in the constitution which is being drafted .
Hungary has decided to take serious measures to reduce expenditure in order to alleviate its current debts and bring its budget deficit below the European average .
However , we respectfully expect the countries using the euro to regain confidence in the common currency .
The introduction of the European semester serves the purpose of common competitiveness : it will enable Member States to inform each other of their budget plans prior to national approval and enable us to set country-specific targets .
I personally would be delighted if it were introduced during the Hungarian Presidency and could even be called the Budapest semester .
Please allow me to use the words of Jean Monnet again , who thought it was an important virtue and aim of community commitment that nations - to quote him - ' instead of confrontation , will let themselves be mutually influenced , and eventually pass naturally to dialogue , to common action ' .
I know that common action still has its moot points , but I sincerely hope that these will be clarified successfully before the economic and financial discussions due to be held soon .
The magic word is prevention .
This can help ensure that the financial crises of individual countries do not catch the European Union unawares and enables an appropriate reaction to these because it is easier to avoid a crisis than to recover from one .
We must shoulder responsibility for closing the development gap .
Even in a community of this size , solidarity can mean paying attention to the fate of individual people , on the one hand , and to that of smaller and larger communities , entire regions , on the other .
The citizens of the European Union deserve equal opportunities .
This can be promoted by good cohesion policy , the main cornerstones of which have already been successfully agreed .
It is important that Europe should not be torn apart from the point of view of competitiveness either .
Turning to solidarity and unity in the energy market , efforts to develop a single energy market are also closely linked to cohesion .
They aim to reduce energy dependency and vulnerability and ensure the unrestricted flow of gas and electricity throughout Europe .
The events in North Africa are also a reminder of how important it is to reduce unilateral dependence and to link up unconnected energy networks .
Developments are needed for the completion of the single energy market , funds are needed for developments , and broad agreement is needed for finding the funds .
Assuming responsibility is required at a macro-regional level as well .
Just as the Barcelona Process in the southern part of Europe and the strategy for the Baltic Sea region in the northern half provide a framework to harmonise regional developments , now the countries of Central and Eastern Europe are seeking opportunities for more efficient cooperation as well .
The strategy for the Danube region is taking shape through the participation of 14 countries in some 40 programmes , which is excellent evidence that being neighbours , frequently mentioned as a geographical constraint , can also be viewed as a geopolitical asset .
We are very much looking forward to the Danube , as one of our natural bonds and the river of our eternal dependence on each other , helping us progress thanks to the strategy due to be adopted in June ; helping us as a green corridor , as an economic potential , as the driving power of joint ventures , as a developing transportation route and , indeed , as a cultural connection .
Hungary is acting as an initiator in devising the strategy and , as regards the practical tasks , is organising the work on common water management and environmental protection .
We must accept responsibility on our borders .
Europe must be able to react to rapid changes in the world .
However , no change that is taking place justifies our acting against our own interests , running from one side of the ship to the other , thus only strengthening the effect of the none too light waves even more .
I am aware that many people raise the issue of the southern and eastern neighbourhoods as a case of either / or , saying that the current situation dictates that we focus all our attention on the European Union 's southern borders .
However , we can only give good responses to changed situations - and we must admit that there will always be such changed situations - if we otherwise stand firm at all points of the compass .
If the European Union forgets this , it acts against itself and weakens itself .
Unexpected situations can always arise more easily wherever we do not keep abreast of affairs , and vice versa : every newly arising problem can be handled more easily wherever there are well-functioning relations .
The Eastern Partnership is neither a Hungarian nor a Polish priority .
Although this seems to appear to be our approach to the situation , it is far more common foresight .
Nothing proves this more clearly than the fact that we will co-host the Eastern Partnership summit jointly with our Polish friends during their Presidency .
We also need to talk about the solidarity which we need to show with those waiting for expansion .
The alliance of states that founded the European Union has always kept its doors open , saying that any democratic country wishing to accede of its own free will which accepts the EU 's basic principles may become a member of the community .
On the one hand , this means that there are clear conditions to belonging to the alliance .
On the other hand , this means that we also have a responsibility for countries outside the European Union , for all those states which consider membership to be their goal and are making serious efforts to achieve this .
The ambition to accede deserves clear answers , clear requirements , and an obvious schedule and perspective for the countries of the Western Balkans , but also Turkey and Iceland .
As regards responsibility for minorities , allow me to quote Article 3 of the Treaty of Lisbon : ' The Union is founded on the values of respect for human dignity , freedom , democracy , equality , the rule of law and respect for human rights , including the rights of persons belonging to minorities ' .
Cultural diversity is indeed the essence of Europe , the source of its vitality .
As a national declaration of this , in Hungary in the next national assembly - which , incidentally , will be halved in size from 2014 - all minorities within the country will have their own representation in parliament .
How Hungary represents the fate of Hungarians living abroad is in complete accordance with the same principle .
We are in an unusual situation .
We have a constitutional obligation to defend the minority rights of indigenous Hungarian communities living in other countries , their right to use their own language and right of self-government .
Could we call ourselves good Europeans if we did not do this ?
It is precisely the European Union that provides us with a legal and intellectual framework where this issue is , in fact , no longer an issue .
Now , at last , we have every chance of overcoming historic grievances - without mourning our geographical separation - and celebrating our spiritual and intellectual fellowship without any kind of territorial claim .
We have even framed this in law .
A state will become stronger and not weaker by granting rights to its minorities .
By doing so , it will gain loyal , satisfied , self-respecting citizens , who - not inappreciably - enhance and add colour to diversity through their culture and traditions .
Lastly , allow me to mention the Roma strategy , as Mr Buzek has already done so .
The Hungarian Presidency regards tabling an effective and viable Roma strategy to the European Union as one of its most important tasks .
Lívia Járóka has already done this .
I am convinced that we need this common action plan .
To eradicate poverty , however , in addition to social measures , the firm rejection of prejudices , and developing a supporting cultural and educational environment are indispensable .
All this is not , first and foremost , a question of agreement and money , but of our humanity and ingenuity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are well aware that the rotating Presidency is primarily always about taking current processes forward .
Two apparently opposing characteristics are needed for this : humility and tenacity .
Humility in common concerns and tenacity in representing them are the qualities that may lead to success .
At the end of our term , the yardstick for us will be this : whether we have strayed from the designated path , or whether we have managed to guide the dialogue back to essential , substantial and constructive affairs .
Therefore , the mission of our Presidency is to be the engine of the processes .
Being a player in a team : this is also what the concept of the trio of presidencies represents .
It is possible to produce a good individual performance but only if the service of the community , or rather team , interest remains paramount .
Many things require reconsideration because it has become apparent that we did not build our new European life on sufficiently solid foundations .
An era spent on seeking the way forward appears to be ending in Europe , too .
I am inclined to think that I see a fortunate conjunction of the stars in this .
Now the European Union has a President-in-Office which is a country making precisely the major structural changes that are also awaiting the EU .
Large , poorly functioning systems believed to be unchangeable must be reorganised and reconsidered , and conditions better able to weather crises , which promote development and protect competitiveness , are needed .
The fact that everything in Hungary today is about the need for change and renewal only makes us more receptive to shaping the common European future .
Therefore , we have the experience which makes it clear that we must return to the effective representation of community interests .
Hungarians expect their leaders and politicians - on whom , incidentally , sovereign power was conferred last year to an unprecedented extent in Europe - to provide a framework for a new life and express the fundamental principles for our future through strong laws and a worthy constitution , and will call them to account on this .
Our guiding principle at all times is to enact laws which determine our future in accordance with EU standards , European tradition and civil liberties .
The effective Hungarian constitution , if you will allow me to say a word about this , begins with the date 1949 .
This was the year when , in the more fortunate half of Europe , the idea of the common market had already come into being and its realisation was close at hand .
In the same year , the Communist regime in Hungary expelled itself from Europe through show trials .
The country lost its independence by being absorbed into the Soviet sphere of influence for decades .
We were cut off from the real Europe , from the community to which we had always belonged through our traditions .
Even the sun was blotted out from our vision .
What a state built on lies could lose , the Hungarians preserved as a nation .
This is why I feel that it is important and speaks volumes that the Hungarian constitution will bear the current year from now on .
It will bear the year 2011 , when , as a kind of gift of history , as a form of redress , we can hold the office of the Presidency of the European Union for the first time .
This is the first time when we can really demonstrate our democratic commitment through a lot of work and also under peaceful , constructive circumstances and are able to place our Hungarian resolve at the service of the community .
I believe that in the life of a nation , the right time for drafting a constitution always comes when it is strong enough to admit its past mistakes and advocate truths that will remain valid for many decades , and is sufficiently steadfast to see through what it has started .
It is at least equally important that we build on European foundations .
I guarantee and assure you that we will regard the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union as the standard for the chapter on human rights in the new Hungarian constitution .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am a fencer and it was in this discipline that I took part in the Olympics , so the metallic sound of the clash of swords is not unfamiliar to me .
Nevertheless , I do not think that on the European political scene today , we should compete to see who can oust and triumph over the other by force .
History has not given us a mandate merely to engage in political chess games and tactical prestige battles , but to serve a cause , to strengthen cohesion and seek consensus .
Europeans need a successful , triumphant and strong Europe , a Europe that is equally founded on the community of interests and values , in which individual nations are also strong .
The ambitious programme we call Europe 2020 is about precisely this .
Ladies and gentlemen , please allow me to finish my speech with a thought of the deservedly popular Hungarian writer Sándor Márai , which is related to Europe . I quote : ' We need to build this way of life further .
We need to fill it with everything that is modern and preserve in it everything that is timeless .
We have everything that we need ; all we need is faith and stubborn will , faith in our role and the will to fight against the tyranny of stupidity and temper .
Where can a European start work ?
Where can a Hungarian do so ?
I think he has already started ' .
End of quote .
All I can add to this is so be it .
Thank you for listening .
President Schmitt , those were important words , and your definition is very important .
The European Parliament means not only simple legislation but the very soul of Europe .
Quotations from Jean Monnet on the spirit of integration , dialogue and common activity , common actions , are very important for us .
It is very important to remind us of the Schuman Plan : grounded on solidarity , first of all , at the beginning of the European Union and then in the 1990s ; last century in Central and Eastern Europe , today on the financial markets and , in the very near future , in the Mediterranean region .
Thank you for all your remarks on today 's activities and today 's challenges and threats facing the European Union .
Thank you very much for your speech .
We will remember your words and your remarks .
( Applause )
1 .
2010 progress report on Turkey (
Mr President , I would like to announce the following .
I reached an agreement with the shadows on my oral amendment to paragraph 18 .
This means that amendment 26 to paragraph 18 will be withdrawn by Ms Flautre .
Therefore , I advise my group to vote in favour of amendment 29 to this paragraph .
Mr President , I have an oral amendment to add in paragraph 18 : ' is concerned by the lack of progress in these investigations and notes that the recent detention of well-known journalists such as Nedim Şener and Ahmet Şık might lead to a loss of credibility of these trials which should , on the contrary , strengthen democracy ' .
2 .
European integration process of Montenegro (
3 .
EU strategy on Roma inclusion (
4 .
Industrial policy for the globalised era (
That concludes the vote .
Colleagues , we have fifty explanations of vote .
You know what this means .
I will be going very fast , on the minute I will be stopping you , on the dot .
I apologise for this but we have to keep to the time .
Voting time ( continuation )
Voting time now continues .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , I want to give an explanation of vote on the calendar for 2012 .
Of course , what we were voting on was utter nonsense , because it does not address the problem of the three different parliaments : Strasbourg , Brussels and , of course , Luxembourg , which everybody forgets about .
The total combined costs , I believe , are something in the region of EUR 250 million per month .
What I would like to do is to offer a constructive suggestion .
Instead of meeting on twelve different occasions in Strasbourg , why do we not meet on twelve different sessions in Strasbourg in one week : first day - three sessions ; second day - three sessions ; third day - three sessions ; fourth day - three sessions .
That way , we only need to spend one week a year here .
We can spend the rest of the time in Brussels if we have to , and we can save an enormous amount of cost and an enormous amount of inconvenience .
Mr President , there is something extraordinary about the monthly peregrination of this Parliament between the two seats .
We preach fiscal rectitude and yet we spend hundreds of millions of pounds a month on shifting our interpreters and our committee clerks and all the Members .
We talk about global warming and yet we emit thousands of tonnes of greenhouse gases as fleets of lorries transport the necessary documentation back and forth .
I know there is an argument that Members of this House make for the symbolic significance of Strasbourg and the historic idea , and so on , and I am rather attracted to the idea that the EU , as a club of nations , should share the institutions around rather than concentrating everything in Brussels .
But let us have one seat , one way or the other .
Why do we not simply put it to this House that we should meet either permanently here in this handsome Alsatian town or we should meet permanently in Brussels ?
Either way , let us cut out the waste and let us , in this time of austerity , try and return some savings to our hard-pressed taxpayers .
( FR ) Mr President , the vote that has been cast , although a majority one , is , in fact , a move to undermine the letter of the Treaties , which is very clear and which stipulates that 12 part-sessions must be held in Strasbourg .
In order to get rid of one of them , it is being claimed that two different part-sessions could be held in the same week .
This is also a way of bypassing the very clear interpreting judgment that was delivered by the Court of Justice precisely when this House wanted to go from having 12 part-sessions to only 11 .
For 20 years , we have witnessed surreptitious moves to deprive Strasbourg of the seat of the European Union .
It is true - and my fellow Members are right on this point - that the current situation is untenable , but we are not obliged to make Brussels the Washington DC of the European Union .
We could have consolidated all of Parliament 's activities in Strasbourg , but it would have taken something other than the French authorities ' persistent negligence to do so .
( DE ) Mr President , what happened today was not a victory for the Brussels camp over the Strasbourg camp , as we also reduced the number of Brussels sittings by one .
The score is therefore Brussels 1 Strasbourg 1 .
However , ladies and gentlemen , we voted against the law - the decision to hold the August and October plenary sessions in one week each is illegal , as the Treaty states that there must be monthly plenary sessions .
Equally , this cannot be justified as a cost saving , as the costs - which , by the way , amount to EUR 70 million , which is plenty - do not arise as a result of Strasbourg , but rather because activities are continually being rerouted , contrary to the Treaty , into the shadows of Brussels ' bureaucracy .
Were we to concentrate our work in Strasbourg , we would both save money and have an independent democratic face in Europe !
( DE ) Mr President , I asked to speak on the budget negotiations because I believe that the European Parliament does not always receive fair treatment in this connection .
As MEPs , we , too , need to support economising , but it is also quite simply the case that we must fulfil our responsibilities properly .
The proposed increase in the budget for the European Parliament , which is far below the rate of inflation , is thus not a reasonable one .
It takes no account , for example , of the increase in the number of members of this House by 18 , of the fact that we must fund the accession of Croatia , or of the other investments that we have to make .
I assume that , ultimately , a sound compromise will be found on this issue .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as we all know , Turkey is a strategic partner for the European Union .
Its location is crucial for the economic and political interests of the Union and gives it an important role in promoting European activities in the Black Sea area , as well as promoting peaceful relations in the Middle East .
The 2010 report on the progress made in the negotiations for Turkey 's accession to the European Union does , however , show the sluggishness of the process and the resistance of the political forces in Turkey to some of the fundamental provisions of the association agreement .
Mr President , I do not believe that the Turkish authorities have made significant progress in terms of justice , fundamental rights , freedom of information , religious freedom and immigration , despite public pressure on these issues .
The economic interests in the region cannot allow us to make concessions on fundamental rights and freedoms .
Parliament 's resolution looks at this situation with a determined approach , urging the Commission and the Council not to waste the positive results achieved since 2005 and , above all , not to void the existing bilateral agreement with the idea of a privileged partnership .
My worry is that this partnership idea could compromise the acceleration of the accession process , which must remain our overall goal .
( PL ) Mr President , water covers the greater part of our globe .
However , we do not very often appreciate the potential and significance of seas and oceans for economic development .
The Atlantic region is particularly important for fishing , transport and energy .
It is the source of almost 50 % of the world 's catches , as well as a variety of mineral deposits such as metals , oil and gas .
Powerful climatic phenomena also occur there , and these can have catastrophic effects for coastal regions .
Therefore , it is essential to draw up the right strategy for the Atlantic region - one which will enhance good management and contribute to protection of the environment and a better life for the people of the region .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , discussion of this resolution must be built around Directive 2008 / 56 / EC , the so-called Marine Strategy Framework Directive .
As my fellow Member who spoke earlier said , the context is the protection of the marine environment because the directive I mentioned sets out common principles on the basis of which the Member States must develop their own strategies together with third countries in order to achieve good environmental conditions in the marine waters for which they are responsible .
This is the framework , therefore , on which the strategy for the Atlantic region ought to have been built , as well as on the basis of the indications of the Council of 14 June 2010 , as noted by the Commissioner when speaking in this House .
Instead , the resolution submitted for Parliament 's vote lies outside this framework and proposes - quite apart from what came out of the consultations carried out by the Commission - a strategy for a macro-region , as well as dealing with territorial issues instead of marine issues .
This direction brings forward a different decision .
I hope that the communication from the Commission , in line with the advance statements in this House , bring the initiative back within the scope of the directive on the integrated maritime strategy which , as it stands , I support .
That is why I abstained in the vote .
( PL ) Mr President , I was pleased to hear the result of the vote on the report on Turkey .
I am certain that every effort which aims to transform Turkey into a fully fledged pluralistic democracy with the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms at its heart is deserving of support .
Recent years have shown that Turkey 's efforts to become one of the European Union 's Member States are having positive effects .
The Union 's Member States should continue to support Turkey in the reforms it is undertaking .
It is necessary to concentrate , in particular , on the most problematic issues , such as constitutional reform , freedom of the press , women 's rights and the protection of national minorities .
I would also like to draw attention to the problem of implementation of the Additional Protocol to the EC-Turkey Association Agreement .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the resolution on Turkey because the constitutional reform that took place 12 September last was unanimously recognised as an important step forward made by Turkey in relation to Europe .
Naturally , there are still many more steps to be taken and in this vein , I would express my concern over the numerous arrests of journalists .
I would like to underline that Turkey is the seventh largest commercial partner of the European Union , that the European Union is Turkey 's main commercial partner , and that trade - which has been carried out correctly for centuries - has favoured interpenetration and the peaceful acquaintance of one people with another .
I therefore applaud the notable progress made in terms of getting started on connections between the European Union and Turkey , in particular , through the motorways of the sea that cross the northern Adriatic and the northern Tyrrhenian seas , which now see a flow of more than 250 000 truckloads per year in both directions , together with an important heavy-goods railway freight link from ports to destinations within Europe .
In this way , it was possible to get rid of a significant amount of heavy goods vehicles on the road and I hope that this continues .
( PL ) Mr President , Turkey is an important neighbour of the European Union , and the report which has been submitted for 2010 highlights significant changes which have taken place there .
There is no doubt that the constitutional changes make a great impression , and they make a fundamental contribution to the democratisation of life in Turkey .
There are , however , areas in which we should like to see greater progress .
A basic matter here is , of course , the fostering of relations with neighbours .
Without a solution to the Cyprus issue , all other issues will be at a permanent impasse .
The situation is similar when we look at civil liberties , including religious freedom .
I hope the conclusions of the report will allow progress to be achieved in Turkey , and a recognition that the country is changing not only in economic terms but also in matters which are important from the point of view of civil rights and freedom .
( PL ) Mr President , as a member of last year 's parliamentary delegation to Turkey , I had the opportunity to see for myself the progress Turkey is making in the process of integration with the European Union .
We should certainly take a positive view of the way the Turkish authorities have dealt with issues related to religious freedom , women 's rights , trade union rights , judicial reform , revision of radio and TV legislation and improvements in civil-military relations .
I agree , too , that it is essential to improve relations between the government and the opposition , to respect freedom of the media , including the Internet , to make improvements in the area of civil rights and the right of freedom of assembly and to carry out a thorough reform of the electoral system .
Another disturbing matter is the increasing problem of domestic violence and so-called honour killings .
Particular attention should be given to the questions of opening the border between Turkey and Armenia and support for negotiations on stabilising the situation in Cyprus .
I support the resolution , because I think that enlargement of the EU to include Turkey is in the interest of particular EU Member States , including Poland .
( DE ) Mr President , I abstained from voting on the progress report on Turkey , but not because I do not agree with its analysis - despite some reforms , the criticism of press censorship , violations of human rights , the Turkish electoral system and the freedom of religion do speak for themselves .
The reason I abstained from voting was that I believe that the European Parliament must be much clearer in its response .
If Turkey refuses to make crucial reforms , we must bring a halt to negotiations on membership .
It is time that this House called for the cessation of accession negotiations .
( FI ) Mr President , it is absolutely true that Turkey has made progress in recent years , but when we look at the Copenhagen criteria for membership of the European Union , Turkey still has a long way to go .
We might predict that Turkey 's accession to the European Union will not happen in our lifetime .
Specifically , there is still a long way to go regarding the basic assumption that we make about human rights and the rights of women and children .
These , however , lie very much at the heart of this European Union and community of values .
It is also very important to consider the situation in Cyprus .
If Turkey wants to occupy half of Cyprus , which is a Member State of the European Union , we obviously have to be tough with them on that .
We cannot accept a situation of this sort , where Turkey is at present playing two different games and following two agendas .
In this matter , we should encourage them to develop democratically but say very clearly that the European Union will not give up its values , and ensure that that is the case .
Mr President , the EU 's attitude to Turkey will one day be regarded as a generational error , as an ethical mistake .
We could have reasonably pursued one of two policies .
Either we could have worked with goodwill towards eventual accession , or we could have said at the outset ' look , accession is not going to happen , let us work out an alternative arrangement ' .
Instead , we have held out the promise of eventual accession with our fingers crossed behind our backs .
We have made promises which we have no intention of fulfilling .
Now , look at it from Ankara 's point of view .
Would they have made a series of difficult and painful concessions on broadcasting , on secularism , on Cyprus , above all , where Turkish Cypriots voted in favour of the EU plan and where isolated Greek Cypriots rejected it and were rewarded ?
We have made them grovel about the Armenian massacres , we have imposed tens of thousands of pages of the acquis communautaire on them , and then at the end of this process , we are going to turn around and flick two fingers at them !
We risk creating the very thing we purport to fear : namely , an alienated and anti-Western state on our doorstep .
Turks defended Europe 's flank against Bolshevik expansionism for 50 years .
We may one day ask them to do the same against Jihadi extremism .
They deserve better than this .

( DE ) Mr President , though I share Mr Pieper 's concerns , I voted in favour of this report , as we have stated quite clearly once again - at the beginning of the report - that , for us , the negotiations are a long process with no predetermined result .
We rejected the motion by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , which sought to specify accession , as we did similar motions by the Socialists in previous years .
This House therefore found the right line .
We should take the next step soon , however , and tell Turkey quite honestly , as Mr Pieper said , that as far as we are concerned Turkish accession is simply out of the question as it would overburden Turkey and overstretch the European Union .
A politically integrated Europe including Turkey as a member is not possible .
It is a grand delusion that we must finally step away from .
As for the progress in question , it is in the interests of Turkey itself , a country that is a member of the Council of Europe and NATO and our closest ally .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to refer to the discussion which took place in this Chamber on the integration of Montenegro into the European Union .
During the discussion , I asked the representative of the Commission and the Council for a timetable for this process and to say when Montenegro can become a fully fledged candidate for EU membership .
Unfortunately , I did not receive an answer to that specific question .
Despite this , I voted for Parliament to adopt the resolution , because I think there are important reasons why we should do so .
Firstly , it is a resolution which is important for Croatia .
Secondly , it is a signpost for other countries which are today part of the Balkans .
However , I think there is a third , very important reason : it is a positive resolution and one which shows that the Union 's values are still attractive .
( DE ) Mr President , when it comes to enlargement policy , we need something along the lines of a regulatory framework .
We must , therefore , complete the negotiations with Croatia by June , as planned , and then get the accession process for that country under way in the autumn with our vote .
We want Croatia to be in the European Union by next year or , at the latest , the year after that .
Things have to go on then , too , but how ?
We need to integrate the small but difficult remainder of South-Eastern Europe .
First of all , there is Macedonia , and then Montenegro .
This is a signal to all the other States in the region that , if they fulfil the criteria , they too have a place in our ranks .
Unlike Turkey , these are European States to the core , and as such , they naturally have a future within our Community .
Montenegro , in particular , is a small country with a major European tradition .
I look forward already to the negotiations with Montenegro !
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is still much to be done in the field of combating discrimination in Europe .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mrs Járóka , when she states that even if discrimination based on ethnicity could now be considered eliminated , the socio-economic exclusion of most Roma continues and remains one of the greatest challenges that we shall be called to deal with in the coming years .
This is down to a whole series of specific factors , such as geographical disadvantages , deficient education or the collapse of planned economies attracting a large and low-skilled labour force .
A strategy to improve their socio-economic inclusion will not compromise anti-discrimination laws in any way , rather , it would complement them .
A significant proportion of European Roma face such precarious and unfavourable conditions that measures aimed at fostering social inclusion must be thought of as bridging one of the largest gaps in the fulfilment of constitutional and human rights in Europe .
( DA ) Mr President , it is always an emotional debate when we discuss the Roma here in Parliament .
There is one group that believes we should not actually do anything - it does not concern the European Union - and then there is another group that believes that we cannot pay out enough money , even if it is not well spent .
None of the approaches to this problem are particularly serviceable and , in any case , we are simply not solving the Roma 's problems .
It is therefore good that we have this report .
It is good because we have now taken a decision to look at the results that have been achieved as a result of the considerable funds that we have already allocated to the integration of the Roma .
We need to see which projects have been beneficial for integration before we can set a proper strategy , thereby ensuring that the money is well spent .
The Danish Liberal Party has therefore voted in favour of this report .
It is moving in the right direction for the Roma . Thank you , Mr President .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with today 's adoption of the own-initiative report , Parliament has made real progress towards the proper inclusion of Roma in the communities that host them .
Overcoming the marginalisation of Roma communities by fully recognising their fundamental rights to healthcare , education and the protection of vulnerable groups is absolutely incumbent upon us .
We also welcome better coordination with local and regional bodies as well as the improvement of the part of the text providing for concrete checks on the consistency and effectiveness of financing compared to the expected result , together with the part that introduces award criteria for Member States that guarantee appropriate use of the resources granted .
However , more could probably have been done with regard to the recognition of reciprocal rights and duties because it is essential to keep in mind the joint responsibility of Roma communities for their effective inclusion .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all agree on the need for a European strategy for the integration of Roma and , of course , possible discrimination against them should not be underestimated , but rights cannot exist without duties and integration cannot exist without legality .
Shockingly unhygienic illegal slums , a huge school dropout rate , illegal activities such as theft , receiving stolen goods , women and children being led into prostitution , begging , refusal of all offers of integration and job support proposed by local authorities : this is the reality of many Roma communities in my country and in other European countries .
It is a bit hypocritical to say that responsibility always and only lies with institutions and never with those who have chosen to inflict this behaviour on society .
Lastly , I regret that this text fails to make reference to the correct implementation of Directive 2004 / 38 / EC , which sets out stringent requirements for European citizens residing in another Member State and their expulsion for public safety reasons .
For these reasons , I voted against the rest of my group .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mrs Járóka takes on particular importance at this time and - together with the communication that the Commission is on the brink of adopting - will constitute the basis for further discussions at the European Roma Platform , scheduled to take place in Budapest on 7 and 8 April
I support the call for the introduction of binding minimum standards across the European Union in the education , employment , housing and health sectors .
In particular , I think greater attention should be paid to primary education , which is crucial for the full integration of the Roma minority .
The firm appeal made by France , Romania , Bulgaria and Finland to the European Commission is certainly to be welcomed .
The Commission does , however , need to take greater responsibility for an active , strategic and leading role in developing the implementation of an effective Roma inclusion strategy .
The need to identify specific duties that the nomadic communities must assume is clear .
Mr President , my group supports this report because it is a move in the right direction , calling for an EU strategy and a road map for Roma inclusion .
The report is inspired by a keen perception of the extremely heterogeneous cultural aspects between different Roma communities in Europe .
At the same time , it advocates the introduction of binding and minimum standards at EU level for starting a real policy of integration .
The EU strategy addresses all forms of violation of the fundamental rights of the Roma people and calls for effective access for the Roma to the labour market by making micro-credit available for self-employment and entrepreneurship .
My group particularly appreciates the stress on the education of Roma children , namely , the abolition of classroom segregation through the employment of Roma mediators and an increase in the number of Roma teachers .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this important own-initiative report forcefully affirms the need to set out a European strategy for the social inclusion of Roma .
Indeed , we need to fight economic and social discrimination against European Roma , which has increased as a result of the current economic crisis .
The European Union must develop a new legal framework and avoid continuing to deal with this problem through non-binding legislation , as this is insufficient and not suitable for achieving the goal in question .
It is equally important to maintain the Roma task force as a permanent organisation and to start thinking about a mechanism for this issue which would be similar to the one used to assess the internal market .
Lastly , Europe must make every effort to guarantee its citizens - and particularly the most vulnerable groups - protection of all human rights related to human dignity .
In the end , the overall inclusion of Roma is essentially a question of fundamental rights , even if we have to ask the Roma communities to try and integrate and not to close themselves in their own world where they do not respect European and national laws .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with today 's vote , we have given a further boost to the - how should I put it - definitive solution to this problem , but we have not adopted the best possible solution .
Indeed , I should like to point out that the more than 300 amendments presented on the reports have been transformed into 38 compromise amendments - all of which were adopted - that aim to better define the priority sectors of the strategy , which is to say , the objectives of this strategy .
Through the permanent task force , the Commission will have to ensure the collection and circulation of statistical data and good practices , and the Member States will have to appoint a government official - hopefully a high-level one - who will act as a point of contact for the implementation of the strategy .
However , we could have been even more incisive and less hypocritical if , in the report , we had looked at the obligations and duties that the Roma community ought in any case to respect in their host countries .
That is what I am hoping for , namely , that we will soon find the solutions that will enable this community to coexist more easily in all Member States .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , no more children who do not go to school , no more children forced into begging or being exploited .
These are just a couple of the aims of the report by Mrs Járóka , which represents an important political response .
Besides declarations of principle , we are awaiting the Commission 's proposal - expected in April - so that there can be clearer and more shared responsibility and cooperation on Roma policies between the Member States and European institutions .
The aim must be to use the resources available as efficiently as possible , beginning with European funds and avoiding local administrations having to take on all the problems and dealing with constant emergencies .
Lastly , I hope that a debate is opened up over Directive 2004 / 38 / EC , which sets out specific conditions - i.e. work , sufficient economic resources and health insurance - to retain the right to reside , but which simultaneously leaves a number of gaps in terms of what happens if these requirements are not fulfilled .
This inadequacy needs to be rectified as soon as possible .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of this report and I should like to offer my congratulations to Mrs Járóka for the work she has done .
She managed to bring together the different positions and establish clear objectives and priorities for the strategy ; namely , the provision of specific measures against nomadic lifestyles , guarantees on basic healthcare , equal access to primary , secondary and higher education , and the right to housing .
The strategy actually aims at inclusion and not merely integration .
It is obvious that the role of the Commission and local authorities will be crucial , above all , in terms of controlling and managing European Union funds .
The only limitation of this report is the lack of instruments to check the actual desire for integration amongst some Roma communities and the consequences that are likely to stem from any unwillingness to remain on the territory of a Member State or participate in the treatments , and the aid and welfare programmes , which certainly cannot continue ad infinitum without producing results .
( FI ) Mr President , I gave my vote to Mrs Járóka 's report , but I want to explain my position in a little more detail .
The Roma question is a paradoxical one for Europe in many senses .
It challenges the fundamental values and ideals of the European Union in practice , but , on the other hand , it is born out of one basic right , freedom of movement , which is a traditional way of living for one nation .
There are Roma in Finland too ; there , the problem is mainly the low standard of education and consequent unemployment .
That is why we need to invest in education in particular .
Soft law is no longer enough , and soft measures are not either .
We need consistent legislation and practical measures that are binding on everyone .
All the Member States and EU institutions are responsible for this .
Kali sarakosti : Happy Lent to you all .
( SK ) Mr President , we are talking about Roma integration issues .
The Roma live in many European countries - both Western and Eastern countries .
It is interesting to note that , although freedom and democracy have been established in Western European countries for longer than in Central and Eastern countries , among which is my own country as well as our neighbours in Hungary , we see similar problems both in the West and in the East .
We have not yet overcome these differences .
There is talk of an integration of the Roma population aimed at making them successful on the labour market , and healthier as a population .
According to the laws currently in force , access to education and healthcare is guaranteed everywhere , and it is just sad that the Roma population often do not send their children to school to be educated .
( FI ) Mr President , efharisto , thank you .
This report by Mrs Járóka is an excellent one .
I think that everyone in this House will share the view that it really is time to take action at European Union level to ensure that everybody enjoys equal human rights .
For , unfortunately , they have not been implemented as far as the Roma are concerned .
It is not enough to have a good report : we also need action .
Now is the time to ask a fundamental question .
How do we move forward from here , to prevent this report from merely remaining a naïve dream or a mixture of different opinions , and to allow it to work in practice so that we can see the status of the Roma improve significantly in the European Union ?
It is also very important to organise followup for this report .
Perhaps we need an ombudsman for Roma affairs at EU level , someone to report on the measures that we have decided on and ensure that they will indeed work in practice .
This is the way to tackle this issue properly and successfully .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the recent and profound economic crisis that has hit European industry has simultaneously highlighted its importance for the European Union 's economy .
Indeed , the European economy has often been focused on the idea that the markets ought to regulate themselves and so far , this has mostly been achieved through individual measures with practically no coordination between Member States .
However , the Europe 2020 strategy recognises for the first time the need for a new approach with a flagship initiative .
It is time for the European Union to fully exploit the shared opportunities for the sustainable renewal and further development of the industrial base , with good quality jobs .
European industry ought to maintain its leadership in key sectors and not find itself bringing up the rear .
It is time for the Union to choose its path for the industry of the future .
We must make sure that our European market creates its own added value .
For this purpose , clear macro-economic coordination of economic , fiscal and budgetary policies is essential for growth and employment , for example , through the fiscal harmonisation of corporation tax .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mr Lange tackles a very topical problem : reacting to the economic and financial crisis that has seriously hit our productive system .
I think the response contained in this resolution is extremely positive , because it manages to bring together the variables required to build a good economic revival plan .
The idea of concentrating on research and innovation , bearing in mind the size of our entrepreneurial fabric is very important and I think it gives a useful shot in the arm to the perhaps slightly more conservative stance of the Commission .

I appreciate the work of the rapporteur , Mr Lange , who has managed to integrate more than 500 amendments , bringing in a resolution that overall makes a huge contribution to our work . What emerges is a targeted industrial policy in European terms , which encompasses the various sectors and is participatory , given the use of monitoring models from both above and below .
One controversial point remains : the European patent .
I maintain my complete opposition on this issue , but this has not prevented me from voting in favour of what is a very positive report .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report shines a light on many positive aspects and mirrors the considerations and requirements expressed by the various national associations .
Therefore , I cannot but support the overall spirit of Mr Lange 's report .
However , some critical issues were not addressed or resolved , such as the request for new legislative measures on resource efficiency and , above all , the issue of enhanced cooperation on patents .
It is now imperative to tackle the question of European provisions on origin marking , which , in my opinion , is an indispensable tool to strengthen and improve European industry and its competitiveness .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Lange because I hope that adopting this report will prompt all the institutions to work to implement the ambitious programme set out , translating it into practical policies .
( PL ) Mr President , industry is developing around the world at an extraordinary speed .
In order not to fall behind China or India , we need immediate change .
Europe , which is small by comparison , should , however , offer the world more than simply more toxic factories , so I think it is right to invest in new technologies , the development of medicine and pharmacology and innovative solutions in areas which we already know well , including agriculture .
I am not thinking of huge livestock farms , but of the creation of new solutions which make it easier to grow crops , raise animals and produce healthy and ecological food , as well as to obtain energy from alternative sources .
It is just such investments which today 's economy needs .
Innovative solutions are also an answer to the demographic changes taking place in an ageing Europe . Thank you .
( SK ) Mr President , industrial policy must , as part of economic policy , aim for sustainable growth , higher employment and a decent quality of life for all Europeans .
European industry is facing powerful competitive pressure from developing countries .
The Union must therefore maintain a proactive policy in order to sustain and strengthen European industry as the driving force of economic growth .
A functional internal market must be adequately secured by negotiating favourable conditions in trade agreements with third countries , but also by means of protection against unfair competition and infringements of competition and intellectual and industrial property rights by third countries .
The EU has great potential for securing a competitive advantage in the area of highly qualified human resources and the creation of innovative technologies , which is necessarily linked to further investment in research and development .
( PL ) Mr President , industrial products account for nearly three quarters of European exports and give work to 57 million citizens , not including extra jobs in related services .
Industry therefore has enormous significance for our economy and affects all of the economy 's other sectors .
As we learn the lessons of the recent economic crisis and the growing competition in world markets , it is essential to take what action is necessary to maintain the strong position of European industry and also to continue its systematic development .
Here , the Europe 2020 strategy seems to be an attempt at a new approach , one which makes full use of opportunities for sustainable modernisation and development of the industrial base of Member States while also ensuring a high quality of work .
This creates an opportunity for Europe to maintain its position as a leader in key sectors of the economy .
The integrated industrial policy , which is intended to bring about a gradual and sustainable transition from a mainly productive towards a knowledge-based industry , looks particularly promising .
Therefore , I fully support the resolution .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it would be inconceivable for a sector that accounts for 57 million jobs across the European Union , three quarters of European exports of industrial goods , and roughly one third of gross value added in the European Union , to be left without support from appropriate sectoral policies targeted at growth and development .
There can be no competitive commercial policy without innovative , good quality industrial production .
I would reiterate the suggestions made by the Committee on International Trade , and particularly those that emphasise the importance of an effective trade protection system , making use of the instruments provided where necessary .
Defending the Union 's interests in future negotiations , so as to protect industry and employment , is an unavoidable necessity to help overcome the crisis and ensure that , along with the manufacturing sector , the real economy takes precedence over the financial economy , avoiding those speculative bubbles that caused so much disaster .
( DE ) Mr President , I consider it to be very important that we should be able to debate this report and also to vote on it today .
It would be best , of course , if crises simply did not occur , but it would be worse if no lessons were learnt from crises when they do occur .
It is precisely because we learnt from the last crisis that we are getting involved in industrial policy in the European Union again , especially as , before the last crisis , there were quite a large number of people who believed that money could be easily earned with money .
Economic and industrial policy , after all , is critical to our prosperity in the European Union .
I therefore believe it is extraordinarily important that we have engaged on this issue .
It is a good thing , of course , to be involved in innovation and future-oriented industrial policy , but I think it is just as important that we have emphasised our traditional industry in this report .
I am very pleased by this and I hope that we will continue to discuss this issue .
( GA ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this excellent report and indeed it was time for us to focus on industrial policy for the European Union .
There is no doubt that we have fallen behind in recent years compared to the major countries of the world , but I hope that we will forge ahead in the future .
Mr President , having indicated my support for the document , I want to express my concern at one item in the explanatory statement , where , on page 32 , it calls for the harmonisation of company tax .
Now that is something my country would not agree with .
Company tax or corporation tax is very important to us and it is up to each country to set its own rate .
Indeed , it is well known that some countries allegedly have a high corporation tax but , in reality , they pay far less .
( GA ) Be that as it may , this is a fine report and I am very happy to support it .
( PL ) Mr President , the resolution which is the product of the debate on the real economy is most deserving of support .
The recent period has been characterised , above all , by the challenge which globalisation has presented to European industrial policy and real production in Europe .
How the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy can be achieved , in particular , those of job creation and resisting delocalisation of industrial policy , is a fundamental question which was discussed during the debate on the subject of the resolution .
In answer to the question as to whether Europe has to lose traditional industries , it can be answered that this does not have to happen , and this was also demonstrated by the debate on small and medium-sized enterprises which was held during the last part-session .
The availability of , among other things , raw materials , including raw materials for power generation , is a serious challenge .
We have to devote much attention to innovations and to using the results of scientific research in industry .
Another important task is to make use of the synergies which exist between different areas of European Union policy , including between industrial / agricultural policy , for example , and commercial policy . Thank you .
( ES ) Mr President , I voted for this initiative because the European Union has to make a firm commitment to industrial policy and face up to the risks of the crisis , to competition from third countries , and to globalisation with increased public funding that is reflected in the future framework programme .
Why is that ?
For the purposes of research and development activity .
To boost private investment and encourage the public and private sectors to work together .
This will enable us to create skilled jobs .
However , we need to make use of the scientific and technological skills of the regions , which have developed innovation networks and competitiveness clusters , and whose innovation and effectiveness exceeds those of their countries .
That is the case with Euskadi , the Basque Country .
Make use of the regions ' knowledge .
Do not live your lives blind to this European reality , because acknowledging it and taking it on board will enable us to consolidate our leading position in industrial policy in the face of the current threats .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - I would ask fellow MEPs to imagine for a moment that they are in business .
You currently have two factories , but by having only one factory , you could increase productivity while reducing costs by £ 150 million and protecting the environment .
It is what your shareholders want .
What businessman in his right mind would keep two factories ?
Yet , fellow MEPs , we are actually in business , the business of government and , crucially , of overseeing the spending of our constituents ' - our shareholders ' - money .
We waste £ 150 million each year by having 11 sessions here in Strasbourg .
In a house that obsesses with green policy , some choose to needlessly pump 20 000 tonnes of carbon monoxide into the environment .
I commend Mr Fox on his work to at least bring some modicum of common sense in 2012 and 2013 .
I voted for Amendment 1 to the draft of the European Parliament 's calendar of part-sessions for 2012 and 2013 .
Despite the fact that I understand the symbolic nature of plenary part-sessions held at the Strasbourg seat of Parliament , given the current critical financial situation in Europe , we need to look for savings , and this is what this amendment means .
Holding two part-sessions in one week is , above all , a gesture to European citizens , because it is their taxes which are used to pay for the expensive and time-consuming journeys not only of Members , but also of officials and assistants .
in writing . - I voted for Amendment 1 , which deletes the part-session proposed for week 40 in 2012 .
I see this as a small step in cutting the waste involved in travelling from Brussels to Strasbourg .
in writing . - As one of the co-signatories of the key amendment , I am glad it has been adopted .
The calendar of part-sessions for 2012 should now be amended as follows : delete the part-session proposed for week 40 ( 1 to 4 October ) ; split the October II part-session ( 22 to 25 October ) into two separate part-sessions : part-session 1 : 22 and 23 October ; part-session 2 : 25 and 26 October .
The outcome of this vote sets a fundamental precedent along the road which I hope will one day lead to the concentration of all of Parliament 's activities in a single place .
Actually , I think we can no longer tolerate the waste of public resources and atmospheric pollution caused by the dual location of Parliament , which each month forces thousands of people to make long and difficult trips between Brussels and Strasbourg .
Putting the two October plenary sessions together in the 2012 official calendar sends a very strong signal and I am optimistic that the path we have taken is more honest and in tune with citizens ' wishes .
I rejected these amendments and will be instituting infringement proceedings at the European Court of Justice along with my colleague , Mr Posselt .
in writing . - According to European law , 12 plenary sessions must take place every year at the Strasbourg seat of the European Parliament .
The vote on changing the calendar to allow two of these Strasbourg sessions to take place within the same week reflects our desire as MEPs to cut costs and CO2 emissions .
Travelling to Strasbourg is expensive and the increased travel causes extra CO2 emissions .
I therefore support this report , which will enable us to hold the required 12 plenary sessions in 11 weeks , thus cutting the cost and environmental impact of our work .
As an MEP , I wish to represent the best interests , economically and environmentally , of my constituents .
I also call on the UK Government to raise the issue with other Member States , as it is the Council 's responsibility .
I voted for Amendment 1 , which proposed combining the two October part-sessions and holding them in the same week in the European Parliament 's session for 2012 .
I am opposed to organising the work of Parliament by splitting it across three locations .
The amendment means that both time and money will be saved , and thousands fewer tonnes of CO2 will be released into the atmosphere .
Savings have to be made - the amendment means that not only MEPs , but also several thousand European Parliament officials who normally work in Brussels , as well as journalists , lobbyists and staff of the European Commission and of the administrations of different Member States , will travel to Strasbourg 11 times instead of 12 .
This will reduce the costs of transport , expense allowances , hotels , etc .
in writing . - Today , Parliament voted on its calendar for 2012 and 2013 .
For the first time in my experience as an MEP , the amendments were approved by the majority .
This means that MEPs will not have to move to Strasbourg 12 times a year , but 11 times to incorporate 12 sessions in Strasbourg .
The monthly ' travelling circus ' from Brussels to Strasbourg has become synonymous with waste , both in terms of the EUR 200 million spent on it , and the 20 000 tonnes of CO2 emitted .
MEPs cannot decide where they sit but they do have the power to decide how many times Parliament must relocate from one city to the other .
Around 350 MEPs supported the amendment that would sandwich two of our sessions into one week , thus saving the costs , time and energy of the return journeys .
It will also send a positive signal to our electorate .
I also hope that this will serve for an eventual calendar in which 12 sessions will be held in 6 weeks .
I disagree , however , that the calendar of 2013 was put to vote together in this plenary .
It is clearly a manoeuvre not to further extend this procedure during this legislature .
During the vote on Parliament 's calendar of part-sessions for 2012 and 2013 , 58 % of MEPs approved an amendment abolishing one of the two October part-sessions held in Strasbourg .
That amendment is quite simply a violation of the Treaties !
The Treaties designate Strasbourg as the seat of Parliament and stipulate that 12 part-sessions must be held there annually .
Two part-sessions are held in October to catch up on the work that is not carried out in August .
Outside these part-sessions in Strasbourg , meetings of the parliamentary committees and additional part-sessions are held in Brussels .
In 1997 , the Court of Justice clearly established the principle that the European Parliament must meet every month in Strasbourg .
The Treaties leave no room for doubt : Strasbourg is not the second seat of the European Parliament ; it is the institution 's only seat .
The anti-Strasbourg group is becoming organised and flexing its muscles more and more , in an attempt to make people believe that Parliament is unanimously against Strasbourg .
The supporters of the Alsace seat must speak out more .
They have the legitimacy of the law and of 50 years ' history of European integration on their side .
in writing . - I voted to change the 2012 calendar to save taxpayers ' money , to save CO2 emissions and to lessen the disruption to Parliament business by the monthly trip to Strasbourg .
The European Treaties explicitly state that Strasbourg shall be the only seat of the European Parliament , and that 12 part-sessions shall be held there annually .
However , a vote was held this week with a view to merging two Strasbourg part-sessions in the same week , in October 2012 and October 2013 .
The democrat MEPs voted against that decision .
France , for its part , has already announced that it will shortly refer the matter to the Court of Justice of the European Union .
Indeed , the decision taken is in flagrant breach of the spirit and the letter of the Treaties , since it should be remembered that the provisions of the texts may be amended only upon a unanimous decision by the Member States .
We voted this week on the European Parliament 's calendar of part-sessions for 2012 and 2013 .
To my great regret , a majority of MEPs voted in favour of an amendment ( to which I was strongly opposed ) merging the two October part-sessions into one , in the same week .
As far as I am concerned , this vote completely contradicts the spirit of the EU Treaties , which explicitly state that Strasbourg shall be the seat of the European Parliament and that 12 part-sessions shall be held there annually .
The debate on the location of the European Parliament 's seat resurfaces all the time , and this is a fresh attack today on the European Parliament 's seat in Strasbourg .
However , the Strasbourg seat has historical references and is referred to in legal texts , and it should not be called into question by these multiple attacks .
France recently announced that it was referring the matter to the Court of Justice of the European Union , a move which I would like to applaud and which I will support .
I voted in favour of the changes to Parliament 's official calendar for 2012 , because I think it is right to try and limit wastage of economic and other resources as we carry out our parliamentary duties .
The decision to hold the two October plenary sessions in the same week actually means we can avoid a double journey to Strasbourg , with all that this entails in terms of resource saving .
In the end , I think this decision is in line with what already happens , with the concentration of the two plenary sessions in September .
I voted in favour of the proposed changes to Parliament 's calendar of plenary sessions for 2012 and 2013 because I think that , even fully respecting the Treaties , it is , in any case , possible to bring two part-sessions of Parliament together in a single week , avoiding going over to Strasbourg twice in the same month .
This will allow us to cut down the costs of the European institutions and avoid wasting time and money .
This will require greater effort in terms of organising proceedings , both by myself and my fellow Members , but it will show the public a greater commitment to avoiding the senseless waste of public money .
in writing . - I believe that holding two separate plenary sessions in October is unnecessary .
The EU Treaties require Parliament to hold 12 sessions in Strasbourg each year .
However , they allow for two sessions to be held in the one week .
By stopping the practice of travelling to Strasbourg twice in one month , the Parliament can set an example in reducing its CO2 emissions and saving public money .
in writing . - I voted for Amendment 1 which deleted the part-session proposed for week 40 in 2013 .
As with the decision on the 2012 calendar , this is a contribution to cutting Parliament 's costs .
in writing . - As one of the co-signatories of the key amendment , I am glad it has been adopted .
The calendar of part-sessions for 2013 should now be amended as follows : delete the part-session proposed for week 40 ( 30 Sep to 3 Oct ) ; split the October II part-session ( 21 to 24 October ) into two separate part-sessions : part-session 1 : 21 and 22 October ; part-session 2 : 24 and 25 October .
The outcome of this vote sets a fundamental precedent along the road which I hope will one day lead to the concentration of all of Parliament 's activities in a single place .
Actually , I think we can no longer tolerate the waste of public resources and atmospheric pollution caused by the dual location of Parliament , which each month forces thousands of people to make long and difficult trips between Brussels and Strasbourg .
Putting the two October plenary sessions together in the 2013 official calendar sends a very strong signal and I am optimistic that the path we have taken is more just and in tune with citizens ' wishes .
I rejected these amendments and will be instituting infringement proceedings at the European Court of Justice .
The Conference of Presidents should not have allowed this motion to go to a vote .
I voted for this report , which respects the principle that the institutions should have sufficient resources to be managed rigorously and efficiently .
At a time of economic and financial crisis in Europe , when the public are obliged to cut back on their personal expenditure , both the EU and national institutions should follow suit .
This should not , however , prevent the necessary public investment which translates into medium- and long-term gain .
I would stress that the impact of the Treaty of Lisbon 's entry into force in heading 5 should become stable in 2012 , although the accession of Croatia planned for 2013 will have an impact on the 2012 budget .
Faced with the present situation , some institutions may have some difficulties in maintaining a balanced budget .
For this to be successful , I agree with the good management measures relating to administrative resources and cost reduction plans , whilst adapting efficient and environmentally friendly technologies .
Finally , Parliament cannot jeopardise the necessary conditions for giving all the Member States sound working conditions , on an equal footing .
in writing . - I voted against the Fernandes report on budget priorities for 2012 because the European Parliament is still going to look for a 5 % increase in its budget even though the rest of the European institutions will confine themselves to 1 % .
The cost of the EU is , in fact , unsustainable for the nations of Europe and needs to be reduced .
I am appalled at the European House of History being approved as part of this report : it is a 70-million-euro-and-counting vanity project which is completely at odds with the supposed claims of austerity .
I voted in favour of this resolution which sets out the general framework and priorities for the 2012 budget in the area of funding the EU institutions .
Faced with the continuing economic crisis , it is very important to ensure good financial management in order to implement the principles of economy , efficiency and effectiveness .
I agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that as a result of the implementation of these principles , institutions should submit cost cutting plans .
Furthermore , each expense incurred by the institutions should be clearly specified and justified .
Parliament and the other institutions should submit biannual reports on the implementation of their own budgets , giving details of the implementation of each budget line .
I therefore believe that the European Parliament and the other institutions should show budgetary responsibility and self-restraint .
I welcome the establishment of a new Section X in the EU budget for the European External Action Service , with an allocation of EUR 464 million .
However , I would like to call on this Service to use the funds earmarked for it to implement its activities and achieve concrete results .
I voted in favour of this report .
Next year 's budget must be responsibly balanced , with priority being given to those areas that are inextricably linked with the EU 2020 strategy .
In drawing up the budget , it is necessary to ensure the principle of sustainable governance in aspects of effectiveness and efficiency .
It is necessary to ensure sufficient resources for the EU institutions so that they can perform their functions properly .
At the same time , the institutions must also respond to the current financial , economic and social situation of the EU , apply stringent management procedures and manage resources with rigour and efficiency I agree that the EU institutions can make a significant contribution to reducing costs and generating economies of scale , such as centralised procurement , shared services between institutions , e-governance systems , etc .
I voted for this document because I think that the Fernandes report on the budget priorities for 2012 appropriately identifies the directions to follow next year .
I approve of and support the idea presented in the report about giving priority to the internal recruitment of staff .
This will help increase efficiency through using the experience previously acquired , while also reducing training costs and the costs involved in adapting to a brand new organisational culture .
At the same time , it is important to compare in detail the actual expenditure with that budgeted during 2011 and to pinpoint exactly the causes of significant variations .
EU institutions should prepare and send the Commission plans for cutting their expenditure , with specific deadlines and measurable targets .
We cannot ask only ordinary citizens and the private sector to make sacrifices .
EU institutions need to as well .
Indeed , Parliament must serve as a model , demonstrate solidarity and keep a very close watch on how resources are spent .
The report on the priorities for the 2012 budget of Parliament and the other European institutions , for which I voted , goes some way toward taking account of the economic , financial and social situation that we are experiencing .
In other words , it is a budget marked by restraint and austerity .
This report advocates legislative excellence , cutting costs , reducing the impact on the environment , and a zero-based increase ; that is , an increase in line with inflation .
The proposal that coming budgets should be multiannual budgets is equally important , so that they can be in line with the multiannual financial framework .
It also takes into account the possible accession of Croatia in 2013 .
I agree with the report on the guidelines for the 2012 budgetary process , which stresses the need to consolidate the resources required to address the new institutional framework resulting from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
A responsible attitude towards budgetary matters is of paramount importance for both Parliament and the other institutions .
The current crisis and the heavy burden of public debt lead to an urgent need for self-restraint , taking into account the principles of economy , efficiency and effectiveness .
It is worth highlighting the fact that certain investments , particularly in technology , could result in future savings in the long term , and therefore , these should not be prevented .
I would also stress that proposals for reducing paper , energy and water consumption , along with emissions , should be tabled as part of the organisational culture of Parliament and the other institutions .
It would also be desirable to reduce the amount of material for disseminating physical media , which should be replaced by digital media .
in writing . - I voted to restrict the EP budget for 2012 , given the economic , financial and social constraints on EU Member States .
We undertook to seek to cut some spending and to justify the rest in detail .
However , projects already under way , such as the House of European History , should not be jeopardised .
This is an austerity budget which stays in line with inflation .
At the same time , cuts must not have a negative impact on the quality of Parliament 's legislative work .
I support the excellent report by Mr Fernandes , because at a time when we are experiencing a severe financial , economic and social crisis in which so many sacrifices are required of the public , we must be the first to set an example by adopting guidelines for a budget marked by restraint and austerity .
The resources needed for the EU institutions to be able to fulfil what is expected of them should , however , be made available , especially in view of the new institutional framework resulting from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would also stress the importance of subjecting the management of these resources to higher standards of rigour and efficiency , under stricter and more transparent control .
It is equally important to encourage the creation of synergies and avoid unnecessary duplications in terms of personnel and functions .
in writing . - When this House considers budget priorities , it does so in the context of massive public sector cuts in EU Member States , rising unemployment , increasing household bills and overall economic uncertainty , both nationally and in many families .
In this extremely serious and challenging context , what does the EU consider to be a priority ?
Remarkably , one priority is a European House of History .
I would hazard a guess that if my constituents were to be asked if this represents 100 million well spent at this time , few - if any - would say yes .
It is time for this place - MEPs , the Commission and officials - to get real .
Priorities must be in the best interests of our constituents and aimed at making their lives easier .
EU money must not be wasted solely for the fulfilment of those obsessed with pushing their idealistic notions of a shared EU history or identity .
Such self-indulgence must end .
We have chosen to support this budget report .
This is partly because it so clearly emphasises the importance of economy and restraint in these difficult economic times and partly because it welcomes the allocation of EUR 464 million to the European External Action Service , the important activities of which are in the area that the EU ought to be focusing on .
At the same time , however , we are extremely critical of the investment of a total of EUR 549.6 million to extend the KAD building in Luxembourg , and we do not at all share the rapporteur 's expectation that this will result in savings in the long term .
Instead , the only reasonable option would be to establish the European Parliament and its work in a single location .
We Swedish Social Democrats voted in favour of the report on the priorities for the 2012 budget for the European Parliament and other institutions .
The report adopts a critical and questioning stance towards a number of budgetary proposals involving high costs and recommends that Parliament 's budget for next year increase by no more than the rate of inflation ; in other words , it should not change at all in real terms compared with 2011 .
We would also like to emphasise that we agree with the report 's extremely hesitant and critical position with regard to the project to establish a House of European History .
At a time when there is severe pressure on national budgets , we consider it inappropriate to initiate such a project , which will probably be very expensive .
However , we would like to point out that we would have preferred an even more restrictive approach to be taken to Parliament 's budget for 2012 that also included proposals for savings and redistributions to finance new requirements .
The Commission advocates a rate of increase of a maximum of 1 % for the EU institutions ' administrative budgets for next year - an initiative that we believe should be supported .
Compared with inflation , an increase of a maximum of 1 % would , in practice , entail a reduction in the overall size of Parliament 's budget .
Taking the current financial , economic and social situation in the EU into due consideration , it is increasingly important that the institutions respond with the quality and efficiency that is required , and that they employ strict management procedures so that savings may be achieved .
It is now necessary to make efforts to fully achieve the objectives enshrined in the Europe 2020 strategy , focusing on growth and job creation .
It is also necessary to strike a sustained balance and make an effort towards consolidation in all the categories of the budget .
It is therefore important to maintain a prudent approach with regard to administrative expenditure .
In conclusion , Parliament should maintain the principle of legislative excellence , respect the principle of good management and transparency , and ensure a spirit of budgetary responsibility in the general framework and priorities for the 2012 budget .
The report ' sets the principle of legislative excellence as a priority ' .
Given that , despite the ambiguity of the concept , this will depend essentially on the political guidelines attached to the legislative process , we advocate that a fair allocation of resources - material and human - be made available to Parliament , to serve the requirements and scope of parliamentary work .
The rapporteur does not hold back from longwinded rhetoric throughout his report , which is punctuated by concepts like ' good management ' , ' economies of scale ' , ' efficiency ' , ' effectiveness ' , ' cost-benefit analysis ' , ' redeployment of staff ' , ' mobility ' , and so on .
Nevertheless , the European External Action Service appears to be excluded from this list when it comes to supporting ' the EU 's ambitions in foreign policy ' .
We agree completely about the ' importance of equal treatment of Members of all nationalities and languages in terms of the possibility for them to carry out the duties and political activity incumbent upon them in their own language ' .
However , this involves much more than ensuring interpretation services in committee meetings , as the rapporteur suggests .
It also involves the provision of interpretation services at meetings of coordinators , trialogues , delegations , parliamentary assemblies and others .
It also involves all official and work-related documents being translated in a timely manner .
At present , there are unacceptable omissions in both areas .
This is another report on the continuity of EU budget policy , which is subordinate , above all , to the political guidelines introduced into the legislative process .
However , we advocate the fair matching of work resources - both material and human - available to Parliament to the needs and scope of Parliament 's work , without exaggerating the costs or possible savings , and without undermining Parliament 's work .
We cannot , however , refrain from pointing out that , rather than concepts like ' good management ' , ' economies of scale ' , ' efficiency ' , ' effectiveness ' , ' cost-benefit analysis ' , ' redeployment of staff ' , ' mobility ' , and so on , what the European Union needs is other policies , including substantially reducing spending on the military and on the European External Action Service .
We support the protection of equal treatment of Members of all nationalities and languages in terms of the possibility for them to carry out the duties and political activity incumbent upon them in their own language , bearing in mind , however , that this means much more than ensuring interpretation in committee meetings , as the rapporteur states .
It also involves the provision of interpretation services at meetings of coordinators , trialogues , delegations , parliamentary assemblies and others .
It also involves all official and work-related documents being translated in a timely manner .
The report by Mr Fernandes concerns the guidelines for the 2012 budget procedure for the European institutions .
Amongst other things , the report provides for greater rigour -given this tough time of economic crisis - in terms of the bureaucratic management of the European organisational system .
That is why I supported Mr Fernandes by voting in favour .
I voted in favour of adopting this report , which lays down guidelines for the 2012 budget procedure : a general framework and budgetary priorities for the functioning of the European institutions ( except the European Commission ) .
Our report supports , in particular , the reduction in the European Parliament 's budget in view of the Member States ' economic , financial and social situation , and I welcome that .
My final point is that I resolutely opposed the amendments attacking the European Parliament 's seat in Strasbourg , and I am glad that they were rejected by the majority of the European Parliament .
I agreed with this report , because it is very important to give priority to the principles of good management , namely , economy , efficiency and effectiveness .
In the implementation of the various policies , the results achieved must be taken into account and variable expenses should , whenever possible and when their scale so demands , be made subject to regular cost-benefit evaluations .
As a result of implementation of these principles , institutions should submit cost cutting plans ; thought should be given to the advantages of centralisation , so as to generate economies of scale ( e.g. centralised procurement , shared services between institutions ) .
Interinstitutional cooperation is essential in order to exchange best practices that favour effectiveness and allow for savings .
I believe that interinstitutional cooperation should be improved as regards translation , interpretation , recruitment ( EPSO ) and EMAS and should be extended to other areas .
In a context of economic crisis , the heavy burden of public debt and restraint in times of ongoing national budgetary consolidation efforts , the European Parliament and the other institutions should show budgetary responsibility and self-restraint .
Parliament 's goal should be to develop legislative excellence and all the necessary resources should be available for this purpose , while respecting budgetary constraints .
In the current economic , financial and social climate , the budgetary procedure guidelines for 2012 present a real challenge , especially because the European Union 's institutions are being forced to make considerable savings but , at the same time , they need to have sufficient resources to enable them to carry out their activities with the highest level of professionalism and efficiency .
In this respect , I express my support for better interinstitutional support with a view to exchanging practices which will result in a strategy for strengthening ties between Europe and its citizens , while maintaining budget austerity and making savings so that the Europe 2020 agenda objectives can be implemented successfully .
Although the 2012 budget for Parliament and the other institutions should be about consolidation , this should not create obstacles preventing investments , since investment projects ensure the smooth operation of Europe 's economies .
Last but not least , I support the rapporteur 's point that it is unacceptable to have no interpretation services available during the meetings of the European Parliament 's committees , as MEPs must be allowed to use their mother tongue .
I , too , was in the situation where I could not use the interpretation services , even when I was presenting a report .
The 2012 and 2013 budgets will be consolidation budgets aimed at reflecting the Member States ' spending cutbacks and setting a benchmark for the levels that will be established in the next financial framework .
The aim of this budget must be excellence , which means pursuing the objectives of economy , efficiency and effectiveness using as little as possible of the available resources .
During this consolidation phase , Parliament has to aim to increase the budget but not above the rate of inflation .
This threshold means exercising great responsibility .
The increased expenses deriving from enlargement to include Croatia and the 18 new Members of this House provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon will be integrated through an amending budget .
In order to respect the approach of containing expenses , I hope that all the institutions will send the necessary information in advance in order to set out a general framework of administrative expenses so that the Budget Authority can take decisions on the use of resources following a multiannual , sustainable approach that aims for the comparability of the information provided over time and across the institutions .
in writing . - I welcome this report which makes clear that Parliament expects the Bureau to submit realistic requests when presenting the estimates , is ready to examine its proposals on a fully needs-based and prudent basis in order to ensure appropriate and efficient functioning of the institution , stresses that the purpose of the amending letter presented by the Bureau to the Committee on Budgets in September is to take into account needs unforeseen at the time the estimates were drawn up and stresses that it should not be seen as an opportunity to renew estimates previously agreed .
Following the interinstitutional line , the enlargement-related needs shall be integrated either in an amending letter or amending budget , and the needs for the 18 new MEPs following the Lisbon Treaty will also be integrated by an amending letter or amending budget .
This report has the great merit of stressing the need for MEPs to carry out their duties in their own language .
The lack of translations in a number of meetings , in communications that are addressed to us , and in joint resolutions that are under negotiation , is an unjustifiable obstacle to our work as MEPs and hence to democracy .
I support this request .
However , I refuse to support the waste of money and the democratic aberration that the establishment of Baroness Ashton 's European External Action Service represents .
Likewise , I refuse to endorse the use of private enterprises in preference to civil servants .
The Treaty of Lisbon has given Parliament new responsibilities .
This situation means additional administrative work , with the result that Members need qualified staff to carry out advisory roles .
This new situation leads to two problems : increased costs arising from the need for more assistants , and additional space required in order for them to carry out their duties in good working conditions .
This situation leads to increased costs .
That is difficult to explain during this time of crisis , but if Parliament 's work is to be excellent , it needs to have the necessary financial and human resources .
That is why I voted as I did .
in writing . - Although the report contains the main guidelines and priorities for the 2012 budget , including the standards of legislative work in the European Parliament , I do not think that the budget increase in terms of the rate of inflation is correct or justified .
There are other mechanisms and ways of solving common problems and priorities .
I voted in favour .
The expenditure ceiling for the multiannual financial framework of the European Union budget for 2012 was increased once again .
Particularly in times when citizens have to tighten their belts , the European Union , too , must make savings .
There are plenty of opportunities to make savings , from abandoning one of the seats of Parliament , to reducing the morass of EU agencies , to improving the fight against fraud within the aid programmes .
Labelling it as due to the economic and financial crisis , the European Union has simply put a few plans on hold but not made any real savings , despite selling these acts as major savings .
This is more than unfair towards European citizens and it is just as unfair to justify all the additional costs on the basis of the greater demands under the Treaty of Lisbon .
For these reasons , I voted against the budget report .
This report includes an increase in the expenditure ceiling for the multiannual financial framework ( MFF ) for the European Union 's budget in 2012 .
As a result of the economic and financial crisis , the citizens in the Member States were urged to accept austerity measures and thus to bear the major part of the impact of the crisis .
The EU , too , should reduce its expenditure .
This begins with the uncontrolled growth of agencies , goes on to the pre-accession aid for Turkey and continues through to the expensive duplicate structures and administration costs as a result of the European External Action Service .
I therefore voted against this report .
Mr Fernandes 's proposal for a resolution on the guidelines for the 2012 budget procedure offers an overview of the administration of Parliament 's budget in view of a future optimisation of the management of the resources available to the European institutions , which is why I voted in favour .
Parliament will have to adopt a budget to consolidate the future financial framework and the additional human resources needed to meet the requirements of the Treaty of Lisbon , and to improve and complete the buildings available , information technology and interpreting services .
The main objective is still to find a good way of managing resources so as to contain expenses while nevertheless improving services .
I chose to abstain because , although this text mentions identifying possible savings for next year 's budget , these are not made specific within the text .
If we want to be consistent , savings-related policies should begin with the very Members of this House .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that the current financial , economic and social situation in the EU cannot prevent the institutions from employing strict management procedures so that the necessary savings may be achieved .
A real effort needs to be made towards consolidation .
As regards sound management principles , the institutions should submit cost-reduction plans , and when presenting expenditure , it should be clearly specified and justified .
In this vein , I would like to publicly express my appreciation for the excellent work that has been carried out by my colleague , Mr Fernandes .
I voted in favour of the report on the guidelines for the 2012 budget procedure because I think that the current economic crisis - which right now has repercussions on employment above anything else - requires a joint effort on cutting back from the Member States and the European institutions .
I therefore agree with the statement that in the current circumstances , the general principle for European financing is to follow an ethos of budgetary austerity .
In any case , I feel that I must emphasise how , even in view of the economic situation , the Union 's budget and , in particular , Parliament 's budget - as the only European institution directly elected by citizens - should primarily take care to promote and bring citizens closer to the European Union , particularly at times like these when the future is so uncertain .
In particular , I think it would be a particularly good idea to consider a better distribution of Parliament 's information offices in the Member States and their more strategic location , partly in the light of the latest upheavals in neighbouring States .
in writing . - I voted in favour even if I would have preferred that some amendments concerning the need for the EP to reduce its number of places of work to one did not pass .
The guidelines for the 2012 budget are based on a balance between the need to give the European institutions sufficient and appropriate resources to carry out their activities , and the need to find a quality and efficient response in the face of the current financial , economic and social crisis .
The submitted proposal points out that the institutions may have difficulties in maintaining the financial discipline and restraint needed to comply with the multiannual financial programme , particularly with regard to heading 5 .
The rapporteur therefore calls for sound management principles , such as economy , efficiency and effectiveness , so that it is possible to achieve greater rigour , simplicity , clarity and transparency .
As regards the Parliament , this document , for which I voted , includes the needs arising from Croatia 's accession in 2013 , the increase in the number of MEPs by 18 and the need for extra staff following the Treaty of Lisbon 's entry into force .
For the other institutions , it is worth pointing out the new Section X on the External Action Service which , with the new Treaty , will respond to the financial needs arising from the creation of an ambitious institutional framework to support EU foreign policy .
According to the Fernandes report , the European Parliament must shine in the legislative field and all resources must serve that end .
For me , there has to be a second priority here , too , namely , that Parliament must shine when it comes to budgetary discipline .
Governments , businesses and citizens are currently having to evaluate their expenditure once again .
The European Parliament must do the same - we must focus not on more money but on new priorities .
We need a change of course because the European Union 's administrative spending has risen faster than its total spending , and Parliament tops the list !
Recital F of the report makes reference to the European External Action Service , which is likely to cost more money .
That , too , must change .
Why does the said service have many dozens of employees and luxury premises in exotic locations like Barbados and Madagascar ?
Take a close look at the service and you find that it does not need more money .
This must be the number one budgetary priority for the European Union : not spending more money , but spending better .
The guidelines for the 2012 budget procedure consist of assorted individual sections drawn together under the headings ' economy ' and ' consolidation ' .
Many citizens in Europe , like their national governments , have been forced into economy and restricted spending by the consequences of the financial and economic crisis .
In this situation , it is more than justified that the European Parliament should lead by example with its proposed budget for 2012 .
In 2012 , the EU will be faced with new - and inevitable - expenditure . This is dependent on the potential accession of Croatia , the newly created European External Action Service and the three financial agencies .
In order to stop the automatic process of increased budgetary demands equating to an increase in the budget , now is the time that potential savings in the EU budget must be identified .
This should include , for example , a business analysis of the Union 's agencies and an evaluation of EU bodies ' human resources and buildings policies .
I am voting for this resolution because a strategy for the Atlantic region is essential for EU territorial cohesion , especially in the context of the eastward enlargement of EU borders .
It is worth noting that our approach to the Atlantic can only be less one toward a peripheral region and more one that affirms its geo-centrality in the world as part of a strategic orientation that puts the region at its centre .
For the EU , it is the border area with North America , South America and all of western Africa .
A strategy for the Atlantic region in which the Member States and their regions participate should also prioritise new areas of innovation in the economy and science , in particular , new products and services linked to the environment , to renewable and marine energy , to food-related marine biotechnology , to health and smart technology-intensive products and services .
The Atlantic strategy should not be isolated , but rather enshrined within the set of the EU 's overall objectives , given the lessons of the Baltic strategy , adapted after the start of the period of budgetary planning for 2007-2013 , which has undoubtedly limited the scope of the initiative .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the European strategy for the Atlantic region .
Five EU Member States are situated along the Atlantic coast - France , Ireland , Portugal , Spain and the United Kingdom .
Therefore , there is a need for a strategy to coordinate the actions of these countries in the region .
I agree with the rapporteur that the major added value of EU regional strategies is seen in multi-level cooperation , coordination and better strategic investment of available funding , not in additional allocation of resources .
I believe that this strategy would address the following issues of common interest : environment and climate change , including preventing and combating marine pollution by ships , transport and accessibility , research , innovation , culture , leisure and tourism , marine services and training , as well as fisheries and the seafood sector .
I would like to recall that one of the first strategies of this kind is the EU strategy for the Baltic Sea region approved by the European Council , covering 8 EU Member States , including my own country , Lithuania .
This strategy is aimed at making the Baltic Sea region environmentally sustainable , prosperous , easily accessible , safe and secure .
This strategy has already been successfully initiated , and I therefore feel that the European strategy for the Atlantic region would be beneficial not just for this region , but for the whole of the EU .
Cooperation on problems extending beyond national borders is one of the great added values of the work carried out by the European Union .
My colleague , Mr Cadec , has been working for months to strengthen cooperation between the regions of the Atlantic Arc , so that it enables them to make the most of any possible synergies .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , which ' asks the Commission to shape as soon as possible the EU strategy for the Atlantic region as an integrated strategy dealing with maritime and territorial issues ' .
I supported this resolution .
Territorial cohesion is one of the EU 's most important objectives and a precondition for an effective , economically strong and competitive internal market .
The Atlantic region has its own specific characteristics , namely , a dynamic maritime area whose fragile environment must be preserved and which is subject to the consequences of climate change .
It is an outlying area within the European Union , with major accessibility and connectivity problems .
I feel that there is an urgent need to adopt this strategy , which will help address this region 's fundamental problems as regards opening up , the interconnection of transport and energy networks and the development of marine energy , the development of urban and rural areas , and the intensification of land-sea ties and of sea-interior waters ties .
I agree with Parliament 's resolution on the European strategy for the Atlantic region , which I believe is of great importance , as five Member States have an Atlantic coast : France , Ireland , Portugal , Spain and the UK .
This strategy is being proposed to address significant issues , such as maritime energy , the environment and climate change , transport and access , security and surveillance , research , innovation , the creative industries , culture , leisure and tourism , marine services and training , fisheries and the seafood sector .
European territorial cooperation , which is consolidated in this strategy through the aforementioned aspects , can contribute widely to the intensification of the integration process within the Atlantic region through greater participation by civil society in the decision-making process and the implementation of concrete measures .
I would also like to stress that this initiative can , and should , lead to the better use of EU funds , not an increase in expenditure .
As a Member elected by a country in the Atlantic region , I must highlight the importance and the need to create a European strategy which takes the geographic , demographic and economic characteristics of this region into account .
An integrated and joined-up strategy needs to be created to ensure a synergy and consistency between sectoral policies in this area , creating the added value necessary to address the challenges of sustainable development and competitiveness of this region in particular , and of Europe in general .
I have no doubts as to the need for an approach at European level , based on strengthening cooperation between the Member States with an Atlantic coast , coastal communities , the private sector and civil society , and in which this common strategy will benefit all the stakeholders .
This should enable the identification of common problems and challenges , and of shared priorities , and the creation of the synergies needed to promote more efficient resource use .
It is important not only to improve the competitiveness and sustainability of the traditional sectors , but also to exploit the full potential of the Atlantic area , with new markets , products and services , guided by two main priorities : protection of the environment and ecosystems , and job creation .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I support the need for the Commission to establish , as rapidly as possible , a European strategy for the Atlantic region which addresses maritime and territorial issues .
This strategy should address issues of common interest , such as the environment and climate change , marine energy , maritime transport , maritime security and surveillance , fisheries , tourism , research and innovation .
The Azores , Madeira and Cape Verde should also be included and have a prominent role in this strategy .
Today , the Atlantic is one of Europe 's borders and has been one of the European continent 's most important means of contact with the world .
It was across this ocean that European peoples , particularly the Portuguese , came into contact with peoples , economies and cultures previously unknown to one another , and forged what is today a truly globalised world .
Today , the Atlantic region suffers marginalisation compared with Europe 's centre , and this can and must be remedied through the understanding that the Atlantic and relationships with the more important partners bordering it , such as Brazil and the United States , can bring about the reaffirmation of a geostrategic centrality that has , however , been displaced by the emergence of the Asian countries .
The importance of the region fully justifies the establishment of a European strategy which , true to the role historically reserved for the ocean that gives it its name , does not confine itself to the Member States , but rather is able to provide a link to those other coasts .
In this regard , I would stress the extremely important and irreplaceable role of the outermost regions in the strategy 's success .
These continue to merit special support from the Union , which can overcome the costs of insularity and boost foreign contacts .
On 14 June 2010 , the Council asked the Commission to draw up a European strategy for the Atlantic region within one year , as it is a peripheral territory with special characteristics in terms of both its potential and its environmental fragility .
Therefore , given its importance at global level , a strategy is required that is ambitious and takes into account its maritime and territorial aspects .
This resolution represents a fundamental contribution to drawing up the strategy as it draws attention to crucial aspects such as the need to seek out synergies with other policies on the environment , energy , transport , tourism , marine resources , and others , to adopt a macro-regional policy and move towards the international approach that is needed for good relations with countries that have Atlantic coasts .
I welcome Parliament 's adoption of this resolution , as I am convinced that this EU strategy for the Atlantic region will speed up sustainable growth in this area and put maritime issues at the top of the European agenda .
We are in favour of developing strategies aimed at the economic , social and territorial cohesion of certain macro-regions , which should obviously be given the appropriate means to allow this to be achieved fully and effectively .
Every phase of these strategies - preparation , formulation and implementation - should actively involve the countries and regions that are within their geographic scope , and should be based on cooperation between those countries and regions .
These strategies can and should address issues of common interest , such as , in the case of this specific proposal of the European strategy for the Atlantic region : marine energy , environmental preservation , including the prevention and fight against marine pollution , transport and access , research and innovation , among others .
However , we have major doubts about , and other strong disagreements with , some of the points in the resolution .
We therefore did not vote in favour .
The resolution does not safeguard the principle that new resources , especially financial resources , should match the new objectives in the area of cohesion policy , in order to make them effective .
The resolution also proposes the subordination of the strategy to EU foreign policy , to international trade policy objectives , to the Europe 2020 strategy and to the achievement of ' the aims of the internal market ' .
It is important to continue developing strategies aimed at the economic , social and territorial cohesion of certain macro-regions , which should obviously be given the appropriate means to allow this to be achieved fully and effectively .
Every phase of these strategies - preparation , formulation and implementation - should actively involve the countries and regions that are within their geographic scope , and should be based on cooperation between those countries and regions .
These strategies can and should address issues of common interest . This case concerns the European strategy for the Atlantic region : marine energy , environmental preservation , including the prevention and fight against marine pollution , transport and access , research and innovation , among others .
However , we have major doubts about , and other strong disagreements with , some of the points in the resolution .
We therefore did not vote in favour .
The resolution does not safeguard the principle that new resources , especially financial resources , should match the new objectives in the area of cohesion policy , in order to make them effective , which means that we will have a lot of promises but few actions , in addition to being subordinated to international trade policy objectives , to the Europe 2020 strategy and to the achievement of ' the aims of the internal market ' .
I strongly support what is being done at EU level to establish an integrated strategy for the Atlantic region .
The Atlantic strategy must focus on stimulating economic development of the Atlantic islands and the Atlantic coastal region .
The Atlantic region is one of the richest areas for wind , wave and tidal energy , but not enough benefit is being reaped from that energy potential .
Atlantic coastal region leisure and tourism activities also constitute valuable economic resources .
There is true growth potential there ; for example , developing strategic marinas in each country .
The maritime transport , ports and seafood sectors - including aquaculture - in particular would benefit from the establishment of closer collaboration among the Member States bordering the Atlantic .
Any strategy for the Atlantic must comply with the provisions of the common fisheries policy .
Over the years , there has been an improvement in cooperation between Member States on issues of safety , security and maritime surveillance .
Since the Atlantic Arc area is so extensive , however , an integrated strategy must be put in place to ensure better and more effective activities coordinated by Member States .
The adoption of a parliamentary resolution on the draft strategy for the Atlantic region is an opportunity for me to point out the urgent need to work at European level on a common approach regarding the use of our maritime areas and to find a joint solution to the problems that exist .
The Channel is a particularly illuminating example in this respect : a strategic maritime gateway to the European Union , it is both an essential link between the Atlantic Ocean and the North Sea ( it contains 20 % of the world 's fleet and more than 500 vessels over 300 tonnes sail through it every day ) and an area dedicated to fishing , leisure activities , aggregate extraction and soon - much to my satisfaction - energy production from offshore wind farms .
This concentration of activities calls for serious thought to be given to the issue of managing maritime safety in that area at European level , as part of a joint strategy .
That is why , during the debate on the strategy for the Atlantic region , I once again called on Mrs Damanaki , Commissioner for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries , to include the Channel in the proposal that she is due to submit in June .
I voted in favour of this document , because as we know , the Atlantic region has its own specific characteristics ; namely , it is a dynamic maritime area ( thanks to maritime transport , fishing , marine energy , etc . ) , an area whose fragile environment must be preserved and which is subject to the consequences of climate change , and it is also an outlying area within the European Union , with accessibility and connectivity problems and with a low number of major city centres .
We need to shape as soon as possible the EU strategy for the Atlantic region as an integrated strategy dealing with maritime and territorial issues .
This strategy should implement a better coordination of goals and means , with strong links to the EU 2020 strategy and EU policies post-2013 . This strategy aims at better spending of EU money , not increasing expenditure .
This strategy needs to be well-connected to EU regional policy and integrated maritime policy .
I feel that it should also facilitate synergies with other EU policies such as trans-European transport networks , the common fisheries policy , climate and environment actions , the research and development framework programme , energy policy , etc .
It is important to improve accessibility in Atlantic maritime regions and increase movement of persons , goods and services in these regions in order to achieve the aims of the internal market and the objective of cohesion policy , especially by the development of short sea shipping and the highways of the sea .
in writing . - I voted for this report on the EU strategy for the Atlantic region which is of the opinion that this strategy should be set within the cohesion policy objective of territorial cooperation ( Objective 3 ) , and be based on an integrated , cross-domain and territorial approach , aiming at better coordinating policies between the various levels of governance on a given territory , with a focus on relevant issues , and is convinced that European territorial cooperation can contribute widely to the intensification of the integration process within the Atlantic region through a greater participation by civil society in the decision-making process and the implementation of concrete actions .
The Atlantic region has specific characteristics of its very own as it is a dynamic maritime area , in which I would stress its maritime transport , fisheries and marine energy .
It is an area with a fragile environment that has to be preserved , but which is subject to coastal erosion and extreme weather events , and it is a peripheral area .
Therefore , an integrated EU strategy is required which covers maritime and territorial issues .
That is why I voted as I did .
I voted for this resolution which calls for the EU to create a European strategy for the Atlantic region .
European territorial cooperation can contribute widely to the intensification of the integration process within the Atlantic region through a greater participation by civil society in the decision-making process and the implementation of concrete actions .
The text includes a call on the EU for the strategy to deal with maritime and territorial issues .
It also insists that cooperation within the framework of this strategy should , first and foremost , be based on the needs of the stakeholders concerned and is thus of the opinion that the political priorities addressed have to be decided through a consensus .
in writing . - Taking into account the specificities of the Atlantic region , Parliament asks the Commission to act as soon as possible to establish the EU strategy for the Atlantic region as an integrated strategy dealing with maritime and territorial issues .
Though Parliament believes that this strategy must develop synergies between relevant EU , national , regional and local policies , it calls on the Commission and the Member States to set up simplified rules to facilitate the implementation of this strategy and reduce the inherent administrative burden .
In my view , this is not possible , because efficient measures of influence on the Commission have not been found so far .
I am getting the impression that the Commission has still not started to change its priorities under the Lisbon Treaty and is conducting unjustified and long-lasting rhetoric with Parliament to further its own opportunities .
This is not being done in the general interest and is actually detrimental to the whole situation .
I supported the report , but nevertheless remain of the same mind .
Five Member States of the European Union border the Atlantic .
France , Portugal and Spain , in particular , certainly do not see only benefits from this geographical fact , as the Atlantic plays a not insignificant role when it comes to the streams of refugees that now threaten to increase as a result of the crises in the countries of North Africa .
People-smugglers are all too keen to use the Atlantic route , since Spain 's border fence was erected in 2005 .
In order to prevent a flood of predominantly economic migrants , the EU would be well advised to quickly develop an effective Atlantic strategy that also covers this aspect , even though the remaining two Atlantic States - the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland - bear little to no impact in this regard .
As the resolution hardly , if at all , covers this area , I abstained from the vote .
At today 's vote , the European Parliament adopted the resolution on the European strategy for the Atlantic region .
The strategy is a further European initiative which will not concentrate on solving the problems of a single country but of the entire Atlantic region , which includes as many as five Member States .
It is important to draw attention to the fact that the strategy should be characterised by a bottom-up approach .
The geostrategic position of the region allows development of cooperation in the fields of maritime safety , international trade and fishing , as well as protection of the marine environment and preservation of biodiversity .
I think it is necessary to ask the European Commission what resources will be given in pursuit of the strategy , because this is particularly important in relation to establishing the new financial framework .
In my opinion , another important matter is the process of putting the strategy into effect and the possibility that it may be necessary to create additional financial instruments .
I agree with the resolution on the European strategy for the Atlantic region , which will contribute to the region 's sustainable development .
Moreover , a further step will be taken towards the implementation of one of the European Union 's objectives - territorial cohesion .
Given the geostrategic position of the Atlantic region , the Commission must take immediate action and develop an integrated strategy for this region , strengthening international cooperation and triangular cooperation initiatives , and addressing maritime and territorial issues .
Attention is drawn to the fact that effective territorial cooperation will promote the development of marine energy and will create a favourable environment to use transport and energy networks and interconnections .
For this strategy to achieve the objectives set , it must be well-connected to EU regional policy and integrated maritime policy . Only this can guarantee synergies with other EU policies and create the conditions for more targeted and more effective absorption and use of funds allocated by the EU , without increasing expenditure .
Furthermore , the adoption of this strategy will improve accessibility to Atlantic maritime regions , and increase the movement of persons , goods and services .
The motion for a resolution on the European Union strategy for the Atlantic region follows the request made by the European Council to the Commission to develop an integrated strategy dealing with maritime and territorial issues in the Atlantic .
I voted in favour of the resolution to ask the European Commission to prepare and report on the negotiations on the planned strategy no later than June .
The aim is to implement better coordination in the region on issues such as the integrated maritime policy , the trans-European transport networks , fisheries , climate and environment actions , research and development , increasing movement of persons , goods and services in the regions in order to achieve the cohesion policy objective , ensuring that everything ties in with the EU 2020 strategy and with the European Union 's policies post-2013 .
I voted in favour of this resolution because given that Portugal is an Atlantic country , with a dynamic maritime area and great potential , although it has a fragile environment that needs to be preserved , I consider it positive that the EU is recognising the potential of its Atlantic region .
I also believe that many of the problems of this vast area should meet with a response at European level through an integrated EU strategy for the region , and through the prospect of a territorial cohesion policy that should be a fundamental framework for Union choices .
However , Union decisions have been totally absent and completely sacrificed because of unacceptable budgetary constraints resulting from political choices of austerity that do not encourage development .
Given Portugal 's particular geostrategic position , this matter is of great importance , especially as regards the areas of maritime security and surveillance .
I therefore believe that the establishment of the European Union strategy for the Atlantic is very pertinent .
in writing . - As was the case in the resolution on an EU strategy for the Danube region adopted by the EP last month , the present draft resolution stresses that the major added value of EU macro-regional strategies is seen in multi-level cooperation , coordination and better strategic investment of available funding , and not in the additional allocation of resources .
The draft resolution underlines the conclusions of the Swedish Presidency regarding no new institutions , no new legislation and no new budgets .
Furthermore , REGI wanted this strategy to work according to a bottom-up approach and to involve all stakeholders ( regional and local public authorities , Member States , the EU , private stakeholders and civil society organisations , including the interregional networks and organisations concerned ) in its design and implementation .
From the Greens / EFA point of view , we proposed amendments on the development of marine energy , the prevention and fighting of marine pollution by ships , and the development of short sea shipping and highways of the sea , that were all adopted .
As a Galician and co-signatory to this initiative , I support an ambitious strategy for the Atlantic region .
I call on the Commission to table a proposal prior to June 2011 with the priority of growing and creating sustainable jobs in line with the Europe 2020 strategy .
The macro-region 's area is maritime , fragile and peripheral , so the strategy requires an integrated , cross-cutting and territorial focus , all of whose dimensions should protect the environment , encourage accessibility , mobility and connectivity , and promote cohesion .
The strategy should also facilitate synergies between the EU 's various policies - for example , as regards : tourism ; highways of the sea and trans-European transport networks ; common fisheries policy ; energy policy , and marine energy in particular ; climate change measures ; the Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development ; multilingualism ; and , in general , any policies that will be implemented from 2014 onwards - and between any relevant policies developed in the field by the various responsible authorities .
The plan must be drawn up , adopted and implemented in a transparent and trustworthy way , through cooperation between all the public institutions , and the involvement of the private sector and civil society organisations .
Owing to its vast area , the European Atlantic coast has great potential and several specific characteristics .
The Atlantic region offers significant and dynamic maritime activity and has at its core regions that are very different from one another , but which have the common characteristic of depending on activities in the maritime basins of this ocean .
There are remote regions of the Atlantic that are difficult to access , being at a great physical distance from continental Europe .
I am talking , specifically , about the outermost regions of the EU , where problems of connectivity and accessibility are reflected in their economic and social development .
However , it is also important to mention that these regions have unique advantages compared with other European regions .
Apart from their permanent constraints , their own characteristics offer potential that should be taken into account as part of an integrated view of the Atlantic region .
The objective of territorial cohesion allows , or rather obligates , harmonious development for all EU regions , bearing in mind the specific characteristics of each one .
I therefore hope that the outermost regions of Macaronesia , including my home region of Madeira , are properly taken into account in any future strategy for the Atlantic , and that an integrated approach can overcome the main difficulties and challenges that these regions experience .
I am voting for this resolution , as I believe that the accession of Turkey to the EU is in the strategic interests of both the country and the EU , but this will require Turkey to make a firmer commitment to the processes of reform in order to meet the accession criteria .
This is the case particularly in the areas of freedom of the press , association and assembly , of commitment to creating a faster , more independent and fairer judicial system which cooperates effectively in the fight against terrorism , and in the struggle for women 's rights and human rights in general .
Moreover , the withdrawal of Turkish forces from Cyprus is an essential condition for building a climate of good neighbourliness .
I voted in favour of this resolution on Turkey 's 2010 progress report .
When it began negotiations on EU accession , Turkey committed itself to reforms , good neighbourly relations and progressive alignment with the EU .
However , it is clear that Turkey 's progress is too slow , demonstrating the unwillingness of this country 's government representatives to implement reforms and democratise the country .
The European Parliament has serious concerns about the deterioration in freedom of the press , about certain acts of censorship and about growing self-censorship within the Turkish media , including on the Internet .
We condemn the restrictions on freedom of assembly and , in particular , the violent police crackdown on student demonstrations at Ankara University in December 2010 .
The European Parliament is also concerned that human rights defenders are being persecuted in Turkey .
This represents just a portion of the human rights violations in a country that aims to become an EU Member State .
It is clear that the current human rights situation in Turkey is complicated , one might even say contrary to the EU 's values and policies .
Against such a backdrop , negotiations on EU accession are leading to a dead end .
I therefore believe that the Turkish authorities must adopt immediate rigorous reforms in all branches of government or consider the possibility of becoming not an EU Member , but a strategic partner .
The European Parliament report and the corresponding motion for a resolution adopted by plenary illustrate the imperialistic infighting within the EU and the conflict surrounding economic and political relations and the objectives processed in cooperation with the bourgeoisie in Turkey .
These issues relate to the exploitation of the people in this country , the servicing of broader imperialistic interests in controlling wealth-producing resources and the exploitation of the people in the Middle East , in North Africa and in the area as a whole .
As the capitalist crisis and imperialistic aggression escalate , the European Parliament has concealed the anti-grassroots policy of the Turkish Government and the attack on the social rights and grassroots freedoms of the workers in that country .
The Turkish Government continues to view grassroots forces protesting against violations of the rights of the Kurds as terrorists .
The European Parliament tolerates Turkey 's intransigence and aggression against the Republic of Cyprus .
It has voted against the proposals and amendments concerning the Republic of Cyprus and its legal rights in the area .
The Greek Communist Party is radically against the accession of Turkey to the EU , because it is fighting against this imperialistic organisation .
The MEPs of the Greek Communist Party voted against the report on Turkey because its accession to the EU can only bring hardship for the workers .
in writing . - My statement aims to justify my abstention on the resolution on Turkey .
I abstained because I did not agree with its lack of positive inspiration and its lack of a clear appreciation of some key features of the Turkish Government 's recent action .
In this resolution , there is too much of a paternalistic attitude towards a great country that does not deserve this treatment .
There are too many demands on Turkey , with too many details and too many unrealistic standards to be met .
If these standards were applied to the EU Member States , several of them would not qualify for EU accession .
I hope this attitude towards Turkey will change over time , and I hope this Parliament will show a stronger commitment to the goal of having Turkey in the EU soon .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
Turkey committed itself to reforms , good neighbourly relations and progressive alignment with the EU .
These commitments and efforts by Turkey should be viewed as an opportunity for Turkey itself to modernise , given the support from Turkish citizens and civil society for Turkey 's further democratisation and their commitment to an open and pluralistic society .
Despite the progress made in some areas , the situation in Turkey remains rather complicated .
Hitherto , Turkey has made rather slow progress with regard to reforms .
Ongoing confrontation between the political parties and the lack of readiness on the part of the government and the opposition to work towards consensus on key reforms mean there is no visible impact , and in some areas , the situation is worsening , particularly as regards freedom of the press .
The Turkish Government has committed itself to undertaking comprehensive reforms in order to modernise its country , and it must therefore increase its efforts to establish a democratic state , based on the principle of separation of powers with a balance between the executive , legislative and judicial functions and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
For the fifth consecutive year , Turkey has failed to comply with Europe 's requests .
There has been a growth in fundamentalist movements , which the government does not combat due to its nationalist and Islamist political views .
The status of religious Christian minorities and of women has been deteriorating for years .
Turkey does not therefore wish to come into line with Western democratic standards ; it has chosen a pathway of re-Islamification , which will lead it ever further away from accession .
A country that aims to take a leading role in the Arab-Muslim world with an aggressive foreign policy towards the West and Israel is a country that demonstrates for itself the reasons why my group has long opposed those who would like to see Turkey become a Member State .
Whilst , on the one hand , the report sheds light on many problematic aspects that have emerged in recent years , it also applauds the ' progress ' that the Turkish Government has made in some areas .
Essentially , the report holds the doors to Europe wide open for Ankara , which is why I voted against it .
Turkey is not Europe and never will be , either in cultural or political terms .
The backward steps made by Turkey ought to convince even its most enthusiastic supporters to give up on the idea that this country should join the European project .
The European Parliament must continue to give encouragement to states wishing to become members of the European Union because it is only by encouraging democratic change and punishing swiftly abuses or ineptitude that will enable these countries to become aligned with Member States ' common democratic and economic standards .
This is why it is natural to welcome the first steps which have been taken towards constitutional reform in Turkey , which highlights , however , the need for global system reforms .
Turkey 's political problems , its relations with Greece , which are still tense and even in stalemate , the precarious dialogue between the political parties and the undermining of press freedom are all reasons for slowing down the pace of the accession negotiations .
Turkey 's immediate aim is likely to be the waiver of the visa scheme imposed by Member States on Turkish citizens .
Indeed , concluding the negotiations on the readmission agreement will result in better management of migration .
The Commission must launch the dialogue with Turkey about visas as soon as the agreement comes into force .
Europe cannot afford to have a state the size of Turkey feeling frustrated about the way in which its citizens are treated .
Turkey is likely to expect Parliament 's resolution to benefit it more .
However , the fact that Parliament is saying that the negotiation process with the EU is lengthy and open-ended does not reflect the reality on the ground .
The Member States clearly have everything to gain from maintaining good relations with Turkey , but once again , the European Union has discredited itself with this report on Turkey 's progress towards accession .
Firstly , it is still not listening to the people of Europe , who are worried about this prospect , the upshot of which is that hundreds of millions of euro are being spent indiscriminately each year ( in pre-accession assistance ) , and nothing is being given in return .
Secondly , the Union recognises , although it has not learnt from it , that Turkey flouts international law in Cyprus and fundamental rights in its own country , scorns its Armenian and Greek neighbours , oppresses the minorities living on its territory and does not even deign to honour the commitments it makes to the Union .
When will we have the courage to get out of this trap ?
Will our leaders get back to reality and propose a partnership to Turkey instead of accession ?
I voted in favour of this report because I believe that the reforms in Turkey , although important , have been taking place slowly .
It is worth stressing the recent amendment to the legal framework reinforcing women 's rights and contributing to greater gender equality , but there is still much to be done to reverse the low rates of female employment .
We Swedish Social Democrats support the demand for Turkey to recognise the genocide .
However , we believe that it is important that the criticism of Turkey for not recognising the genocide is not used as a weapon by the - regrettably - xenophobic forces which want to keep Turkey out of the EU at any price .
We think it is important to continue the membership negotiations with Turkey and to put pressure on this country to comply with the Copenhagen criteria , because that will force it to comply with the human rights requirements and adopt a more progressive attitude to minorities like the Kurds , Armenians , Assyrians and Syrians , who we believe would perhaps be the ones to benefit most from Turkey joining the EU - an EU that is genuinely democratic and prepared to accept diversity .
We therefore abstained from voting on Amendment 38 .
Given the maelstrom of instability afflicting the southern Mediterranean and the whole Muslim world , it is clear that , for all its flaws , the Turkish regime has been able to evolve in a more peaceful and orderly way , and that it has sought to converge and integrate with the European Union by adopting its standards and best practices .
Today , Turkey is a regional power to which the EU must pay particular attention , as the link between the two is crucial .
Having said that , it has to be acknowledged that Turkey still does not fulfil all the objective criteria that would enable it to aspire to be a full member of the Union , and that the reforms that it has recently been making will take time to have the expected results .
I hope that Turkey will be successful in its efforts at democratisation and that , whatever form its future relationship with the Union takes , it will become closer and deepen , for their mutual benefit .
Negotiations concerning Turkey 's accession to the EU began in October 2005 , and that process is still ongoing and a long way from reaching an outcome in the near future .
The European Union , which is interested in pursuing a policy of good neighbourliness , welcomes this integration , as it regards Turkey as a strategic partner .
Nonetheless , there are certain problems hampering the advancement of this process .
The first of these is the disrespect for fundamental rights as regards freedom of speech , respect for minorities and the rule of law .
The EU sees this as an unacceptable situation , which is only exacerbated by the occupation of a large part of the territory of Cyprus .
Turkey must therefore provide evidence that it is in the process of changing , particularly by implementing the legislation amended in 2007 and complying in full with the undertakings that it has made to the EU .
I am voting in favour of this report in the hope that the Turkish Government will adopt the approved recommendations as soon as possible , as the people of Turkey will reap the benefits .
Turkey is militarily occupying part of an EU Member State : the Republic of Cyprus .
Despite efforts by the Cypriot Government to resolve the problem and repeated demonstrations of goodwill to come to a fair solution , the Turkish authorities show no signs of wanting to match these efforts .
Instead , they are pursuing a policy of non-compliance with United Nations resolutions , and of the occupation and colonisation of the northern part of the island .
That should be a central point in this resolution .
However , the resolution is complacent as regards the continuation of this situation .
In addition , it is silent about the repression of workers , trade unionists and leftist forces in Turkey , as well as of the Kurdish minority .
Those who have voted for this resolution are concerned rather to urge Turkey to ' support and actively contribute to the implementation of EU policies and measures in the region ' , particularly in the area of energy , highlighting its ' constructive engagement ' in NATO operations in Afghanistan and the Balkans , along with the renewal of ' close ties with Israel ' .
These considerations are illustrative of the deeper meaning and significance of EU enlargement processes which , in the specific case of Turkey , is the imposition of the wishes of the EU powers and the interest that they serve .
I welcome the report by my Dutch colleague in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
The text is very balanced .
It highlights some of the critical issues still to be resolved in the process of bringing Turkey closer to the European Union and also notes how , as well as the unresolved issue of the Armenian genocide , it is also up to the Turkish authorities to take responsibility for the occupation of part of the island of Cyprus and the dispute with the Republic of Cyprus , a Member State since 2004 .
Another fundamental point is inter-religious dialogue with the various communities , including the Christian community , and , in particular , the possibility for these communities to obtain legal personality in order to open and operate houses of worship .
I think the time has come to leave hypocrisy behind and stop constantly boxing in the Turkish people , since we knew from the start that the obstacles would be difficult to overcome .
Turkey is not Europe , either in cultural or geographic terms , though it has extremely strong commercial ties to Europe .
For these reasons , I think it would be more useful and worthwhile to set up a privileged commercial partnership , instead of insisting on the long and winding road to accession .
As we have been stressing , many questions are raised by the negotiations on Turkey 's accession to the EU .
This is a process promoted by the major powers in the EU , and it is not lacking in contradictions , as its objectives include the integration of this large country into the EU single market , control of its economy and the use of its geostrategic location in relation to the Middle East , the Caucasus and Central Asia , particularly for access to and control of the energy sources and markets of these regions .
Moreover , the resolution is instructive on this point , urging Turkey to ' support and actively contribute to the implementation of EU policies and measures in the region ' , particularly in the area of energy , highlighting its ' constructive engagement ' in NATO operations in Afghanistan and the Balkans , along with the renewal of ' close ties with Israel ' .
The resolution ignores the repression of workers , trade unionists and leftist forces in Turkey , and of the Turkish people .
As for Cyprus , the majority of Parliament maintains the usual ambiguity , although it is not clear why , given that Turkey has not taken any step towards recognising Cyprus , an EU Member State , but is continuing its military occupation of the north of that island , installing Turkish citizens to change its demographic balance , and in breach of UN resolutions .
The large groups have not had the courage , in committee , to defend their own political choices regarding Turkey 's accession to the European Union .
In order to avoid talking about full membership of the Union , in the case of the left , or of a privileged partnership , in the case of the so-called right , they have struck a deal .
They have decided on the usual meaningless option of the ' open-ended ' process - in other words , a process with an uncertain end .
Who , though , wants to pursue negotiations that have no clearly defined aims ?
The people of Europe , who are overwhelmingly opposed to this accession , and whose governments , like this Parliament , refuse to listen to them , are being made fools of .
Parliament , which , every year , deplores the fact that Turkey does not honour its commitments , that reforms there are slow , that the conditions of women and Christian minorities there are deteriorating , that it is in conflict with a Member State ...
And which completely fails to learn from this !
Turkey and its people are also being made fools of - with disastrous diplomatic consequences , as we saw recently with Mr Erdoğan 's visit to Germany and Mr Sarkozy 's visit to Turkey .
Neither does Nicolas Sarkozy have the courage of his alleged convictions : is he in favour of a partnership and not of accession ?
Then he should say so clearly and act accordingly .
I am in favour of the negotiations and Turkey 's accession to the European Union , but only on condition that human rights and democracy are respected . That is why I voted for the amendment , which proposed the recognition of the Armenian genocide , a crucial historical act and prerequisite for Turkey 's accession to the Union .
I voted in favour of this document because accession negotiations with Turkey were opened on 3 October 2005 after the Council had approved the Negotiating Framework , and because the opening of those negotiations was the starting point for a long-lasting and open-ended process .
Turkey has committed itself to reforms , good neighbourly relations and progressive alignment with the EU , and these efforts should be viewed as an opportunity for Turkey itself to modernise .
Full compliance with all the Copenhagen criteria , in accordance with the conclusions of the December 2006 European Council meeting , remains the basis for accession to the EU , which is a community based on shared values .
I would single out the main aspects and priorities of this integration as building good neighbourly relations , advancing EU-Turkey cooperation , enhancing social cohesion and prosperity and fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria .
Turkey has aspired to membership of the EU since the 1960s , but now the membership talks have , in practice , come to a halt .
Turkey needs to look in the mirror : it has not implemented the Ankara Protocol or recognised Cyprus .
Furthermore , the country must introduce civil and human rights reforms before it can join the Union .
These include freedom of religion and acknowledging the rights of women .
These are the facts .
The Union , however , should also take a look in the mirror .
There is strong opposition to Turkey in the EU , based on prejudices and fear of difference .
The big Member States , such as Germany and France , are afraid of Turkey , which is a large , influential country .
The situation in North Africa has once again shown that Turkey is a skilful foreign policy actor .
In fact , Turkey is more skilful than the EU or its individual Member States .
Since the 1990s , Turkey has built good neighbourly relations and stability in its region - on its borders with Europe , the South Caucasus , Central Asia and the Middle East .
The young people in North Africa who are so keen to see reform are looking to Turkey .
Turkey is a strong economic actor .
Unlike the European economy , Turkey 's economy is dynamic and is growing , in spite of the economic crisis and recession that has hit Europe and the rest of the world .
This cannot be ignored .
Today , when with bated breath and hope , we observe the revolutions that have overwhelmed some of the Arab countries , my conviction that Turkey 's membership of the European Union is a geopolitically strategic necessity simply becomes stronger .
Turkey is a democratic Islamic state , which can serve as an inspiring example to other Arab countries that wish to establish a democratic system of government founded on the rule of law and respect for human rights , while preserving their religious values .
It worries me that we are sending the wrong signal to the citizens of Turkey and reinforcing the influence of anti-European and Islamic fundamentalist forces .
We must recognise that by so doing , we are also doing a service to those who do not wish to see the European Union as the most important player on the world stage .
We must face up to the truth and admit that Europe cannot currently compete in terms of economic development with such countries as China , India and Brazil .
Admitting Turkey to our Union would make us larger and economically more powerful .
We must also recognise Turkey 's stabilising geopolitical significance .
From the experience of Latvia , I know that adhesion negotiations are an important instrument for encouraging reform , which is why it is important for the EU to open negotiations on new chapters with Turkey .
Turkey 's wish to commence negotiations with the EU on the introduction of a visa-free regime is justified .
Turkey 's government has made significant strides , which is why I should like to emphasise that criticism in EU reports on Turkey 's progress should be commensurate with an objective assessment of the country 's achievements .
Turkey has achieved remarkable economic growth , enabling it to progress in 10 years from the 27th to the 16th biggest economy in the world .
It is the European Union 's 7th biggest trade partner and the EU is Turkey 's main trade partner .
Roughly 88 % of direct foreign investments in Turkey come from EU states , which indicates how solid our ties are .
On the political front , it is a model of stability and democracy for Muslim states .
Negotiations with Turkey should be given a boost .
For example , I think that opening Negotiation Chapter 15 , which is on energy , is important , including for EU Member States .
Turkey 's strategic importance to the Union 's energy security must not be ignored at a time when we want to diversify supply sources , with the Nabucco gas pipeline project being a significant example of this .
Therefore , I think that Turkey must be considerably involved , even prior to accession , in EU energy projects or in regional cooperation in the Black Sea and Mediterranean Sea region .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which commends Turkish citizens and civil society for supporting Turkey 's further democratisation and for their commitment to an open and pluralistic society , but notes Turkey 's slow progress with regard to reforms and recalls that the Turkish Government has committed itself to undertaking comprehensive reforms , both with a view to fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria and for the sake of Turkey 's own modernisation , and calls on the government to increase its efforts in that respect .
There has been no change over the past year in Turkey 's attitude towards either the European Union or Cyprus .
Turkish colonisers and occupying troops are still on the island .
It is important to note that the Turkish Cypriots in occupied Cyprus are demonstrating against Turkey , protesting about their financial hardship due to the presence of the Turkish occupying army .
Referring in a statement to the Turkish Cypriot demonstrations , Turkish Prime Minister Erdoğan accepted that Turkey invaded Cyprus in order to serve its strategic interests .
This resolution lectures Turkey on democracy .
Such lectures are inappropriate .
Barely two months ago , Parliament was welcoming the negotiations between the Commission and the dictator Colonel Gaddafi .
And what about integration between the Union and Turkey ?
As for its claim to draw a partner country 's attention to the need for a separation of powers when this House demands no such thing within the Union , it is , in fact , unbearable .
There is worse , however : this text threatens Turkey with the cessation of its EU accession negotiations if it fails to comply immediately with the Union 's neoliberal dogma , and reminds it of the Copenhagen criteria .
Anyone who has the general interest of the people at heart knows that this Europe needs to be changed before it is enlarged .
I am opposed to any further accessions taking place until social dumping has been stopped , but I shall vote against this arrogant text .
The possible accession of Turkey to the EU continues to be cause for major reservations .
Its continuing occupation of part of Cyprus , its refusal to open ports and airports in the region , the violation of rights of political , religious and ethnic minorities , discrimination against women , the exclusion of political parties and the revocation of laws limiting the jurisdiction of military courts are some examples that demonstrate this .
There are other fundamental issues .
Most of Turkey is not geographically part of Europe .
Turkey has an Islamic identity that is very different from the Judaeo-Christian identity of most EU countries ; the secularity of the country is only held in place by military force .
The movement of people from what would become the country with the largest population in the EU would create great imbalances in the labour market .
None of this precludes acknowledgement of the efforts made by Turkey over recent years to meet certain criteria required by the EU , and it recognises the invaluable role that this country plays within NATO .
A relevant consideration would be whether it would be better to guarantee Turkey privileged and preferential partnership status with the EU , rather than creating false expectations and hopes for membership , something that it would be difficult for the facts and circumstances to accommodate .
I am in favour of Turkey 's accession to the EU and welcome the progress the country has made to its citizens ' benefit .
However , at the same time , it should be mentioned that in order for Turkey to be able to accede as a Member State of the EU , it has to comply with the Copenhagen criteria and the obligations to the EU itself and to its Member States , like any other candidate country .
It is necessary for Turkey to respect international law , and it must do much more in relation to the Kurdish problem , to acknowledgement of the Armenian genocide and to normalisation with its neighbouring countries .
As such , Turkey must withdraw its occupying troops from the Republic of Cyprus .
I believe that Turkey 's eventual accession is of vital importance if the Union wishes to increase its political , strategic and economic influence at international level .
Integrating that country into Europe will benefit Europeans at least as much as it benefits the Turks .
We should not forget that Turkey is a traditionally secular country ; it is powerful and has a wealth of human resources .
It is a gateway to the markets and the energy routes of Asia and the Middle East .
It is also totally reliable within NATO .
Certain efforts made by the Turkish authorities with regard to respect for human rights deserve to be mentioned .
Thus , the adoption of amendments to the constitution is a step in the direction of the democratic standards necessary for accession .
Nevertheless , although the new radio and television laws are welcome advances , freedom of expression and , more specifically , freedom of the press , remain a cause for concern .
Similarly , the resolution of the Cyprus issue is a prerequisite for any progress in the accession process .
in writing . - Turkey 's accession to EU is not within the strategic interest of EU until Turkey admits to the genocide of Armenians and withdraws its troops from Cyprus .
I voted against the resolutions as a whole and against many separate odious points .
The progress report on the accession negotiations with Turkey was , once again , more than sobering .
Given the circumstances , however , what else could be expected ?
Turkey is not a European country - geographically , culturally or historically - and it has a different approach to many issues for these reasons .
All of this being the case , it always astounds me how this House manages to produce such politically correct and positive resolutions on this subject .
The truth is never allowed to be stated and clear words are to be avoided if at all possible .
It is really time to come clean with Turkey .
It must be made clear to the Turks that they are our friends and partners in many areas but that accession to the EU is just not possible .
Rational forces in Turkey have long since recognised that accession to the European Union is not the most worthwhile goal for them .
In light of its location and the manifold connections with the Turkic peoples of the Caucasus and with the Arabs , Turkey is assuming an important strategic position in the Middle East .
The EU should take account of this and recognise Turkey as an important strategic partner beyond its borders .
I wonder how it is possible that this report does not mention a number of fundamental issues regarding Turkey , above all , the disastrous situation in Cyprus .
In the northern , Turkish-controlled part of the island , systematic violations of basic rights are a common occurrence and Turkey is trying to bring in more settlements , which definitely will not help the peace process that we are hoping for .
Another fundamental issue that astonishes me and that has not been adequately stressed is Turkey 's obstinate refusal to acknowledge the Armenian genocide that took place last century .
For these and other reasons , I voted against the report , just as I remain strongly and staunchly against Turkey 's possible future accession to the European Union .
The European Union needs Turkey and Turkey needs the EU .
It is important not simply in terms of trade and economic ties and investments .
Almost 100 years ago , Turkey turned to face Europe and it can and must become a bridge linking our continent with the Muslim world .
Unfortunately , it has to be acknowledged that negotiations on Turkey 's accession to the EU have slowed .
The EU is waiting for progress , particularly as regards protecting human rights , gender equality and safeguarding freedom of expression , freedom of the press and religious freedoms .
Normalisation of relations with Cyprus is another important issue .
This conflict must be resolved in a manner that is favourable for both Turkey and Cyprus .
It is important to reach a peaceful solution to the conflict .
Events in North Africa demonstrate the important contribution Turkey has to make , spreading stability and democratic values .
The people of Libya , Egypt and other Arab nations view Turkey and the EU as an example that they need to follow .
I voted in favour of the report , because it is well balanced .
It reflects well the state of Turkey 's EU integration in 2010 .
I have always agreed with Turkish membership .
However , this country would have to implement the Ankara Protocol and do more , particularly as regards minorities , women , press freedoms and the rule of law .
I voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution on Turkey 's 2010 progress report .
The Commission 's annual report shows that the modernisation of Turkey towards a democratic and pluralist system is a slow and painful process but that the Turkish Government , citizens and civil society are working towards it .
The domestic political squabbling over reforms does not ease the way to reaching European standards , but does , however , show a commitment to change and modernisation .
Recent events in the Mediterranean show how important it is to assess the reforms and the situation step-by-step , avoiding taking simplistic stances on the issue .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the 2010 progress report on Turkey .
Apart from anything else , it contains an important call on the Turkish Government to apply the bilateral readmission agreements entered into , pending the application of the readmission agreement between the EU and Turkey .
This call is even more valuable in light of recent events in North Africa , which put Greece at the centre of the wave of immigration .
This is a time when , wherever we are and wherever we stand , we need to highlight the immigration dangers that we may have to face ; we cannot simply stand by and watch something that is already happening .
As a candidate country , Turkey should cooperate with the EU so that , together with Greece and the other Member States , we can stem the flood of immigrants trying to enter the EU illegally .
The motion for a resolution on Turkey draws attention to the situation on human rights .
The constant stalemate between Turkey and Cyprus , the precarious dialogue between the political parties , the undermining of press freedom , women 's rights and other fundamental rights are some of the factors which have resulted in slowing down the pace of the accession negotiations , according to the draft report .
The negotiations are regarded as ' a long-lasting and open-ended process ' .
I think that Turkey 's accession to the European Union must be seen as a strategic benefit for both parties : the EU and Turkey .
This is why I call on the Turkish Government to step up the reform process in order to fulfil the accession criteria completely .
The process of bringing Turkey closer to the objectives of the European Union has been , and will be , a long one .
I have therefore always advocated the deepening of relations between the EU and Turkey through the gradual implementation of partnerships in various areas .
I think that creating a long-term expectation of integration is not positive either for the EU or for Turkey .
in writing . - Notwithstanding the progress mentioned during the debate , and the ' opening ' , problems remain in relation to women , minorities , freedom of opinion and the press , social imbalances , poverty , rights of the child , education , an independent judiciary and army intervention in politics .
The EU Commission notes that despite legislative advances , ' however , senior members of the armed forces have made a number of statements going beyond their remit , in particular , on judicial issues ' .
It reached the following conclusion regarding the judiciary : ' Investigations in some high-profile cases continued to raise concerns . This points to the need to improve the work of the police and the gendarmerie but , also , the working relationship between the police and the gendarmerie , on the one hand , and the judiciary , on the other ' .
There are still many unresolved questions over Turkey 's progress in the EU accession negotiations .
First of all , the ongoing issue with Cyprus needs to be concluded between the Greek-Cypriot and Turkish-Cypriot communities , during which the withdrawal of Turkish troops will also be negotiated .
These negotiations are currently going through a particularly delicate phase .
In addition , major doubts must once again be raised over the cultural background of the country itself , which is closely tied to Islamic traditions - a long way from Europe 's Catholic Christian roots .
Although the report offers strong criticisms of the positions held by Turkey , the clear intention to have it join the European Union remains .
We cannot support this for many reasons that show that this country has nothing in common with the rest of Europe : geographic position , religious belief , the militaristic decision to continue to occupy part of the European Union in northern Cyprus , the decline of the freedom of the press , limits on the freedom of expression , religious discrimination and the violation of women 's rights take Turkey ever further away from Europe .
To this day , religions other than Islam cannot open and operate places of worship , proselytise , form a clergy or have a legal personality .
The Turkish Government does not wish to comply with the important European Union Treaties and protocols and it does not cooperate sufficiently in terms of controls on illegal immigration .
For these reasons , I voted against the report .
I have always supported Turkey 's accession to the European Union , subject to adherence to the Copenhagen criteria and Turkey adopting the acquis communautaire in the proper manner .
Today , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the progress report on Turkey .
The resolution gives expression to a clear and balanced political message on the eve of the parliamentary elections .
Turkey has delivered major efforts on the road to its membership , including the partial revision of its constitution , civilian control of the military and the partial reform of the judiciary .
Further steps are necessary , however . The pace certainly needs to be stepped up , too .
The European Parliament points out that better guaranteeing of human rights , including those of women and minorities , is crucial , as is an independent judiciary .
In addition , emphasis must also be placed on guaranteeing the freedom of expression and , in particular , the freedom of the press , as this was recently put under pressure again as a result of the arrest of journalists .
It is necessary , however , that Turkey be encouraged to fulfil the exemplary role that it can play in the democratisation process for the Arab world .
I therefore find it regrettable that there are still crucial chapters in the accession negotiations that are being blocked by various Member States .
in writing . - I supported this report which recognises the constitutional changes which have taken place in Turkey but also addresses areas which remain problematic , such as their failure to implement the Ankara Protocol .
By encouraging Turkey to continue carrying out reforms , the European Parliament hopes to see improvements in human rights and equality laws which will benefit Turkish citizens .
The progress report on Turkey very clearly shows up the weaknesses in the process in place hitherto .
Turkey clearly lags behind expectations .
There must also be no accession discounts , as the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance have been calling for .
In this context , also , Mr Erdoğan 's appearances in Germany , where he called on the Turks in Germany to un-integrate , must be viewed in a critical light .
Such speeches are not helpful for good cooperation and represent a snub to the efforts of both Germany and the Union .
Furthermore , there is still much to be desired in relation to the freedom of the press and the resolution of the Cyprus issue .
in writing . - I have been consistently supportive of Turkey 's accession process while fully aware of serious concerns that have to be addressed .
The Progress Report 2010 is a reasonably balanced document and I have voted in favour of it in spite of a number of reservations - not least over the Cyprus issue , where I much regret that the amendments calling for fulfilment of the EU Council 's promise to end the isolation of Northern Cyprus were voted down .
Turkey has a pivotal role to play as a gateway between West and East and we should be sending positive and welcoming signals .
I voted in favour of the 2010 progress report on Turkey , which turned out to be clearly negative .
According to the report , over the past 5 years , Turkey has made hardly any progress worth mentioning in its process of reform or in meeting the EU 's accession criteria .
There are still considerable failings in the fields of human rights , freedom of the press and of opinion , and women 's rights .
As a member of the High-Level Contact Group for Relations with the Turkish Cypriot Community in the Northern Part of the Island of Cyprus , I am well aware that the same applies to the unresolved problem of Cyprus .
I voted in favour of this report , but I did so only because it very specifically makes clear that there is no progress in the accession negotiations with Turkey .
On the contrary , indeed , essentially what we have is a standstill or even steps backwards in relation to the observance of civil and human rights , freedom of religion , of assembly and of the press , and on the Cyprus issue .
In fact , Turkey 's new foreign policy direction , for example , as relates to Iran and Syria , gives rise to doubts about whether Turkey 's Prime Minister Erdoğan is really serious when he talks about moving closer to Europe .
Furthermore , it remains unclear how the billions of euro of pre-accession aid paid to Turkey are being spent .
There is only one conclusion from all of this , and that is that the accession negotiations must be halted .
Turkey remains one of the EU 's most important partners . The idea of its full membership , however , is becoming increasingly illusory .
I am in favour of this resolution as I am convinced that Montenegro should become an example of success for the EU in the Balkans , as it meets all the conditions established by the Commission to begin the accession process .
However , I am concerned about the prevailing corruption , particularly in construction , privatisation and public procurement sectors , and , more seriously , discrimination against minorities and the most vulnerable groups .
The independence of the media should also be a concern .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the European integration process of Montenegro .
The European Parliament approves of the reforms being made by Montenegro and welcomes the progress made in the European integration process .
On 17 December 2010 , the European Council took the decision to grant Montenegro the status of candidate country for accession to the European Union .
I share the regret expressed in the resolution over the decoupling of candidate status from the right to open negotiations .
It is important that the decision to start these negotiations should not be unduly or unreasonably postponed .
I expect the negotiations to start at the latest after the publication of the 2011 Commission Progress Report , provided Montenegro makes good progress in fulfilling the benchmarks set by the Commission .
The European Union strongly supports the progress made in the enlargement process but notes that major challenges remain in most of the countries concerned .
This resolution concerns the case of Montenegro .
I supported it as I believe it is balanced : it emphasises the fact that Montenegro has made real progress , not only in economic terms , but also in terms of the fight against corruption .
While Montenegro must , of course , continue its efforts , I feel it is only right for it to be granted the official status of candidate country for accession to the European Union .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
The European Council reaffirmed that the future of the Western Balkans lies with the European Union and that the growth and stability of this region is particularly important .
Judging by the progress made by Montenegro in various areas , it is clear that the country is taking preparations for European integration seriously .
The government and opposition parties in Montenegro have reached a general consensus as regards European integration and have made it a high priority .
The report also shows that Instrument for Pre-Accession ( IPA ) assistance works well in Montenegro and that there has been significant judicial and administrative reform .
Montenegro is successfully engaging in regional cooperation , is a constructive regional partner , and is playing a stabilising role in the Western Balkans region .
The report sets out the reasons why Europe should not want Montenegro to join the European Union .
Rampant corruption , ongoing serious social discrimination against women and several ethnic minorities , media pluralism standards that fall far short of European levels and the entrenched presence of organised crime in the economic and political life of the country .
Furthermore , I cannot even support the Council 's basic position regarding the accession of Balkan countries to the EU .
It is a political and strategic absurdity to think of Europe as the inevitable destiny of the countries of the former Yugoslavia .
It seems that recent experience does not count at the top levels of our institutions .
Trying at all costs to speed up enlargement , including economically weak and politically unstable countries , certainly has not helped the consolidation of the European project .
Indeed , it has weakened its structure , slowed down decision-making processes and complicated the development of shared policies in crucial areas for the life of our continent .
I therefore voted against this report which , although it emphasises the multiple problems underlying the process of Montenegro 's accession , retains the basic idea of giving this country the opportunity of joining the EU .
I welcome the concern and commitment shown by the government and opposition parties of Montenegro in relation to European integration .
The results of this process are the institution of the country 's legal and constitutional framework , which has almost been finalised , along with the economic reforms that have been undertaken .
However , there are a number of aspects to improve , including corruption , organised crime , discrimination and the freedom of the press .
I would like to call upon this state to continue along this route , which I hope will soon end in processes of negotiation being opened .
Montenegro has shown that it wants to continue with its European choice .
I welcome the determination of its leaders and the changes which have been taking place in the country to bring it up to European standards , particularly with regard to democracy , human rights and respect for the rule of law .
Despite the progress which has been seen , it is still clear that the country still has some way to go before being fit to join the European Union .
I hope that the determination of Montenegro will continue to be felt and that , rather than nominally or formally converging with the EU , Montenegro will improve living conditions for its people and improve the functioning of its institutions so that it can become a prosperous state .
The European institutions have recognised the strategic interest of EU enlargement to the Balkans on a number of occasions .
The accession of new states depends on various factors . The first of these is the interest expressed by the state , followed by a pledge to comply with a set of fundamental rights for citizens .
As the Republic of Montenegro has expressed its interest in acceding to the EU , the Council decided to confer candidate country status on this state on 17 December 2010 .
In fact , as stated in this report , Montenegro has been making a number of reforms , particularly the creation of a new legal and constitutional framework , and in the fight against corruption .
Nevertheless , there are areas in which more progress is needed , such as the freedom of the press and respect for the work of non-governmental organisations .
I am voting for this Parliament resolution on the process of integration for the Republic of Montenegro , which recommends that the process of integration be speeded up .
I would like to call upon the Montenegrin authorities to continue to make an effort to fulfil the established objectives , as this country is an important neighbour for the EU , and one with which we would like to collaborate .
In the case of Montenegro , it is becoming clear that the direction and meaning of the processes of EU enlargement are intended to satisfy the designs of the major EU powers and their interests , which serve their large corporations : namely , the extension of markets , access to and control of geostrategic locations , and manual labour that can be exploited and used to further devalue the workforce in the EU countries as a whole .
As the peripheral regions created as a result of successive processes of enlargement are exhausted , it is necessary to create others .
Many promises are being made today to the people of Montenegro , as they have been to others in the past and present .
However , the price is high , and it has only partially been divulged .
In this particular case , it is important not to forget that the process of breaking up Yugoslavia was carried out by NATO and the EU powers , which are today seeking to attract Montenegro into an accession to the EU that is the successor to that process .
We are facing yet another episode in the process of the total disintegration of Yugoslavia , and what remains of it .
This time , it is Montenegro 's turn .
The major powers of NATO and the EU , having imposed strangulatory economic and financial measures on Yugoslavia , with the support of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , supported ethnic divisions which ended in war and the hasty creation of new ' sovereign states ' .
The future integration of Montenegro into the EU is the successor of that process and the attack on the achievements of socialism , with a view to satisfying the interests of economic and financial interest groups by exploiting the workforce , through the market , and through the geostrategic locations and natural resources of these countries .
Now the promises are huge .
The EU beckons with millions of euro in so-called ' aid ' and development .
However , how much will this cost and when will it arrive , if indeed it does ?
Our experience is that 25 years of Portugal 's capitalist integration in the EU demonstrate that the promised progress is never achieved .
What is achieved is the destruction of manufacturing and employment , the exploitation of workers , the destruction of public services , debt and foreign dependence .
This is why we have out doubts about this process .
The enlargement process of the European Union continues on exclusively geographical premises and , as I have already stated in this House , the Council is being hasty in granting the status of candidate country for accession before the countries in question reach democratic quality standards that at least approach a basically adequate level .
Corruption , smuggling , organised crime and violations of the freedom of the press are just some of the factors that lead me to think that Montenegro is still a long way from Europe .
These reasons really seem sufficient to not support this resolution , which traces the guidelines for the European future of the Balkans irrespective of the area 's tangible problems .
The decision to grant candidate status to Montenegro was primarily political .
Montenegro would probably have had to wait longer for it , if not for the fact that this issue was being considered at the same time in relation to Albania .
However , the comparison works to the advantage of Montenegro , of course .
Nevertheless , many of the reservations applying to Montenegro ' carry over ' from one annual report to the next , and we see from the Commission statement that politicisation of the state bureaucracy , independence of the judiciary , organised crime and the environment are now ' regular features ' .
There is no fundamental progress in sight regarding the fight against all-pervasive corruption .
We must not underestimate this .
In the given circumstances , it is therefore a good solution to grant Montenegro candidate status without setting a deadline for the start of accession talks .
The EU has already adopted a similar approach towards the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in 2005 .
The difference is that overcoming the barrier which confronts the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia requires the agreement of two states .
Montenegro 's fate , meanwhile , is entirely in its own hands .
I presume that all of this was made very clear in the recent talks between Herman van Rompuy , José Manuel Barroso and Jerzy Buzek and the new leader of Montenegro , Igor Lukšić , the world 's youngest premier .
Nobody likes to be led by the nose for too long .
This also applies to a country which , despite the fact that it is not in the EU , has been using the euro as its national currency for many years now .
I voted in favour of this document because a general consensus and high priority has been given to European integration by the government and opposition parties in Montenegro , which has resulted in good progress in the reform process since the independence of the country .
I welcome the fact that Montenegro was granted the status of candidate country for accession to the European Union and Montenegrin citizens have been granted the possibility to travel without visas ( full visa liberalisation ) to the EU Schengen area .
I welcome the fact that the process of establishing the legal and constitutional framework of the country has almost been finalised and there has been good progress in adopting important legislation in the field of fighting corruption , as well as progress in reform of the judiciary .
However , there is still a need to continue to reform public administration , strengthen human resources at the local level of administration and combat organised crime , particularly money laundering and smuggling .
The media sector must be able to operate without political interference and it is necessary to guarantee the independence of regulatory bodies .
I voted in favour of the resolution , which promotes the integration of Montenegro into the European system , because we have all witnessed that this country has made notable progress towards adopting proper processes and instruments .
These are necessary steps not only for joining the EU but also to give a judicial , civil and social structure to a country that must develop in compliance with the regulations and in view of shared growth at the various levels of administration .
Montenegro has already launched important reforms that are therefore heading in the right direction , which also involves creating an administrative structure capable of making effective future use of Structural Funds , which will benefit this country greatly .
Ahead of the start of the much anticipated negotiations , many fellow Members and I hope to create a suitable environment for the citizens of Montenegro , free from corruption and bursting with initiatives for democratic growth .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the resolution in order to acknowledge Montenegro 's progress towards European integration and highlight the remaining goals to be achieved for the benefit of its people .
When the resolution was in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I contributed amendments concerning the efficiency and predictability of the justice system .
The publication of all judgments and the unification of jurisprudence should be priorities in order to ensure public trust and a predictable judicial system .
Increased funding for courts to work fast and efficiently and consistent measures for training judges are also necessary .
The efficiency of the EU funds spent in the area of justice reform and the combating of corruption must be assessed .
The consistency of the rule of law throughout a nation is vital to its ability to progress politically and democratically .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which welcomes the general consensus and high priority given to European integration by the government and opposition parties in Montenegro , which has resulted in good progress in the reform process since the independence of the country , and which welcomes the new political leadership in Podgorica and encourages the new government to continue Montenegro 's European integration process and speed up the reforms leading to fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria .

It also welcomes the European Council decision of 17 December 2010 to grant Montenegro the status of candidate country for accession to the European Union , but regrets , however , the decoupling of candidate status from the right to open negotiations , stressing that the decision to start them should not be unduly or unreasonably postponed , and expects the negotiations to start at the latest after the publication of the 2011 Commission Progress Report , provided Montenegro makes good progress in fulfilling the benchmarks set by the Commission .
This resolution supports the obligation for the people of Montenegro to submit to the Copenhagen criteria and accelerated privatisations .
The Union has been reduced to an aggressive and pretentious liberal doctrine .
I want no part of it . I shall vote against .
As a candidate for future accession to the EU , Montenegro has demonstrated its willingness to pursue its choice of Europe through the determination of its leaders and the changes which have been taking place in the country in order to bring it closer to European requirements , particularly with regard to democracy , human rights and respect for the rule of law .
However , despite the progress that has been made , this is not yet enough , and Montenegro has to continue to make efforts before it is fit to join the European Union .
I hope that this determination will continue to bear fruit and that joining the EU will become a reality , so that Montenegro can give its people better living conditions and improve the functioning of its authorities in order to become an increasingly better state .
I am in favour of starting discussions on the accession of Montenegro to the EU , inasmuch as I am in favour of expansion on principle .
Nevertheless , I have been unable to vote for this resolution as the Commission is demanding a series of reforms from Montenegro that are in line with the EU 's neoliberal policies , such as the privatisation of the public sector and the adaptation of the education system to the Bologna Process .
For all the above reasons , I did not vote for the report , but rather abstained .
Ever since it gained independence in 2006 , Montenegro has clearly demonstrated its desire to join the European Union : the euro was officially adopted in 2006 , and a Stabilisation and Association Agreement ( SAA ) has been in force since 1 May 2010 .
Montenegro 's accession to the Union will bring greater political , economic and social stability to the country and will increase the stability of the Balkan region .
Indeed , I welcome Montenegro 's efforts to become a constructive partner in the field of regional cooperation , notably as a result of the various regional agreements it has concluded with its neighbours in the areas of readmission and extradition and in judicial and police matters .
The consolidation of peace and stability benefits not only the region but also Europe as a whole .
I therefore call for accession negotiations to begin as soon as possible , particularly since the European Council granted Montenegro the status of candidate country at the end of December 2010 .
Montenegro 's efforts to meet the accession criteria are going well , even though substantial progress still needs to be made , in particular , regarding corruption and organised crime , freedom of information and gender equality .
in writing . - Although the Committee on Foreign Affairs welcomes the European Council 's decision to grant Montenegro candidate status , serious problems remain as regards corruption , especially where the building industry , privatisation and the state procurement sector are concerned .
There are still problems as regards minorities and unprotected groups as well .
It would be correct to supervise the implementation of Parliament 's recommendations to Montenegro , and if these recommendations are implemented , I believe that the accession of a country like Montenegro can only be a benefit to the EU .
There is constantly a tension that is not always easily reconcilable between respect for human rights and other national interests ( perhaps of a military or economic nature ) .
Even the United States and the European Union step over this fine line from time to time , as can be seen from the infringement of civil liberties and data protection in the context of the fight against terrorism .
The EU must therefore stand up more strongly and consistently for human rights within and outside the Union .
Outside the Union , I have in mind especially the protection of Christian minorities in Islamic countries and in Asia .
I therefore voted for this motion for a resolution .
Today , the European Parliament adopted the resolution on the European integration process of Montenegro .
Enlargement of the EU to include the Western Balkans was confirmed as long ago as 2003 in Athens , which is why Parliament has expressed the hope that accession negotiations will begin before the end of this year .
In the resolution , attention is drawn to the significant improvement in the political and social situation in Montenegro , and also to Montenegro 's positive approach to European integration .
Unfortunately , Montenegro has still not overcome the problem of corruption and organised crime .
In my opinion , a very important and so far also unresolved problem is the question of discrimination against ethnic groups and also against women , who are under-represented in decision-making processes and in public administration .
Another positive feature is the country 's fight against censorship and its attempts to guarantee freedom of expression .
However , attacks on journalists and activists are still being reported .
EU integration is the main driving force behind Montenegro 's progress .
This country has achieved a lot in the last 12 months , successfully implementing structural and economic reforms , and effectively combating corruption and organised crime .
Ethnic minorities live together peacefully in Montenegro and the country successfully promotes good neighbourhood relations .
The EU and Montenegro therefore signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
I voted in favour of this resolution , because it rightly indicates further steps to reform Montenegro .
It is necessary to make progress in the establishment of the rule of law , to continue to implement administrative reforms , improve the capacities of civil servants , amend electoral law , and strengthen civil society and the independent media .
It is important for the country to maintain the momentum and to continue the work it has begun .
Montenegro became one of the official candidate countries for accession to the European Union last December 2010 , but no date has yet been established for the start of proper negotiations .
I support the spirit of the resolution where it compliments the government of Montenegro in light of the priority being given to reforms linked to the integration process and , despite the problems still to be resolved , it expresses hope for official negotiations to begin within the year .
In terms of bringing the Balkans closer to the European Union , Montenegro is the country that offers the best socio-political situation .
This is why I voted in favour of the resolution , since I think that the accession to the EU of Montenegro and the other Balkan countries is of fundamental strategic importance for Europe in terms of the stability of the region itself , for its own development , and for the resources that it offers .
I acknowledge the effort that has been made by Montenegro , particularly with regard to legal reforms , the struggle against corruption and the fight against different types of discrimination , but I would like to stress that this work needs to be continued and intensified .
However , there is still a wide range of matters that require particular attention .
I am referring to economic issues in particular , and the need to apply new structural changes , despite the success of the economic reforms , which has been exposed by the financial crisis .
I would like to add one final remark on an issue that I hold dear : the need for improvement in the quality of legislation drafted in Parliament .
in writing . - In general , this report is good and well balanced . The report addresses all relevant policy fields .
Montenegro , which became a candidate country in December 2010 , is still waiting for negotiations to start .
The report criticises this fact in paragraph 2 : ' regrets the decoupling of candidate status from the right to open negotiations and stresses that the decision to start them should not be unduly or unreasonably postponed ' .
The rapporteur expects negotiations to start after the 2011 progress report .
Some interesting points are on IPA ( paragraph 5 ) , corruption ( paragraph 8 ) , freedom of information ( paragraph 10 ) , organised crime ( paragraph 14 ) and anti-discrimination ( paragraphs 17-22 ) .
Many paragraphs are devoted to the issue of anti-discrimination and touch on all relevant aspects such as Roma , Ashkali , Egyptians ( paragraphs 17 and 22 ) , LGBT ( paragraph 17 ) , women and domestic violence ( paragraphs 17-19 ) , ethnic issues ( paragraph 21 ) and civil society ( paragraphs 5 , 10 , 23 , 24 and 32 ) .
In general , the report is very positive on the role of CSO and devotes many paragraphs to the issue . The most important are paragraphs 23 , 24 and 32 .
In these paragraphs , the report ' reiterates the importance of active and independent civil society organisations for democracy ' and ' encourages the Montenegrin Government to have close collaboration and regular dialogue with NGOs ' .
Ever since Montenegro officially became a candidate country for accession to the European Union on 17 December 2010 , the country 's government has immediately given priority to reforms that can accelerate the European integration process .
There are still some problems to resolve , such as electoral reform , and reform of the public administration and the legal system , but the report makes it clear that Montenegro is making progress .
Italy fully supports the European aspirations of this country , since it believes that the accession of Montenegro and the Western Balkans meets a basic interest of the EU in that it promotes stability , regional cooperation and development in a crucial geographical area for our continent .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution which would see Montenegro achieve candidate status for the European Union .
It also highlights the issues of equality and corruption which need to be tackled within Montenegro and calls for measures to be taken to tackle these problems .
I voted for the motion for a resolution , because the report states quite clearly that since gaining its independence in 2006 , Montenegro has made significant progress in internal reforms .
However , we must not be blind to the fact that there are , as always , serious problems with corruption and organised crime , freedom of expression and discrimination .
Nevertheless , at the same time , the report explains that the government of Montenegro is prepared to tackle these problem areas effectively , and has introduced a package of suitable and appropriate measures .
I voted in favour because I think the process of European integration in Montenegro can meet a fundamental strategic interest of the European Union , namely , promoting and seeking to guarantee stability and development in a crucial geographic area for our continent .
At the same time , this accession may strengthen the fight against organised crime originating from the Balkan area .
It also needs to be highlighted that during the process of bringing the Balkan countries closer to the Union , Montenegro has long expressed strong domestic consensus on the European outlook and shown a mature and conciliatory attitude to neighbouring States .
I voted for this report because the values of European integration require that the EU be free of prejudice and discrimination in order for human rights to be respected .
This discrimination is exacerbated by the current economic crisis , and the integration of the Roma population should be seen as the joint responsibility of the European institutions , the Member States and the regions , making use of all the resources available to the EU to address this situation .
The Commission should play a leading role in this process , paying particular attention to requests for technical assistance and , above all , presenting a strategy that includes the defence of human rights , the right to education and training , culture , employment , sports , adequate housing , healthcare and better sanitation for the Roma population as priority areas .
Moreover , efforts should be made to increase political and civic participation by the Roma , starting with the youngest .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the EU strategy on Roma inclusion .
Roma are Europe 's largest ethnic minority , but they are also very isolated and , therefore , almost completely disconnected from national economies .
I agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that the inclusion of Roma is a necessary investment , because it is cheaper to integrate Roma than to sustain their substandard socio-economic conditions .
Another important dimension that I would like to underline is the fact that the overall inclusion of Roma is essentially an issue of human rights .
A significant proportion of European Roma face such substandard conditions - almost totally disconnected from the economy , resulting in their exclusion from basic human rights - that fostering social inclusion cannot be viewed within the framework of general policy rectifications , but must be handled as bridging one of the largest gaps in the fulfilment of constitutional and human rights in Europe .
By approving this strategy , the European Parliament has taken the first step towards promoting the social and economic inclusion of Roma , and now the Council and the Commission must take the necessary action to ensure that this strategy is successfully implemented .
Approximately 10-12 million Roma reside in the European Union .
Many suffer discrimination and social exclusion .
They are , for the most part , European citizens , and the EU must establish a strategy for integrating them .
That is why I voted in favour of this text .
It provides for an action plan based on the fundamental values of equality , access to rights , non-discrimination and gender equality , drawing on the Structural Funds already available .
The Roma situation in the EU is rather complicated .
A large proportion of Europe 's 10-12 million Roma have suffered systematic discrimination and are therefore struggling against an intolerable degree of social , cultural and economic exclusion as well as human rights violations .
Furthermore , a significant proportion of the Roma community live in regions which are among the least economically and socially advanced in the Union , and therefore Roma children often do not have access to education and training systems , which later leads to them being discriminated against in the labour market and prevented from integrating into society .
The EU has developed a range of useful tools , mechanisms and funds to foster the inclusion of Roma , but these are scattered across policy areas and , therefore , their effect and benefit remain limited .
I agree that the Member States must improve the implementation of the EU strategy on Roma inclusion and ensure the full transposition and application of all related directives and EU law , thereby preventing Roma segregation and discrimination .
The European Charter of Fundamental Rights prohibits discrimination on grounds of sex , race , colour or ethnic or social origin , genetic characteristics , language , religion or beliefs , political or other opinions , membership of a national minority , wealth , birth , disability , age or sexual orientation , as well as on grounds of nationality .
There are approximately 10-12 million Roma in Europe , most of them European citizens , who suffer from systematic discrimination and who are victims of intolerance .
The integration of the Roma population is the responsibility of all the Member States and European institutions .
This report urges the Member States to cooperate with the European Union and the representatives of the Roma community to develop integrated policies , using the resources available within the European Union , under existing Structural Funds , to support the integration of the Roma community , as it is less costly to integrate the Roma than to sustain their insecure socio-economic conditions .
The harmonious integration of Roma communities involves the participation of everyone : the Roma themselves , and their host community .
For this reason , I supported this report .
The adoption by a very large majority of Mrs Járóka 's report is an additional political signal confirming that the European Union is aware of its responsibility towards this ethnic minority , which is the largest one in Europe , as well as the most persecuted one .
The report highlights priority areas that must feature in the strategy , such as the fight to have the Roma people 's fundamental rights respected .
The strategy must focus on education , but it must also prevent extreme marginalisation and avoid the reproduction of inequalities .
Finally , the strategy must establish innovative ways of providing genuine access to the labour market and to affordable , healthy housing .
The current challenge , as mentioned in the report , is to ensure that EU funds are fully absorbed and are used in a way that will benefit the Roma people .
Indeed , the instruments are there but they are utilised particularly badly .
Roma inclusion is a matter for Europe .
It is now up to the European Commission to draft final proposals on the basis of our vote today .
While respecting the principle of subsidiarity , the Union must fully perform its role as a driving force and unite the actors involved at all levels so as to increase the beneficial effect of EU funds and make the Roma fully fledged European citizens at last .
Basically , the report on Roma inclusion does not bear in mind the difficulties faced in the social integration of Roma if one considers the fact that often , it is the Roma community itself that does not want to integrate in the social fabric of our countries .
This is a cultural factor that cannot be denied or ignored : Roma have their own traditions and customary ways of life which makes it difficult to integrate them in social environments characterised by processes , lifestyles and habits very different from their own .
It therefore remains a fact that any Roma integration policy will have to deal with this obstacle : their actual desire or willingness to integrate .
Quite aside from sociological considerations , I must recall that given these and other difficulties , the policies proposed in the reports on Roma communities will require an enormous disbursement of funds by the EU and the Member States , without achieving the desired result in the end .
Without mincing words , that is what has happened so far and there are no reasons to believe that the situation will change from here on in .
I have therefore voted against the report .
I voted in favour of this report , because Roma living in Europe need the support of the European Union ( EU ) .
The EU strategy on Roma inclusion proposes setting compulsory minimum standards of education , employment , housing and healthcare .
Nevertheless , a significant proportion of European Roma face such substandard conditions , being almost totally disconnected from the economy , resulting in their exclusion from basic human rights .
Therefore , the strategy proposed by the European Parliament gives priority to Roma employment and improving education , housing and social security .
It is important to ensure the abolition of the segregation of Roma children in schools and classrooms .
It is also very important to encourage Roma to become involved in all areas of public and political life and to participate in the work of non-governmental organisations .
In order to implement the strategy on Roma inclusion , it is indispensable that the strategy must , above all , be an internal EU strategy , and the general oversight of priority areas and objectives must be within the Community structures , with an annual report on the progress of the strategy and the evaluation of results .
The 10-12 million Roma should enjoy minimum standards at EU level so that they can have access to jobs and education .
The European Parliament resolution , which endeavours to influence the future strategy on the inclusion of the Roma , offers better protection for fundamental rights , as well as increased EU funding .
Romania understands perfectly well the difficulties , but also the indolence of this minority .
The European Union ought to be aware that there is a very high level of resistance to change within this ethnic group , including social inclusion .
The Roma have been victims of discrimination down the centuries but , at the same time , of self-exclusion as well .
This assessment is very fair , but it needs to be realised that , very often , the solutions which we come up with are inadequate or not understood by the Roma .
The future EU strategy on the Roma minority must obviously emphasise compliance with , and the promotion of , the fundamental rights to work , housing , health and , in particular , to education , even in spite of resistance from parents .
However , no one must expect change to occur quickly .
Several generation changes will probably be required for this minority to assume certain rules of social coexistence .
A basic precondition for drawing up any kind of sensible strategy on Roma inclusion is to collect and provide data on the socio-economic situation of the Roma ( chiefly education , health , housing and employment ) .
Both Member States and international organisations ( the International Organisation for Migration and the OECD ) should therefore focus on these issues in greater detail , and help to set concrete objectives relating to , for example , the percentage of the Roma community completing secondary and tertiary education or employed in the civil service or represented in various areas of social and political life .
It is then up to the Commission to set out a clear and manageable EU strategy for Roma inclusion on the basis of this data .
We might consider establishing performance bonuses for the EU strategy on the Roma minority , within the framework of the cohesion policy .
In any case , there is a need to draw up more effective methods for monitoring the spending of EU resources specifically designated for marginal groups of citizens .
In the interests of Roma inclusion , it is also perhaps necessary to make use of the funding options provided by the PROGRESS programme , the lifelong learning programme , the cultural programme ( 2007-2013 ) and the public health programme ( 2008-2013 ) .
In this context , the Commission should provide the European Parliament with a list of projects benefiting the Roma which it has funded since 2000 , and set out the results achieved by these projects .
I am pleased with the commitment that the EU has demonstrated in establishing binding standards that guarantee the Roma community access to education , employment , housing and healthcare .
This initiative addresses not only the human values inherent in the social inclusion of ethnic minorities , but also the economic progress stimulated by the fall in unemployment .
I agree with the measures proposed under this integration strategy , in particular , the fight against undeclared work and the increase in Roma teachers .
It is important that the community itself be included in the integration process , so as to ensure sustainable development from the inside out , encouraging a desire for a positive role in society , instead of imposing it .
This process should also focus on all forms of the violation of fundamental rights , with particular attention to social exclusion and discrimination in public life .
The issue of Roma inclusion is a major challenge that the European Union must take up .
This report is along the right lines , as it shows the European Parliament 's will to fully contribute to this end .
in writing . - I voted for this report as Europe 's 10-12 million Roma should benefit from binding minimum standards at EU level to improve their access to employment , education , housing and healthcare .
The resolution , which seeks to influence the Commission 's upcoming strategy for Roma inclusion , also calls for better protection of fundamental rights and use of EU funding .
I hope EU governments now respond to this strong message from Parliament .
I support the rapporteur , Mrs Járóka , when she advocates a coordinated EU policy , complementing existing legislation , to promote the integration of European citizens belonging to the Roma ethnic group - estimated by the Council as numbering between 10 and 16 million - that provides for the adoption of anti-racist and anti-discriminatory measures .
The implementation and correct application of this policy should also be ensured .
Measures should also be adopted , however , to respond to the specific needs of the Roma and to promote their socio-economic inclusion , such as the right to work , housing , education , healthcare and others .
In addition to the humanitarian aspect of Roma integration , this should also enable an increase in the workforce to support the social security system , and reduce the social and healthcare benefits guaranteed by the state to those living in poverty , not to mention the possibility that crime rates may be reduced .
Integration should take into account the protection of children and should respect the law .
A common European solution is needed to a common European problem , taking an integrated and cross-sectoral approach that enables aid for and specific intervention in the most underdeveloped areas , and in those with severe structural disadvantages .
We have just adopted by a large majority the EU strategy on Roma inclusion .
This is a strong political signal confirming that the European Union is aware of its responsibility towards this minority , which is the largest one in Europe , as well as the most persecuted one .
The European Union and the Member States must tackle the disgraceful segregation suffered by the Roma head-on .
This report stresses the importance of respecting the fundamental rights of the Roma and , in particular , access to education .
To avoid any risk of marginalisation , it is also important to implement innovative policies on genuine access to employment , and to enable these people , the vast majority of whom are permanently settled , to access decent and affordable housing .
The EU funds are there . They must be used in a way that will benefit the Roma .
It is now up to the European Commission to draft final provisions based on the proposals in this report in a coherent manner with the principle of subsidiarity and with one aim : to ensure that the Roma become fully fledged European citizens .
Parliament has adopted a good text . It emphasises Europe 's important role in ensuring the social inclusion of the Roma within the European Union , with the application of this strategy at local level .
The report points out that a strategy for the Roma is possible only with the cooperation of members of the community - in short , we must work ' with ' before we work ' for ' .
The Roma should therefore be involved in any decision making .
The text points out the difficult living conditions , discrimination and difficulties in accessing essential services that the Roma suffer . It points out the need to ensure respect for the freedom of movement of European citizens .
It also mentions the importance , in social inclusion terms , of social protection , vocational training , education and public service provision .
It denounces the insufficient allocation of funds , when the money could be put to good use .
However , the real drawback of this report is the insistence by the conservatives in the European Parliament on mentioning the need to combat the Roma people 's so-called ' prolonged dependence ' on the social welfare system .
This is a scandalous prejudice aimed once again at marginalising the Roma community .
I am delighted that the European Parliament has adopted the Járóka report by an overwhelming majority .
The report states the need to combat the exclusion of , and discrimination against , the Roma , to promote their social , cultural and economic integration , to better protect their fundamental rights and to make better use of European funds .
Parliament has defined its priorities , on which there is a consensus .
Parliament calls for an EU action plan in this area , wants EU funds to be harnessed , and proposes the adoption of a crisis map , to show where Roma populations are concentrated .
As far as specific measures are concerned , one can mention access to education , which is as much a priority for the Roma people as it is for anyone else .
Furthermore , we must monitor the use of EU funds to ensure that the money actually reaches the intended recipients .
Parliament has also made strong calls for EU bodies to be set up under the supervision of the current Roma Task Force , with the aim of providing EU financial assistance to relevant local initiatives and of identifying and reporting in good time any misuse of funds .
Furthermore , the scope of the funding should be extended to projects aimed at improving public services as well .
I voted for this report because I think that an EU-level strategy for integrating the Roma minority is a positive and welcome step .
This community needs special attention at European level , given the persistent problems with social and economic integration , along with the particular level of mobility among its members .
However , I think that the biggest effort is still to be made .
Strategies and actions plans for Roma integration have been and are available at every level , but it is their proper implementation that is lacking .
To ensure its success , this new strategy must be implemented in the most appropriate manner .
With this in mind , I think that a structured dialogue between the Roma communities , non-governmental sector and local authorities must provide the basis for the future strategy 's implementation .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe that the inclusion of the Roma does not just have to do with moral imperatives or the European Union 's human rights obligations .
A number of studies prove that the exclusion of these European citizens has socio-economic costs for the Member States .
The social inclusion of the Roma is a necessary investment , and will be of financial benefit in the long term .
Historically , the Roma have been the target of discrimination and hostility from the majority populations of the Member States .
Much discrimination also still persists within Roma communities themselves , and the strategy urgently needs to seek to remedy this , rather than simply not hiding it .
I believe that an EU strategy in favour of the integration of the Roma , as for any other disadvantaged ethnic minority group , is to be welcomed .
I also believe that it is likely to succeed if it is supported by the active involvement of the very people whom it aims to integrate .
Without the participation , interaction and commitment of all players in this common effort , the strategy will run the risk of being nothing more than a statement of good intentions .
Much remains to be done to reverse the trend of discrimination towards the Roma .
I hope that the strategy 's success will eventually justify the slowness of its elimination .
This report covers the development of an EU strategy on Roma inclusion .
It is a very useful and encouraging document which was compiled jointly by the Commission and Parliament , and its recommendations address the objectives set out in the Europe 2020 strategy as regards reducing poverty and combating social exclusion , so as to foster inclusive growth throughout the EU .
The Roma population has highly dynamic demographics , unlike other ethnic groups , and it is thought that in some countries , such as Hungary , they will make up more than 50 % of the economically active population by 2050 .
Their integration is therefore imperative , not only in ethical terms , as it is a human rights issue , but also for the sustainability of social security systems , It has been shown that this does not represent a cost , but rather a ' necessary and financially profitable investment in the long run ' .
Sometimes , the costs of exclusion are greater than those of inclusion , when we take account of the benefits that this brings .
I welcome the adoption of this report , and I welcome the recommendation that the Commission take on the role of overseeing and monitoring Member States ' compliance with this strategy .
The resolution adopted advocates the adoption of an EU strategy for Roma integration , along with the development of an inclusive action plan based on the fundamental values of equality , the exercising of rights , non-discrimination and equality .
The aim is to ensure that the Roma community has real access to education , jobs , housing , healthcare and culture .
The mention of European programmes and funding that can be used for the social and economic integration of the Roma is opportune , given that these are underused .
This resolution is all the more important given that it is common knowledge that the Roma have been the target of unfortunate and unacceptable discrimination in a number of EU countries , such as France and other Member States .
The discrimination that takes place against the Roma in various EU countries is common knowledge .
Just recently , there have been problems in France and other EU states , which could worsen under the pretext of the economic and social crisis .
The rapporteur , who is a Member of Roma origin , has therefore tried to make Parliament aware of this situation .
Within this context , the resolution that has been adopted today advocates that the Commission propose and the Council adopt an EU strategy encouraging Roma integration as an action plan at European level , and which will be significant and inclusive at various different levels , based on the fundamental values of equality , the exercising of rights , non-discrimination , and equality between men and women .
In the same way , it is worth remembering that there are European programmes and funding which can be used for the social and economic integration of the Roma , but that communication needs to be improved at all levels if these are to be properly employed .
The objective is to ensure that the Roma community has real access to education , jobs , housing , healthcare and culture .
Managing the problems of the largest ethnic minority in Europe requires pragmatism , rather than some kind of fake bleeding-heart liberalism .
We are talking about giving the Roma minority a whole series of rights , which a very great many citizens can only enjoy thanks to daily sacrifices .
I do not think it is a European strategy or a decision that deserves support given that this phenomenon also implies vast differences between one Member State and another .
Some countries are in an objectively difficult situation , whilst others are barely affected by the phenomenon .
That is why I think it would be more effective to apply the principle of subsidiarity . Hence , I do not intend to lend my support to the text that has been tabled .
Rarely has a European Parliament report come so close to madness .
For the strategy on Roma inclusion read the systematic promotion of a small population in everything and everywhere , mandatory quotas in all areas , including in decision-making bodies and businesses , and the systematic public funding of its alleged needs , including housing .
This minority is , of course , supposed to be the frequent victim of malicious discrimination , and never does one question one 's own responsibilities .
It should be said that the rapporteur is herself part of this minority , which proves that it is not as oppressed as all that .
Frankly , it is a bit like entrusting a Chinese person with the task of defining Europe 's trade protection policy .
To return to the subject at hand , though , which other European citizens , albeit victims of poverty and insecurity , and excluded , in their own country , from the social benefits already allocated as a priority to others , are the object of such deep concern on your part ?
It is in this systematic discrimination against European citizens and at their expense that the reasons for their growing rejection of the Brussels set-up are to be found .
This week , the European Parliament , by a large majority , adopted a report on the EU strategy on Roma inclusion : this is an additional political signal confirming that the European Union is aware of its responsibility towards this ethnic minority , which is the largest one in Europe , as well as the most persecuted one .
The report emphasises the priority areas of this strategy : fundamental rights , inequalities , the fight against discrimination , education , access to employment , the labour market , access to housing , and so on .
These are all areas in which action is needed .
For my part , I stressed the need , within the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , to pay special attention to children and minors when drafting such a strategy .
The report also highlights the misuse of the European funds available for Roma inclusion : administrative delays and burdens , insufficient awareness , a lack of involvement on the part of local authorities , and so on , are all difficulties to which the Member States , local authorities , interested parties and others must respond in order to ensure the full absorption of these European funds .
This strategy will have to be shaped later on by each Member State and will thus be assessed at local level .
The issue of Roma inclusion is a genuinely European problem , which is why the European Union must go to the very root of the discrimination suffered by the Roma community by combating stereotypes , in order to ensure equal access to employment , housing , healthcare and education .
I am therefore delighted that the European Parliament has taken up the issue and adopted this report , which aims to provide food for thought for the Commission .
This report denounces the misuse by the Member States of the European funds that should be devoted to Roma inclusion projects , but it is my hope that the Commission will go further by forcing the Member States to account publicly for their use of these funds .
I voted in favour of this document , although I believe that this report should have been rejected .
At the moment , it is not necessary to strengthen a strategy that is devoted to just one group .
Rather , we need an effective emergency strategy aimed at solving the issue of legal and illegal migration in order to ensure , above all , economic stability , employment , security , public order and justice for all European citizens who make up part of a Member State from demographic , cultural , traditional , historical and economic viewpoints .
in writing . - ( RO ) The European approach to the Roma problem has been , and still is , inadequate .
The report drafted by Lívia Járóka in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , along with the contributions from the other associated committees , should provide new impetus for a proper Roma integration strategy , which we expect from the Commission next month .
I strongly believe that we are all eager to bring about real change for the Roma community and offer them all the prerequisites for social inclusion .
This is why we need to focus on the political and financial instruments we have available and take direct action in key areas such as education and health .
Cooperation at every level , from European to local , is also essential because , without concerted action , all the resources are wasted .
The Roma need to be involved in making policies .
This is why solutions must be found to bring us into contact with those who form the link between the decision-making and implementation levels .
Lastly , we must acknowledge the importance of the message we are sending out with this report .
However , we should not forget that numerous messages have been given and the time has now come for concrete actions .
The Roma are culturally one of the richest nations in the world .
Their presence lends variety to the landscape of many different countries .
However , stereotypes and discrimination are injurious to the Roma , and unfortunately do not help in establishing dialogue - and dialogue is needed .
We live alongside one another , and we must at least accept each other in order to put an end to the phenomenon of exclusion .
To this end , it is necessary to support education so that there will not be obstacles to Roma children learning alongside other children in European schools .
It is also necessary to support initiatives which will allow Roma to undertake legal employment and more easily acclimatise in the country in which they are currently living .
We are afraid of what we do not know .
If we know more about the riches of Roma culture and customs , integration will certainly take place more quickly .
in writing . - The ECR Group is wholeheartedly supportive of the inclusion and integration of the Roma people within Member States and the European Union .
Equal access to the public service sector and the labour market and freedom from discrimination are essential for all people regardless of race , ethnicity , or heritage .
We also strongly support the report 's aims regarding EU funds being better spent and better allocated in order to fully support the Roma people .
However , some sections of the report which discuss health , education and employment are areas which we believe should be legislated by Member States .
Voting in favour today on the resolution on the European Union strategy for Roma inclusion could represent a useful boost to the promotion of non-discrimination in the Member States , as well as an incentive to bring in instruments to protect the Roma .
What I have said is valid , in particular , for the most vulnerable groups , in line with the provisions of the EU 's Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I think that defining effective economic instruments is a further aim to be reached in order to implement a serious and substantial Roma inclusion policy .
The resolution in question tackles a particularly significant issue - including for my own country - and aims at proper integration of the Roma so as to enable their real participation in the economic , social and cultural life of the countries in which they are located , on condition ( I would add ) of the total respect of the principles and laws of the host State .
Lastly , I support the request made to the Commission regarding the adoption of a leading role in the establishment of unitary strategic coordination , in partnership with the Member States , by setting up a task force to act as a permanent organism responsible for supervising and coordinating the issue .
I voted for this report as I welcome its extremely close look at the complexity of the issue of the Roma community in the EU .
I would even dare say that when most of these problems are resolved , it will mean that a large number of the problems we are faced with now as a European society will be resolved .
I would just like to mention the way in which the Structural Funds could be used to support the priorities of the EU Roma inclusion strategy .
I believe that substantial funds need to be allocated to the economic and social development of these communities .
In cases where inadequate support is given to interventions in terms of finances or an appropriate period of time for the envisaged impact to be made , the effects achieved will not be those we currently expect .
What is required is prioritisation , smart spending of funds and political commitment .
Otherwise , the financial resources will be wasted .
Following this report , I await with interest the next steps which the Commission is going to take .
I hope that this strategy will generate the value added required from implementing a European measure supporting Roma inclusion .
in writing . - I welcome this report on the plight of the Roma - the most marginalised group in the European Union .
The resolution sets out practical steps for improving the health , education and welfare of the Roma .
It includes measures to improve their access to the labour market and to decent housing . This resolution offers an opportunity for the Roma to be better integrated into society .
This resolution is pure talk , yet again .
I am pleased that this text denounces racial hate speech , ethnic profiling , unlawful fingerprinting and unlawful eviction and expulsion .
However , I object to the bitter pills we are made to swallow along the way : full powers for the Commission in this matter , stigmatisation of the Roma in a text that claims to defend them , competition on the job market and competitive clusters .
This confused approach is unacceptable .
The EU is an area of solidarity and inclusion , so it must do what is necessary to prevent discrimination against the Roma and to gain them the same rights as regards education , employment , healthcare and housing in all Member States , as well as states intending to join the Union .
The Roma should be attending to children who are generally prevented from attending school ; with children and women who are used in begging ; with begging adopted as a life choice ; and with the rejection of work and recourse in its stead to the social security systems of third countries .
Decisive steps must be taken to bring discrimination to an end .
However , if this is to be achieved , the Roma cannot exclude themselves and must help with their own integration into a European area in which inclusion is desirable .
I voted for the report on the EU strategy on Roma inclusion .
The text points out the need to prepare an EU-level strategy for the protection and integration of this population .
It also calls on the Member States to adopt and strengthen effective legislation against discrimination - including multiple discrimination - in all areas of life that guarantees , protects and promotes fundamental rights , equality and non-discrimination , and the right to freedom of movement , including actions to raise public awareness directed both at Roma people and at others , so as to eradicate discriminatory obstacles .
Today , some 10-12 million Roma are in need of European measures to promote their social , cultural and economic integration .
The Roma have suffered and continue to suffer systematic discrimination , exclusion , human rights violations and stigmatisation .
The report we have just adopted is an important step towards measures aimed at reducing marginalisation , poverty and social exclusion .
However , much remains to be done to prevent discrimination .
Even if discrimination on the grounds of ethnic origin can be eliminated , the socio-economic exclusion of the majority of the Roma population remains a harsh reality .
Many Roma in Europe are completely cut off from the economy and live in conditions so poor that they cannot enjoy their fundamental rights .
I believe , furthermore , that Roma inclusion should begin in early childhood , with the inclusion of children in the population register , access to quality education , and job assistance for parents .
The Commission must set binding minimum standards at EU level that require the involvement of local , national and European authorities alike .
in writing . - Areas in which more effort from the EU is required in the Roma inclusion process are priorities for the EU .
Unfortunately , there are problems involving education , medical care and the extreme isolation of these people .
The report calls for the Commission to present a strategic plan for introducing binding minimum standards at EU level for these priorities , including penalties for Member States that do not comply with the objectives .
Although I am not confident that this will be successful , as a whole , I voted in favour .
The Roma and Sinti - that is the politically correct term , although some members of these ethnic groups take this to be pejorative , and ask to be designated ' Gypsies ' - do , of course , live to some extent in miserable circumstances .
We must , at the same time , not overlook the fact that the lack of progress towards a better way of life is also connected to the traditions of these groups , to which they continue to cling .
In a typical do-gooding way , over many years now , attempts at socialising these groups have been begun but they have all failed , because they have not been accepted by the great majority of this nomadic people .
The European Union has set aside EUR 12 billion up to 2013 for integration of minorities , and it is already quite clear that the money will be wasted where most Roma and Sinti are concerned .
Both the clan structure and lack of the right to intervene on the part of the authorities prevent this vicious circle from ever being broken .
The strategy that has been planned is not only incapable of changing anything significant ; it could , in some areas , such as ' non-discrimination ' , even turn into an own goal .
Moreover , there is a lack of the concept that there is no such thing as a right to be included in the social security system .
That is why I strongly reject the report .
I decided to vote against this report because I cannot see any need for the European Union to commit huge resources to the inclusion of the Roma .
At a time of economic crisis and general difficulty , it aims to press ahead even more quickly to ensure specific funding and favourable conditions in a number of areas for the Roma population .
This ethnic group has historically remained isolated in Europe , often not as a result of the will of others but by their own nature ; they have willingly remained at the margins in order to carry on living according to their own customs , which are a long way from the common values and sentiments of Europe .
Rather than a specific European strategy for the inclusion of the Roma , I would like it if we worked at a European level for a real and effective common immigration strategy , which seems increasingly essential and can no longer be postponed .
A European Roma strategy is undoubtedly an absolute necessity , as this is a European minority which is typified , at the same time , by a very large degree of cross-border mobility , given their way of life .
I voted for this resolution , especially because it emphasises the role played by good quality education and training as a factor influencing people 's personal and professional life and because , as a result , education is the most reliable solution for ensuring Roma integration into society .
While the majority society in the EU is rapidly ageing , the Roma are recording a rapid increase in population .
In Hungary , where the Roma currently make up between 6 % and 8 % of the population , they will exceed 50 % of the working population by 2050 .
All the worse , therefore , that Roma life in the EU is characterised , as it always has been , by unemployment , a level of education that is greatly below average , organised crime and prostitution , as well as retreat into a parallel society .
The situation of women in often archaic Roma society is particularly dramatic , and their lack of education and , hence , their exclusion from the labour market is so much the greater .
The report before us admittedly addresses some of the problems , however one-sidedly .
Integration is not a one-way street .
The Roma must make their contribution , send their children to school , integrate themselves better into the labour market and put an end to criminal tendencies .
I therefore voted against the report .
I voted in favour of this report , because we urgently need to change a situation where , even in the 21st century , a significant portion of the 10-12 million Roma living in Europe suffer discrimination , and economic and social isolation .
The road to integration is a long and complicated process which is adapted to the conditions of individual countries and local regions .
The European Union strategy should ensure clear objectives and means of funding programmes .
However , the greatest responsibility lies with national governments and local authorities , which know best the situation in the region .
Education , healthcare , housing policy and the more rapid inclusion of Roma in the labour market - this is the key to solving a long-standing problem .
If Roma EU citizens are unable to integrate properly into the societies of European Union Member States , then this would send out a poor signal on EU integration policy in general .
The European Union has now been working for years on problems relating to the social integration and protection of minorities .
The report by Mrs Járóka on the Roma inclusion strategy sets out an action plan for their socio-economic integration in view of a European project that defines national strategies to deal with the problem , partly on the basis of the costs that each Member State will have to bear .
I voted in favour of the report precisely because we need a new European legal framework that includes measures to combat discrimination and protect human rights , to integrate Roma in the various Member States with a plan that guarantees their education and health coverage .
I voted today in favour of the European Parliament report on the EU strategy on Roma inclusion .
Their inclusion in society is a very important issue which concerns all the Member States in general and Greece in particular where , according to studies ( by the EU Fundamental Rights Agency ) , 35 % of Roma are illiterate and just 4 % have attended school for at least ten years .
The key point in inclusion is education and the abolition of segregation in schools .
Alongside adequate healthcare and equal opportunities in employment , the Member States need to keep a closer eye on the extent to which EU funds for the Roma are actually used for the benefit of the recipients .
in writing . - We know that 10-12 million European Roma continue to suffer serious systematic discrimination in education ( where they are victims particularly of segregation ) , housing ( particularly with forced evictions and sub-standard living conditions , often in ghettos ) , employment ( their particularly low employment rate ) and equal access to healthcare systems and other public services , as well as an astoundingly low level of political participation .
The EU strategy on Roma inclusion should embrace measures to ensure the monitoring of the situation of the Roma in relation to the respect and promotion of their fundamental social rights , equality , non-discrimination and free movement in the EU , and also to provide education , training opportunities and job assistance for adults , which are crucial in order to support the recruitment and continued employment of the Roma with the aim of avoiding the perpetuation of social exclusion .
The Commission and Member States should address the particular needs of Roma women by applying a gender perspective in all policies for Roma inclusion and providing protection for especially vulnerable subgroups .
Therefore , I ask the Commission to present annually to the European Parliament a follow up of the EU strategy on Roma inclusion in order to monitor the progress made at national level .
I voted in favour of this report , which focuses on the need to effectively address the problems and challenges related to this sensitive issue of integrating Roma communities .


in writing . - Parliament 's Járóka report on the EU strategy for Roma inclusion was voted on in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on 14 February , with the majority of the Greens / EFA amendments accepted by the rapporteur or included in the compromise amendments , and many of the Group 's red lines to the issue included : namely , the Roma inclusion strategy should be guided by an insider 's approach : designed by Roma for Roma , which means empowerment of Roma , inclusion in the decision-making process , hiring of Roma staff / mediators in key positions at local , national , EU level ; stop unlawful practices that continue with EU Member State impunity : violence against Roma , violations of the right to free movement , increasing activity of extremist political parties , politicians , and policies , systemic segregation of Romany children in education , widespread residential segregation of Roma , trafficking in human beings , denial of access to healthcare and social services , coercive sterilisation of Romany women .
On 6 April , the European Commission will present its Communication on Roma inclusion .
This issue is also listed among the priorities of the Hungarian Government , which currently holds the European rotating Presidency .
Parliament 's resolution points out the need for the greater integration of Roma populations in modern society .
Personally , I think that it is up to these populations to adapt to our society and not to force us to adopt favourable policies that often produce results that are quite opposite to expectations .
Ignorance , a lack of education and illiteracy often mean a lack of future prospects .
Without education , it is impossible to take an active role in society .
The difficulties that the Roma face in finding a job are often the result of their low level of education and this shows that the educational sector is the foundation on which to build a future of their own .
This report is absolutely unacceptable since it reiterates on a number of occasions that the inclusion of the Roma is an economic necessity and that it would bring financial advantages for the Member States .
It also proposes a task force for the Roma as a permanent organ of the Commission and denounces systematic discrimination and an intolerable level of exclusion and human rights violations .
The report also emphasises the need for a common European strategy to combat all forms of violation of the rights of the Roma , including fingerprinting and expulsion .
It sets out fines for national governments that do not respect obligatory European standards towards the Roma population , promoting the hiring of Roma in the public administration , and hiring Roma teachers in schools so as to protect their culture by using their language .
As a final insult to the freedom of speech , it also sets out to condemn the rejection of and discrimination against Roma in political meetings .
It is clear that I cannot but vote against a report that is absolutely offensive and harmful to the rights of people to be the lords of their own manor .
Any European strategy for Roma inclusion must be based , first and foremost , on a knowledge of local conditions .
The strategy is therefore inconceivable without close cooperation with the local authorities and the communities where the declaration must be translated into everyday coexistence between the majority of society and the Roma community .
The report does not overlook this aspect and I have therefore voted in favour of it .
The Roma struggle with discrimination in Europe on a systematic basis and have to fight exclusion , violations of their human rights and stigmatisation .
By voting for binding EU minimum standards today , I hope that the 10-12 million Roma will have better access to jobs , education , housing and healthcare .
It is a positive that the report calls for the best measures to be sought in collaboration with the stakeholders .
The report further highlights the primordial role of regional policy .
The Member States , after all , do have access to funds to assist the Roma with integration , but barely use that money .
It is thus up to the Member States to face up to their responsibility .
Another positive in this report is the idea that the Commission will have to introduce award criteria in favour of compliant Member States and penalties for non-compliance .
The only minus point is the reference to the Roma 's ' prolonged dependence ' on the social welfare system .
This is a very conservative , preconceived opinion that marginalises the Roma community once again .
I hope that the Commission integrates this report into its own proposal , which is likely to be presented on 5 April .
It is scheduled to be adopted by the Council before the summer .
The integration of the Roma is one of the priorities of the Hungarian Presidency .
in writing . - I supported this report which aims to combat discrimination against the Roma people and calls on Member States to produce policies for their integration into the labour market .
The Roma people is one of the most marginalised groups in the EU , which is why we need to ensure that action is taken to tackle the social exclusion that they face .
In the vote on the Lange report , I am abstaining on paragraph 31 because of the ambiguous wording , which refers to Eurobonds as well as project bonds .
However , taking it as a whole , I am voting for the report , as I have nothing against project bonds in themselves .
Project bonds serve as finance for extensive innovation , infrastructure and reindustrialisation projects .
This is not a question of instruments for the communitarisation of debts , as would be the case with Eurobonds .
I voted for this report , as industrial policy is a priority for the Europe 2020 strategy and the main driving force behind the European economy .
The focus on this sector is due to the fact that it is responsible for three quarters of European exports , providing jobs for 57 million people and representing 80 % of investment in research and development .
I believe that if Europe is to be competitive in this area , there must be a focus on advocating green and innovative knowledge-based projects .
I voted in favour of this important resolution on an Industrial Policy for the Globalised Era .
The global economic crisis has affected European industry and therefore , to be able to overcome the effect of the crisis and face those challenges , the EU needs an industrial policy approach that combines competitiveness , sustainability and decent work that can , at the same time , stimulate the economy , boost employment , reduce environmental degradation and improve quality of life .
I agree with the resolution 's call for the Commission and the Member States to develop an ambitious , eco-efficient and green EU industrial strategy in order to recreate manufacturing capacity across the EU territory and to generate highly qualified and well paid jobs within the EU .
The European Parliament stresses the great importance of SMEs in the industrial landscape , in particular , when it comes to providing long-term jobs at regional level , and in preserving economic and creative vitality and a high level of growth .
There is , therefore , a need to continue working on better access to financing opportunities for SMEs and , in particular , to develop viable venture capital possibilities ; to strengthen , in the context of the new architecture of the financial market , short- and long-term financing possibilities for SMEs and their preferred sources of finance ; to open up markets and create fair conditions for competition , enabling more entrepreneurs and small companies to grow and develop into companies operating all over Europe .
The global economic crisis has affected European industry , making it more difficult for it to adapt to the challenges posed by the transition to an industry based on knowledge and efficiency , which has a strong impact on industrial development and the labour market .
To be able to face these challenges , I think an industrial policy approach is required which combines competitiveness , sustainability and decent work which can , at the same time , stimulate the economy , boost employment , reduce environmental degradation and improve the quality of life in the European Union .
This report supports industrial progress through smart and forward-looking regulation and market stimulation , based on accurate expectations for market developments , and supporting the global trends towards clean , sustainable and innovative forms of production , distribution and consumption .
I voted for this report because I believe that the success of the European Union 's industrial policy depends on it being firmly rooted both in a new financial sector architecture that promotes investment and prevents speculation , and also in a macro-economic policy that steers fiscal , economic and budgetary policies in the EU towards sustainable growth and job creation .
Deindustrialisation is an established fact in Europe .
Europe 's technological and economic position is being put at risk by increased globalisation and intense competition from rapidly developing countries .
The European Union must therefore adopt an industrial policy that combines competitiveness , sustainability and decent work .
The aims are as follows : to stimulate the economy , boost employment , reduce environmental degradation and improve quality of life .
This is the thrust of this resolution , which I endorsed .
In particular , I am in favour of issuing EU bonds with a view to enabling the European Union to fund innovation , infrastructure and reindustrialisation .
There are 57 million people employed in the industrial sector in the EU , and 75 % of European exports involve the same sector .
That sector will be central to the future competitiveness of the EU .
I welcome what the EU 's 2020 strategy contains about encouraging high quality jobs and training to help and support the development of the industrial base , and therefore I voted in favour of the report .
Since it is SMEs which create two thirds of the jobs in the sector , I welcome what the report contains on small business access to public procurement opportunities and the role of small businesses in improving industrial policy .
SMEs must have better access to the Framework Programme , and assistance and support must be given for technology transfer and innovation .
I agree with the rapporteur that the EU should develop and encourage innovative clusters in regional areas .
The major advantages of these clusters are their ability to transfer knowledge , to develop research activities , qualifications and infrastructure , and to stimulate employment opportunities in regional areas .
I voted in favour of this report .
The European Union is the world 's largest market , but we are not exploiting our huge potential .
We are a very open market , but face enormous obstacles to accessing foreign markets .
The incomplete single market in areas such as energy forces us to bow to the conditions dictated by external parties , which has a direct impact on our competitiveness .
The viability of industry depends on the viability of our small and medium-sized business sector , which , despite the measures approved , is going through a difficult period .
I agree that innovation is at the core of industry today , but in this area we cannot exactly boast of our ability to react in a timely manner to changing global market conditions .
I believe that today , we have a well balanced and comprehensive vision of industry , and now the Member States and the European Commission will have to do their bit to ensure that our ambitious goals enable the creation of a modern and competitive industry .
European industry is still facing the consequences of the economic crisis , and requires a coordinated approach at EU level in order to handle them successfully .
An industrial strategy must be drawn up for the EU setting out strategic areas for investment , and then taking account of these priorities in the future financial perspective , annual budgets and policies of the EU .
The development of European industry will not happen without ambitious funding , especially in the areas of research and energy , telecommunications and transport networks ( TEN ) , and therefore in the public services which sustain the business environment .
In my opinion , however , it is neither necessary nor appropriate to start issuing EU bonds for this purpose ( Eurobonds or project bonds ) .
The EU is not a sovereign political entity , and therefore its revenues should basically be made up of the contributions of Member States .
Not to mention the fact that the idea of Eurobonds involves debt and might clash with the principle of a balanced European budget .
Financial support for innovation , infrastructure and reindustrialisation should be based primarily on boosting the resources for the Eighth Framework Programme for Research and Development and for the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme , with the aim of ensuring that European industry remains competitive at the global level , and thereby also making effective use of private investments .
Europe is currently finding that it has become less competitive in global markets .
As such , Europe needs to find ways of strengthening its industrial base to face up to new challenges .
This report , ' An integrated industrial policy for the globalisation era ' , aims to table proposals to relaunch European industry .
An integrated and sustainable industrial policy must be based on scientific research , on innovation , on increased resource efficiency , on a commodities strategy , on reinforcing small and medium-sized enterprises , and on developing regional networks .
In particular , it is essential for energy efficiency and the introduction of information and communication technologies to constitute the basis of the industrial revolution , so as to increase competitiveness , economic growth and employment .
I particularly welcome the emphasis given to traditional European industry , which is essential to our economy .
Measures such as the introduction of new technologies and increased efforts in scientific research and innovation in sectors such as the manufacturing industry are of crucial importance .
This is the only way that we will be able to return European industry to a leading position in the world .
Industrial policy is essential for the European Union , and this report is an opportunity for the European Commission : the initial communication was disappointing .
Parliament 's work provides the Commission with concrete proposals that it must take up .
This report should be linked to our proposals , which the European Parliament as a whole adopted this week , including , in particular , the principle of a ' tax on financial transactions ' at European level and of issuing EU bonds ( Eurobonds ) .
Our policies must show that social innovation and technological innovation are compatible .
In the vote on the Lange report , I am abstaining on paragraph 31 because of the ambiguous wording , which refers to Eurobonds as well as project bonds .
However , taking it as a whole , I am voting for the report , as I have nothing against project bonds in themselves .
Project bonds serve as finance for extensive innovation , infrastructure and reindustrialisation projects .
This is not a question of instruments for the communitarisation of debts , as would be the case with Eurobonds .
Clearly , Europe must develop a long-term European industrial strategy .
We cannot be the only economic area in the world to unilaterally apply free trade principles while having no idea of what our main competitors are doing .
The European Commission has to realise that , with the crisis , the rules put in place are no longer suitable for today 's economy , and that it is time to seriously strengthen the European Union 's anti-dumping arsenal and the application of the general principle of reciprocity in trade .
The European Union needs a European strategy that serves as a vehicle for major industrial projects such as Galileo and ITER .
It must also support its production sectors and its SME base .
It must promote and increase its research and development investments so as to try to maintain its lead in the area of high technology .
Similarly , it must step up the fight against counterfeiting , and put forward an offensive European patent policy .
This text does not stand out for its quality , since it is the result of a very broad compromise between the MEPs .
It contains both elements that are very positive in the eyes of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and certain ideas that we have sought in vain to denounce .
However , the main thing is that it enables MEPs to express a rather progressive opinion on the EU 2020 strategy 's flagship programme dedicated to industry .
Hence , the text calls for transport systems to be made more sustainable through the use of more efficient technologies , interoperability and innovative mobility solutions .
It points out the need to place energy and resource savings at the heart of European industrial policy .
In this respect , it recalls the huge job potential and cost reduction benefits that energy efficiency improvements are expected to yield .
The adoption of measures that ensure energy efficiency improvement must therefore underpin initiatives in all industrial sectors .
MEPs also sought to encourage all the efforts made to redress skills shortages in order to promote the qualifications of the workforce and interest young graduates more in industry .
Industry creates almost one third of EU GDP , industrial products account for three quarters of exports , and industry employs 57 million European citizens .
European industry was already going through a restructuring process before the crisis stated .
At present it is influenced especially by the rapid and changing development of the global economy , as well as growing competition .
A new form of globalisation is developing , leading towards a global society based on knowledge , research and innovation .
The need to mitigate climate change and maintain maximum biodiversity levels is leading industry towards production that involves ' zero ' CO2 emissions and an efficient use of resources .
European industry should continue to maintain a strategic position in key sectors , and to exploit the opportunities for sustainable recovery aimed at securing the greatest possible number of jobs for qualified workers .
The rapporteur proposes a whole raft of measures to make this possible .
I agree with and support the creation of an innovation supply chain , greater efficiency in the use of resources , the more effective use of public contracts , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , greater production of so-called clean energy and the generally broader inclusion of SMEs in the concept of European industry .
The report is of benefit to European industry , the rapporteur genuinely understands the issue , and I am therefore voting for the adoption of the report .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report because I believe that it represents the way forward for a robust , cohesive and employment-based industrial policy for the European workforce .
R & D is a key driver for innovation and trade and will remain one of the cornerstones for industrial policy in the EU .
I believe that industry plays a key role in keeping jobs in Europe and this is why we must enhance efforts to maintain a strong industrial base , become the most competitive economy in the world and ensure close-knit networks between companies in different Member States in order to achieve shared industrial priorities .
Some of my amendments included in the report concern shortening the time to market for new products , ensuring that European manufacturing strengthens the foundations of the European economy and the simplification of funding programmes for industry .
I voted in favour of this report as I support the idea that only an industrial strategy that is ambitious and efficient from an environmental standpoint can renew and stimulate Europe 's productive capacity , and gain a central role in the creation of highly skilled and well paid jobs in the EU .
At a time when Europe is experiencing an unprecedented crisis , which is due , albeit not solely , to the budget , we cannot forget the leading role of industry , which represents 37 % of Europe 's gross domestic product , and the challenges that it is facing in a globalised world in which emerging economies - and also the US - are committing to aggressive industrial policies based on massive investment in research and development in key sectors , competing with Europe , with the advantage that they do not have the same environmental , social and labour constraints .
There is no miracle solution to this .
Despite its many virtues , the Europe 2020 strategy is not a magic wand for European industry in a world where competition is global and fierce .
I therefore believe that the only route for European industry is to specialise and definitively commit to quality and the latest technology , along with rationalising costs and ensuring greater efficiency in management .
European products must be preferred , not because they are cheaper - that will never happen - but because they are better and more innovative .
Only the excellence of European industry can make this happen .
We hope that we are capable of rising to the challenge .
The importance of European industry is indisputable .
It represents three quarters of exports , a third of the EU 's gross value added and a third of employment .
Although dynamic , it has not escaped the economic crisis and needs to be at the forefront of the European policy agenda advocated by this report .
Indeed , industrial policy should be central to our concerns , as it relates to the future , by creating employment and promoting investment in production .
However , it also presents us with challenges : how can we guarantee the sustainability of resources when faced with climate change ?
The EU needs a coherent industrial policy that conveys confidence to companies and helps them to overcome the crisis .
It needs to promote modern industry that is effective , reduces energy costs and CO2 production , and is ecologically responsible , and which is competitive , engaging in research , innovation and the recycling of raw materials .
This is because we cannot forget that an industrial policy is also a social policy , and I am therefore voting in favour of this report .
However , I would like to draw attention to the need to strengthen support for small and medium-sized enterprises , which employ the majority of workers in the EU 's business sector , and to implement origin marking .
This is another report that is full of contradictions .
On the one hand , it has some positive aspects , which we appreciate , defending industry and small and medium-sized enterprises .
The presence of modern and efficient industry which creates jobs and is environmentally sustainable is an important tool for development in every country and region .
However , the current framework of EU policies , in which the most negative aspects have been worsening over the years , is markedly unfavourable to this endeavour .
Rather , it has been promoting the dismantling of important productive centres , deindustrialisation , the elimination of jobs , and growing dependence in innumerable countries and regions .
Liberalisation and international trade deregulation policies are a central tenet of this policy framework , and are contributing decisively to the current situation .
However , the report insists on advocating these policies . It endorses them , while ignoring their effects .
It also insists on the sacrosanct principle of ' free competition ' and the deepening of the internal market , both offshoots of the aforementioned framework , on public-private partnerships , and even on synergies between civilian and military investment .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left sought to eliminate these most negative aspects from the report , while keeping the aspects that are good .
Unfortunately , all the proposals were rejected by the majority in Parliament . That is why we voted against .
Unfortunately , none of our amendments , which were aimed at removing the most negative aspects from the report , were passed .
We therefore voted against in the final vote on the resolution by Parliament .
Although , as I mentioned in the debate in plenary , there are positive aspects in the report , there are many contradictory positions .
While , on the one hand , it claims to defend industry and small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , on the other hand , it contains proposals that insist on the liberalisation of free trade and free competition , on the deepening of the internal market , on public-private partnerships , and even on synergies between civilian and military investment .
We would like industries that are efficient in terms of resource use , that are less dependent on carbon , that value jobs with rights , and that guarantee equal rights for women in terms of access to jobs , to promotion , to wages , and to participation in management and administrative bodies .
We advocate other policies , particularly in terms of industrial policy , foreign trade , financial , research , science and innovation policies , which support SMEs , as well as a commitment to training and skilling workers , and to the dignity of those who work .
Mr Lange 's report on the Industrial Policy for the Globalised Era looks at extremely important issues , such as access to credit for enterprises , and , above all , for small and medium-sized enterprises .
I particularly appreciate the idea of linking the industrial world with universities in order to boost European universities , thereby harking back to the EU 2020 objectives .
I therefore voted in favour .
The Europe 2020 strategy has acknowledged the need to set out a new industrial policy in order to maintain a solid and sustainable industrial base in Europe .
Strong and prosperous industry is indeed a key factor for growth in the European Union and therefore , in the current context of globalisation and intense international competition , it is essential to create a framework that is even more favourable for its development .
This report should certainly be applauded for having provided a detailed survey of industrial policy in the light of the economic crisis , which seriously damaged the sector , and also for providing various cues for properly reviving European industry .
For this reason , I think it is important that the political aims set out in the flagship initiative tabled last 28 October by Mr Tajani are translated into tangible actions such as , by way of example , strengthening and internationalising small and medium-sized enterprises , providing easier access to credit , and the definition of a new industrial innovation model .
Other than that , Europe must take the risk of increasing productivity with new ideas by investing increasingly in research , which must represent the new engine to restore European excellence .
The global market is reacting to the need to meet the demands of the model of consumption which has already been formed in highly developed and developing societies .
However , competitiveness ' at any price ' is appearing , by which I mean competitiveness which is influenced by more than just the innovativeness of industry and changes in the model of consumption .
We can include the following in the catalogue of unfavourable phenomena which accompany competitiveness : a model of consumption , imposed by industry , which squanders energy and raw materials ; competition which is based not on the superiority of the methods used but on the financial supremacy of wealthy monopolistic corporations ; a fragmentary competitiveness which is concerned only with the final phase of processing and not gross competitiveness , by which I mean competitiveness which takes account of the preparation of raw materials and materials for production ; the taking over of raw materials and energy markets by supranational , often non-European , corporations ; increases in energy prices and , as a result , of raw materials too , by regulations which impose a system of emissions trading on the EU Member States ; unfair competition imposed mainly by large , supranational corporations , including financial corporations .
I treat this report as a good beginning to a very important discussion about the future of competitive industry in Europe , and so of Europe itself , so I voted in favour of its adoption .
I regret that this report was not tabled earlier , for example , when Brussels was denouncing the creation of industrial champions , or when Mittal was carrying out its hostile takeover of Arcelor , depriving Europe of the only bit of its iron and steel industry it had left .
For decades , the European Union has worked hard at destroying our industrial fabric and our industrial jobs , through European sectoral policies , European competition policy and European free trade policy , which all of you here have systematically praised , supported and promoted .
In the face of disaster , you are now tentatively coming round to what the Front national has been proposing for a very long time : recognising the crucial nature of an industrial base , developing strategic sectors , protecting against unfair competition and helping to penetrate external markets , guaranteeing and safeguarding raw material supplies , regulating takeover bids , making competition policy subject to strategic , socio-economic and public service requirements , providing public support to emerging or innovative sectors , and so on .
However , it is rather late in the day , and Europe , which has hung on to its ultraliberal ideological foundations , is definitely not the best level at which to make decisions and implement such policies .
I agreed with this report , because EU industry accounts for roughly a third of gross value added in the EU , with almost three quarters of European exports being made up of industrial goods , and a third of employment , providing subsistence to some 57 million people .
The recent profound economic crisis has hit European industry .
However , the crisis has also highlighted the importance of industry to the EU economy and made it evident that not enough has been done to comprehensively address its needs in the current challenging climate .
Manufacturing growth has fallen to its lowest level in the last two decades , and certain European industries are in permanent crisis as a result of unfair competition from third countries , particularly in the areas of labour relations , the environment and intellectual and industrial property protection .
As the USA , Japan and China are pursuing a strong and active industrial policy supported by leading edge products and services , there is a danger that European industry may be left behind .
An integrated and sustainable industrial policy in the EU should be based on the following key aspects : the need to establish an innovation chain linking scientific research and practical adaptation , to use resources more effectively , and to enhance clean energy production .
We must call on the EU to launch strategies providing for long-term changes and to pursue an education policy that satisfies the needs of the labour market .
It is necessary to combat the spread of the shadow economy and undeclared casual work during the crisis which distorts competition , and there are also proposals to facilitate SME participation in public procurement .
In the vote on the Lange report , I am abstaining on paragraph 31 because of the ambiguous wording of the vote , which refers to Eurobonds as well as project bonds .
However , taking it as a whole , I am voting for the report , as I have nothing against project bonds in themselves .
Project bonds serve as finance for extensive innovation , infrastructure and reindustrialisation projects .
This is not a question of instruments for the communitarisation of debts , as would be the case with Eurobonds .
In my opinion , today 's vote is an important step forward towards emerging on the other side of the economic and financial crisis that has struck Europe and its industries .
Indeed , the resolution looks at a key sector that needs support in order to allow the European Union to implement an industrial policy that needs to marry the achievement of high levels of production with a commitment to competitive and sustainable renewal .
For this reason , I applaud the reference to the EU 2020 strategy , which must function as the guiding light for the complete implementation of Europe 's priority actions through huge investment in innovation and research , which is necessary for growth and development in Europe .
Overall , I think the rapporteur , Mr Lange , has done a good job , managing to bring together the ideas and suggestions garnered from more than 500 amendments and putting together a report that I agree with and support , with the exception of the European patent .
Indeed , I think that the decision to start enhanced cooperation in a sector of strategic importance - namely , intellectual property - is not a correct decision or one that will bring positive consequences for European industry .
Industrial policy for the globalised era is becoming a great problem for the Union and for individual Member States .
The quest to minimise production costs and prices is becoming the reason for closing down industrial production in the Union , moving factories to locations outside the EU and then importing production .
This is having adverse effects : a loss of the capacity for industrial development , technical education and innovativeness , and , as a consequence , a dependence on other countries .
Entire sectors of industry are going under , such as the shipbuilding industry in Poland .
Stricter environmental requirements introduced only in the EU and toleration of dumping by Asian producers are accelerating the deindustrialisation of Europe .
What is needed is a judicious policy which will allow Europe to retain its industrial character .
The recent economic crisis has confirmed that small and medium-sized enterprises are still the driving force of economic and social development , playing a key role in promoting economic competitiveness and creating jobs .
I welcome this report and I think that the EU instruments supporting competitiveness need to be reviewed and strengthened with the aim of streamlining administrative procedures and facilitating access to funding for SMEs .
It is also absolutely essential to introduce innovative incentive mechanisms , based on achieving the targets linked to smart , sustainable growth with an integration aspect , and to promote closer cooperation with the financial institutions .
One important method for funding innovation for SMEs which is available via the European Investment Bank is the Risk Sharing Financial Facility .
However , to ensure its success , the European Commission needs to make significantly more funds available , including through innovation funds from ERDF sources , and to promote direct private investments and innovative financing mechanisms for high-risk innovative projects and those in which SMEs participate .
in writing . - I agree with this report that an EU strategy to promote strong and skilled human resources with a strong creative potential and active involvement in innovation and development , new and innovative technologies / processes / solutions which generate added value , R & D geared to the needs of sustainable development , an efficient supply chain for the production of high quality goods and services , more efficiently organised production and management systems , overall greater resources efficiency that leads to a reduced carbon footprint , cost-efficient and sustainable modes of transport , smart and efficient logistics and high quality infrastructure , a consolidated and fully operational single internal market , and a level playing field in trade relations with third countries , is the only means of increasing the sustainability and competitiveness of European industry and thus maintaining its global leadership .
The report on an industrial policy for the era of globalisation is an important document in the crisis that has affected the European economy and industrial production in particular .
However , it does not include the main issue - the real cause of the enormous economic problems .
This is the global capitalism of free competition and unbridled neoliberalism , on which the EU is unfortunately based .
The EU does not need more strategic documents literally churned out by the Commission , but there is a pressing need for a change to its underpinnings , and particularly a move towards a social and peaceful union with a regulated financial sector .
Since we are debating a ' strategic ' document as such , experience shows that it is not as difficult to produce such documents as it is to develop them subsequently in the individual areas , and to monitor and evaluate the effects of the proposed measures flexibly .
The area of intellectual property rights , for example , including industrial rights , is proof of this .
In the vote on the Lange report , I am abstaining on paragraph 31 because of the ambiguous wording of the vote , which refers to Eurobonds as well as project bonds .
However , taking it as a whole , I am voting for the report , as I have nothing against project bonds in themselves .
Project bonds serve as finance for extensive innovation , infrastructure and reindustrialisation projects .
This is not a question of instruments for the communitarisation of debts , as would be the case with Eurobonds .
European industry represents approximately a third of the EU 's gross value added , as almost three quarters of European exports relate to industrial goods , and a third of employment .
Moreover , it has a multiplying effect , which means that approximately two additional jobs are created in associated services for every job in industry .
In view of this , no one is disputing the importance of the industrial sector to the economies of the Member States , but the economic crisis has cast doubt on the importance of this sector , to the detriment of the financial and service sectors , and it is time for us to review this situation and go back to investing heavily in this sector .
European industry is heading in the direction of specialisation and commitment to the quality of its products and to the latest technology .
What is produced by our industry needs to distinguish itself by innovation and quality , never by price .
In order to remain competitive amidst worldwide economic change , the significant economic sector that is industry must not be neglected .
Sustainability as well as humane working conditions should be both encouraged and demanded , for it is the case that competition from the emerging nations such as China , India and Brazil grows ever stronger and consequently , the pressure on the European internal market grows ever greater .
Sustainability and growth are two buzzwords often heard , above all , in industrial policy , but their implementation is seriously in doubt , due , primarily , to the lack of available resources .
I am abstaining because I am of the view that the measures proposed will not be in any way sufficient to secure Europe first place in the world in the industrial sector .
I voted in favour of this resolution because EU industry has been badly hit by the current economic crisis .
In today 's world , there is huge competition in industry and , therefore , the industrial sector must remain competitive and innovative , supporting innovative ideas , and quality and technological leadership .
We must enhance facilities , transfer high technologies and facilitate their transposition among companies .
We must make every effort to ensure that existing resources ( minerals ) are used appropriately within the European Union , avoiding their export outside the EU 's borders , and that we stop oligopolies from forming in trade .
European aid should go not towards a quick fix , but towards investments in the future that are focused on the creation of new jobs , so that every citizen has work in their own country .
Particular attention must be paid to so-called problem regions with a low level of industrial development or a high level of unemployment .
Consequently , there is a need to promote the establishment of technology , industrial and science parks and company centres .
These organisations are particularly important for actively creating and developing modern technologies and ensuring economic development and modernisation , while , at the same time , creating new jobs .
Small and medium-sized enterprises must be encouraged to invest in clusters .
A favourable business environment should be created for them and the administrative burden should be reduced .
Deep-rooted bureaucracy is preventing industrial development and is damaging the competitiveness of products created .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Lange because alongside the Europe 2020 strategy , the European Union must work for vigorous development and better use of resources in order to ensure innovation .
The report on an Industrial Policy for the Globalised Era lists precisely these objectives : industrial innovation and simplification of existing legislation with the interests of citizens at its heart , and the role of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) - the beating heart of the European economy .
SMEs need to be guaranteed favourable conditions and easier access to financing .
It is important to emphasise that the means through which a dynamic and cutting-edge industrial policy will be realised is Structural Funds , which , if used correctly , will lay the foundations for growth in Europe .
EU industry accounts for roughly a third of gross value added in the EU , with almost three quarters of European exports being made up of industrial goods , and a third of employment , providing subsistence to some 57 million citizens ( plus its multiplying effect whereby each job in industry creates approximately two extra jobs in related services ) .
There are 15 key elements : building an innovation chain ; increasing resource efficiency ; clear targets for sustainable products ; using public tenders ; enhancing clean energy production ; a convincing raw materials strategy ; reshaping trade for fair coexistence and sustainable production ; outlining an obligatory sectoral industrial policy ; involving SMEs ; developing regional areas for action ; ensuring anticipation of industrial change ; restructuring ; enhancing qualifications ; enlarging workers ' participation in decision making ; and long-term policies .
EU industrial policy must be orientated towards both a sustainable , eco-efficient and globally competitive renewal of the industrial base and a sustainable transition from a mainly production-based towards a knowledge-based industry , while being definitely committed to investing in the EU and establishing strategic partnerships between companies in the Union .
Through this report , Parliament has highlighted important issues that deserve to be emphasised in terms of the growth of European industry .
I am referring to the recognition of the strategic role of small and medium-sized enterprises and to the need to make it easier to access credit with simplified funding procedures , as well as the importance of internationalisation as a key factor for competitiveness .
The link between innovation and the industrial world through continuous relations between enterprises and universities is also crucial and includes the sale of results and encouraging their use .
For this reason , I support the contents and the proposals of the report by Mr Lange .
The recent economic and financial crisis has highlighted the importance of industry to the EU economy , which means that it is important to recognise the need for an integrated approach to industrial policy , combining competitiveness , innovation and sustainability , whilst , at the same time , showing itself capable of stimulating growth , creating jobs and ensuring environmental preservation .
Indeed , European industry is facing numerous challenges , so it is vital that there be commitment to investing in new technologies and solutions , in training of staff , in the efficiency of production systems and management models , and in strengthening small and medium-sized enterprises .
I voted for the report because I am convinced that an integrated industrial policy for Europe is indispensable , especially in the face of the new challenges brought about by globalisation , and a further development of industrial policy is therefore necessary .
Industrial policy serves as a driver for sustainable employment and the prosperity of society .
A single job in industry creates at least two more jobs .
Europe 's position in industrial policy is increasingly being put in doubt as a result of increasing industrialisation in the emerging countries and the growing strength of our largest competitors , like the US and China .
We must therefore develop more ourselves ; for that to be the case , we need to make sure to renew our industrial base by taking steps in specific sectors , but also by guaranteeing , in broad terms , the competitiveness of Europe on a global level and the sustainable growth of European industry .
The report also calls for an integrated industrial policy to serve as the foundation for environmental , competition and trade policy , in order to improve resource efficiency .
In addition , the report highlights the importance of a constructive partnership with workers and trade union organisations .
The need to improve coordination between the EU and the Member States is also emphasised in the report .
I consider these measures to be absolutely necessary .
This report makes provision for the further development of industrial policy to be approached with the necessary ambition and prudence .
In the vote on the Lange report , I am abstaining on paragraph 31 because of the ambiguous wording , which refers to Eurobonds as well as project bonds .
However , taking it as a whole , I am voting for the report , as I have nothing against project bonds in themselves .
Project bonds serve as finance for extensive innovation , infrastructure and reindustrialisation projects .
This is not a question of instruments for the communitarisation of debts , as would be the case with Eurobonds .
In today 's plenary session , we voted on Mr Lange 's report , entitled Industrial Policy for the Globalised Era .
European industry accounts for roughly a third of gross value added in the EU , with almost three quarters of European exports being made up of industrial goods , and a third of employment , providing subsistence to some 57 million people .
If its multiplying effect is accounted for , whereby each job in industry creates approximately two extra jobs in related services , its impact on employment is even more substantial .
Furthermore , EU industrial policy should be oriented both towards a sustainable , eco-efficient and globally competitive renewal of the industrial base and towards a sustainable transition from a mainly productive towards a knowledge-based industry .
The integration of all EU policies so as to combine all aspects that have an impact on industry is crucial .
The own-initiative report on industrial policy by Mr Lange restates the position expressed in the Communication by the Commissioner for Industry , Mr Tajani , with some new ideas aimed at the important renewal of the industrial sector following the economic crisis .
in writing . - Parliament has today supported a set of actions to promote the competitiveness of European industry .
I welcome the recognition that , to face the crisis and globalisation challenges , energy and resource efficiency must be the basis for European industrial renewal .
Sustainability has to be recognised as a central aspect of the so-called ' competitiveness proofing ' and ' fitness checks ' to be implemented by the Commission as part of its better regulation initiatives .
The report rightfully calls for closed-loop industrial systems , greater resource productivity , durability and re-use , recycling and remanufacturing .
The report also calls for instruments to foster the development and growth of eco-innovative SMEs , as well as the development of eco-industrial parks .
It is important to bring the EU 's industrial policy in line with its climate and energy policy objectives .
The Greens expect the Commission to deliver on that challenge in its upcoming strategic initiatives , such as the resource efficiency strategy , the raw materials strategy and the Small Business Act .
At last , the European Union has recognised the fundamental role of industry , calling for simplification of access to credit and a reduction in red tape .
In recent years , we have witnessed the adoption of measures which cause heavy burdens for European industry and which favour the unfair competition of products imported from third countries .
I would note the costs resulting from combating climate change and the measures aimed at reducing or eliminating duties .
The report highlights the importance of research as an instrument to fend off competition and notes the professional training of workers and the information that must be given to consumers .
Let us not forget , however , that aside from all the fine words , the EU is at risk of a rupture between Member States , which results in a minimal desire to create an industrial future together .
I am referring to what has happened with the European patent , which has seen the Union exclude Italy and Spain , and the use of enhanced cooperation amongst other Member States .
I voted in favour of this report since the principles it brings up are worthy of support .
Industry in Europe is facing not only the effects of the economic crisis , but also the new challenges of the globalised era .
Businesses must react appropriately to ever faster changes in economic trends .
The economies of rising countries are altering the balance of forces in international markets .
With the development of a knowledge-based society , the role of scientific research and innovation is also being enhanced , these leading to economic growth and competitiveness .
The problems which the EU economy is having to face up to include demographic change and the downturn in productivity .
The main objectives for EU industry are a growth in competitiveness and innovativeness .
To achieve them , it is necessary to take a number of measures at the same time .
It is essential to continue work on the single market and harmonisation of customs and tax legislation .
The bureaucratic burden on businesses should be reduced and the legal framework simplified .
Cooperation between businesses should be strengthened through business clusters , networks and centres of excellence , and efforts should be made to promote synergies between universities and business .
It may also prove helpful to use alternative mechanisms such as public-private partnerships that share the risks between private and public investors , and to use leverage and the knock-on effect .
It will be crucial to support small and medium-sized enterprises , which form the basis of European industry , by financial assistance in the area of innovation and technology transfer and by involving innovative and sustainable criteria in tenders for public procurement .
It should not be forgotten to ensure a rise in spending on research based on cooperation between the public and private sector .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which highlights ways in which the EU 's industrial base may be strengthened .
Industry provides roughly a third of employment in the EU , which is why it is so vital that we ensure its ongoing viability .
European industry and its multiplier effect account for approximately a third of the EU 's gross value added , and it provides a livelihood for 57 million people .
It is necessary to create an industrial policy which fosters coordination between the Member States and their competitive potential , as expressed in the Europe 2020 strategy .
The relevance of this report at a time of economic recession shows that , despite its importance , this sector is relegated to the background .
This evidence requires a closer look at the challenges which European industry will have to face , particularly the restructuring and reorientation of its makeup , based on a global knowledge society through innovation and research , in order to address the competitiveness of emerging economies .
Aside from this , new dynamics , climate change , demographic shifts and the process of urbanisation / depopulation are developing .
Of the 15 points tabled by the rapporteur , I would like to highlight the measures that have an effect on small and medium-sized businesses ( SMEs ) , which are the real driving force of the EU growth .
The simplification of European procedures for obtaining funding , more and better information given to the SMEs about operational programmes , the creation of innovation clusters and networks , as well as greater support on the part of the European Central Bank , are key initiatives for the success of European industrial policy .
In the vote on the Lange report , I am abstaining on paragraph 31 because of the ambiguous wording of the vote , which refers to Eurobonds as well as project bonds .
However , taking it as a whole , I am voting for the report , as I have nothing against project bonds in themselves .
Project bonds serve as finance for extensive innovation , infrastructure and reindustrialisation projects .
This is not a question of instruments for the communitarisation of debts , as would be the case with Eurobonds .
in writing . - I supported this report as it sets out the need for a coherent policy on the future of industry across the EU .
With over 60 million jobs in the EU generated by industrial manufacturing , a robust policy will help the EU overcome some of the challenges faced by manufacturers .
Making up part of the EU 's 2020 strategy , this report outlines 15 ' cornerstones ' of a strong policy which will ensure that the EU can keep up with competitors from the US , China and Japan , who invest heavily in research and development into cutting-edge technology , and countries that are able to cut costs through cheap labour and have less stringent intellectual property rules .
Some of the most useful recommendations in the report include the need for an innovation chain which links industry-related research to innovation and application of the technology , and an increased emphasis on resource efficiency and sustainability which ties in with the aims of the Europe 2020 strategy .
I decided to vote in favour of the own-initiative report by Mr Lange since it represents Parliament 's contribution to the debate on an issue of utmost importance for the business world : European industrial policy .
The report has a number of positive aspects , such as the broad appeal to European enterprises to meet environmental standards , but only on a voluntary basis and without rigid impositions .
The central role of industry - and not just industrial policy - for the growth of the European Union is also correctly reiterated .
Now , taking our lead from the report that has been voted on today , I think it is important that all the institutions and interested parties strive to realise the objectives defined therein , translating them into real action .
Particularly important are : the adoption of measures for the protection of intellectual property ; the affirmation of an industrial innovation model that aims for excellence ; the modernisation of industries , particularly with regard to environmental protection and the careful use of energy resources ; and support for the creation of circumstances that assist in the internationalisation of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
The sitting is suspended at 13 : 45 and shall resume at 15 : 00 .

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
EU approach towards Iran ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Belder , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the EU 's approach towards Iran ( A7-0441 / 2011 ) .
Mr President , I would like to start by expressing my gratitude to the shadow rapporteurs , with whom I enjoyed sound collaboration in the course of producing this report .
The result is something that we can be proud of .
A report was adopted in a vote of the Committee on Foreign Affairs by an overwhelming majority of 62 in favour and just 3 against .
It is also very important , in this key portfolio , that we speak with one voice , not only in Parliament , but also in the European Institutions as a whole .
I am delighted that , through this resolution , we are expressing our support and solidarity with the millions of demonstrators who have taken to the streets since the disputed presidential elections of 2009 .
The opposition forces in Iran are in dire need of that support and solidarity now that they are seeing how regimes are falling and presidents resigning elsewhere in the Middle East .
The Green movement must feel our support , as the opposition is once again looking for options for how to organise legitimate protests against the Iranian authorities at the risk of their own lives .
The fact that that risk is real is proven not only by the arrest of the opposition leaders , Mr Mousavi and Mr Karoubi , but also by the wild and uncontrolled calls from a significant proportion of the Majlis , the Iranian Parliament , to have them put to death .
In our resolution , the European Parliament calls on the Iranian authorities to fully and unconditionally cooperate with the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) , based in Vienna .
It is precisely Tehran 's uncooperative stance that lends Iran 's nuclear programme its suspicious air .
The concerns of the whole international community are more than justified .
That being the case , in my view , it is incomprehensible to send a country like this the message that it has a right to enrich uranium .
However true it may be , it is not the signal that the European Parliament should be giving at this crucial point in time .
I therefore ask my fellow Members to support my proposals to remove these passages from our resolution .
The resolution also goes into Iran 's role in the region .
Certainly , in the wake of the documents leaked via WikiLeaks on the region 's perception of Iran , Parliament will serve Tehran well by sending it a clear message that it must bring an immediate end to exercising its destabilising influence .
I therefore ask you all to support the amendments I have tabled on the role of Iran in its neighbour Iraq and on the removal of paragraph 53 from the resolution .
In my opinion , the European Parliament already gives sufficient support to the idea that the Union and Iran should have a stable Afghanistan as a common goal in paragraph 55 .
As I reach the end of my speech , Mr President , I would like to make one final remark .
I am not thin-skinned , and it is precisely for that reason that I want to comment on Iran and its official representatives in Brussels and the national capitals .
I have had the opportunity to take a look at correspondence from Iran to my fellow Members from various sources .
The tone and the content of the correspondence must be called remarkable , to say the least .
This report - I referred to this earlier - was adopted by the Committee on Foreign Affairs on which I serve by an overwhelming majority .
For that reason , this resolution must not be seen as a private project of mine , but as a common stance of the European Parliament as a whole .
It is therefore not the case that my background as chair of this Parliament 's first delegation determined the critical tone of this resolution .
On the contrary , in that respect , Iran must be called to account for its own behaviour .
The entire European Parliament - and I am thankful for this - accepts neither President Ahmadinejad 's anti-Semitic rhetoric nor the denial of the holocaust , although I have to say , unfortunately , that that anti-Semitism is not restricted to the inner circle of the regime .

Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , this is an opportunity to debate the European Union 's approach to Iran , which has been the subject of an own-initiative report with Mr Belder as rapporteur .
Mr Belder 's report touches on a broad range of issues and reflects the views of many different interests , but I will concentrate on two issues , the nuclear programme and the human rights situation in Iran , both of which the report deals with extensively .
As honourable Members know , Iran 's nuclear programme remains a serious concern for the European Union and for the international community as a whole .
Both the UN Security Council and the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna have adopted a series of resolutions requiring Iran to take the steps necessary to build confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its programme .
Regrettably , the last IAEA report , issued on 25 February , confirmed Iran 's failure to comply with its international obligations .
For the European Union , we remain determined to work towards a diplomatic solution on the basis of our double-track approach , combining pressure with dialogue .
The objective remains to engage Iran in a phased approach of confidence building , leading to meaningful negotiations on the nuclear programme .
At the second meeting I led on behalf of the E3 + 3 - China , France , Germany , Russia , the United Kingdom and the United States - in Istanbul , I presented to Iran our proposals for concrete confidence-building measures , including an updated fuel supply arrangement for the Tehran Research Reactor , as well as other transparency measures .
Honourable Members will know that these proposals would bring immediate benefit for both sides and could pave the way for a process to address concerns and gradually build mutual confidence .
And building confidence is what our efforts are all about .
Iran 's response was disappointing .
It was not ready to discuss our proposals unless we first recognised Iran 's ' right to enrich uranium ' .
It spoke of the removal of all sanctions .
I understand Iran 's wish to see sanctions removed .
We all want to see our talks come to a successful conclusion which - in accordance with the Security Council resolutions - would mean the sanctions would go .
The removal of sanctions is something which would accompany the gradual re-establishment of confidence .
That was the path we were trying to go down .
As for the ' right to enrich ' , the Non-Proliferation Treaty is careful to balance rights and obligations .
I see no value in re-writing or re-interpreting it in any selective way .
The first step is for Iran to put itself into full compliance with its obligations .
We will continue our efforts engaging Iran but , at the same time , our efforts to increase the pressure , first of all , through a strengthening of the implementation of existing sanctions .
I have since met with the new Foreign Minister of Iran , Dr Salehi , in Geneva , a meeting which gave me the chance to explain to him the efforts we have put into the Iran talks and our strong desire for a response , for the security of all of us .
I have also written to Dr Jalili , who led the talks on behalf of Iran , to restate our offer and to invite him to respond .
Dr Salehi told me they were considering their response and I urged them to be positive .
Like this Parliament , I share the views of so many on the issue of human rights in Iran .
The continued and systematic oppression , arrests and harassment of lawyers , journalists and others who are exercising their rights is totally unacceptable .
We have seen very long prison sentences and restrictions on the right to work and travel for up to 20 years for some of the people convicted .
When Iranian people wished to demonstrate peacefully on 14 February in support of the situation in Egypt and Tunisia , the demonstrations were forbidden .

Moreover , as Mr Belder has said , Mr Mousavi and Mr Karoubi , the two opposition leaders who had expressed their support for these demonstrations , were held under house arrest and later apparently detained .
I have seen the statement by Socialists and Democrats of the Parliament made on 1 March , and I fully support that .
I remain very concerned about the treatment of Mr Karoubi and Mr Mousavi and I issued a statement on 4 March to that effect .
Despite our efforts to secure verifiable information , it remains unclear whether they are under house arrest or otherwise imprisoned .
I urge the authorities of Iran simply to grant them the freedom of movement to which they are entitled .
The report also underlines the seriousness of the increase in executions in Iran .
The information we have suggests there may have been around 100 executions since the beginning of this year .
In line with our longstanding and firm position on the abolition of the death penalty , I have called for a halt to all pending death penalty cases .
I want the death penalty abolished , whatever the method .
Stoning and public hangings are barbaric .
It is important to note that international efforts can and do make a difference .
I saw that in the case of Ms Ashtiani .
Her execution has - at least temporarily - been stayed , but as the report points out , Zahra Bahrami , a Dutch-Iranian national , was executed in Iran on 29 January with no prior notice .
Both the execution and the process leading up to it were shocking .
I have made this clear publicly , expressing my dismay over the lack of transparency in the case and that the Dutch authorities were refused consular access .
Let me finish my intervention by mentioning that my services , together with Member States , are discussing how we can be more effective on human rights issues in Iran , using public and private messages , working bilaterally and through multilateral organisations , working with Member States and with international parties , all with a single purpose : to ensure that the Iranian people , like others , have their basic rights respected .
I look forward to this debate .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , I should first like to thank our rapporteur , Mr Belder , for his comprehensive report .
As soon as it is now put to a vote , it will be passed by a large majority here in this plenary .
It is really important that the regime in Tehran must not succeed in breaking a broad common front even in this Chamber .
As regards the nuclear ambitions of the leadership , the international community stands together at the United Nations .
No one in the world wants the Iranian bomb .
We all want complete and transparent collaboration with the International Atomic Energy Agency .
We have made wide-ranging offers .
Unfortunately , they have not met with a positive response .
In this House , we are not quite all of one mind as to how far we should enforce international demands with sanctions .
I hope , however , that in our overall view of the situation , we are coming to a common way to proceed .
The second aspect that worries us is Iran 's role in the region .
Iran 's attitude to Israel remains intolerable and unacceptable .
Its support for organisations that destabilise the region cannot be tolerated .
Large parts of the region are in fear of Iran 's policy .
The internal political situation is dramatic where human rights and democracy are concerned .
It is for that reason that I harbour the wish that this great people of culture will rid itself of this leadership sooner rather than later .
I am very confident that we shall not see a second Iran in Egypt , but rather a second Egypt in Iran .
Then we should see an end to the exploitation of religion for very secular aims .
Then one hopes that there would be an end to the death penalty in general and , in particular , for minors and members of minorities .
Then there would be an end to the persecution of dissidents , not only of Mr Karoubi and Mr Mousavi , and then one hopes there would be press freedom and a path to free elections for a better Iran .
On the way there , we must put our European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights to use among other things , so as to allow support to be given to active players in civil society .
Targeted sanctions against representatives of the regime must also be extended .
In the light of the events in North Africa , let us also give Iranians the courage for a better future .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , I am very pleased that the approach of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy is the dual approach of discussing human rights and the nuclear issue on a practically equal footing , because Iran is a contradictory example to the world and to the countries surrounding it which , immersed in democratic reform processes and guided by the legitimate democratic aspirations of their peoples , see in Iran exactly what they do not want for themselves , and that is what we are denouncing in the report that will possibly be adopted tomorrow .
First of all , it is a technocratic regime that subjugates its people and violates human rights , by applying the death penalty - and I should like to mention the case of Zahra Bahrami in particular - by disempowering women , by persecuting homosexuals and by suppressing dissidence .
It is also a contradictory example as regards political freedoms .
The repression of demonstrators , which is going on right now and has been going on since 2009 , is absolutely unacceptable , just as the detention of the leaders of the democratic opposition movement is unacceptable .
On behalf of my group , I am demanding the immediate freeing of the opposition leaders , Mr Mousavi and Mr Karoubi , and their wives , as well as of all the people under arrest for peacefully exercising their right to freedom of expression , freedom of association and freedom of assembly .
Iran is also a contradictory example in terms of negotiations with the international community on the nuclear issue .
A responsible attitude by Iran in this area , as well as in that of human rights , a different focus in the region as regards Hamas and Hezbollah , and different rhetoric in relation to Israel , would make Iran an important partner and player in the region 's stabilisation , which is another of the things we are calling for in this report .
Baroness Ashton , it is important to open a European Union delegation in Tehran , not only so that we can have a political dialogue with the Iranian regime , but also with a view to civil society .
Finally , I should like to thank Mr Belder for the work he has done with the shadow rapporteurs so that we were able to balance this report and make it acceptable to the entire European Parliament .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , is Ahmadinejad better than Gaddafi ?
While the international community is rightly focused on Libya and seeks ways to end the violence Gaddafi and his collaborators inflict on citizens , let us not allow Iran to be snowed under in our political agendas .
A massacre is also happening in Iran , but it happens in slow motion .
One execution every eight hours since the start of this year , and systematic repression , torture , rape and censorship have been rampant during the Islamic Republic , and , in particular , since the elections in 2009 .
Ahmadinejad is no better than Gaddafi and we need to invoke similarly harsh measures to protect human rights in Iran .
Some might argue that sanctions are in place , but these only focus on the nuclear issue without yielding the desired results .
In fact , this risks becoming a zero sum game vis-à-vis human rights as impunity meanwhile continues .
Madam Vice-President / High Representative , in this report , the European Parliament gives you the mandate to impose sanctions on individuals responsible for the grave human rights abuses that we see , and we have made this recommendation before .
A list of 80 names has been leaked and attributed to your office .
I want to ask whether this is a sign of your inclination to move ahead with this important measure .
We also need to provide technologies for citizens to communicate freely and to access information , and the EU needs to be a safe haven for free thinkers .
Vice-President / High Representative , let the EU lead on efforts to hold accountable individuals who rape women before execution so that there is absolutely no chance they may end up in heaven as virgins , men who shoot dead unarmed youths from rooftops while they walk in the streets , and the judges who convict human rights lawyers for defending juveniles and women .
Let us hold accountable a system that allows de facto imprisonment of opposition leaders .
When Libya is discussed on Friday , please use the momentum to introduce similar measures against those in power in Iran so that justice can be done to the Iranian citizens who , in 2009 , started the massive youth uprisings that now inspire a generation in the Middle East and in North Africa .
Mr President , the report before us , on which all groups have worked intensively together , represents a very good basis on which the EU can construct its Iran policy .
The various issues on which we disagree with the Iranian Government are dealt with as a single overall challenge : the nuclear programme and Iran 's relations with its neighbours , the catastrophic human rights situation in the country and the difficult economic situation .
Unemployment has risen to enormous proportions ; one in four Iranians is living below the poverty line .
Baroness Ashton , you must now draw some conclusions from the report .
We Europeans must not stand by while critics of the regime , trade unionists , women 's rights workers and those of different faiths are detained , tortured and murdered .
We must try , plainly harder than before , to put pressure on those responsible for human rights violations , through targeted sanctions , such as restricting entry or freezing their accounts .
The European External Action Service must equally examine which economic sanctions actually hit the target and which of them merely impact upon the Iranian people .
A policy of complete isolation will just lead us up a dead end and also fails to find favour with many Iranians .
Parliament has , with this report , made it unmistakeably clear that democratic change cannot be brought about by external military means .
We must stick to a double-track strategy going forward , under which we try to engage in dialogue while unambiguously insisting on respect for universal rights and compliance with international treaties .
It is in this context that we must understand the demand to open an EU delegation in Tehran now that the European External Action Service has taken over responsibility from the rotating Presidency of the EU for representing the EU in third countries .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , High Representative , Iran to me represents the most serious threat to global security .
President Ahmadinejad is determined to arm his country with nuclear weapons and the prospect of a nuclear-armed Iran is too terrifying to contemplate , posing an existential threat to Israel .
This is why we must consider all options , including military ones , to prevent it .
Iran has deceived and obstructed the international community time and time again .
Sadly , the European Union has , at times , allowed itself to be manipulated by Ahmadinejad .
While the Council regularly denounces the barbaric theocratic regime in Tehran , individual Member States have sometimes taken a less robust approach .
Indeed , it is only a few months ago that EU leaders agreed to proscribe export credit guarantees to Iran .
Until then , these guarantees represented a vital lifeline of an economic nature to the regime which craves any vestige of legitimacy , not least because of Ahmadinejad 's contempt for human rights , as evidenced by the regular execution of homosexuals , political dissenters and minors .
( The President asked the speaker to speak more slowly so as to permit interpretation )
Mr President , the Belder report has been considerably improved by the amendments , and my group can agree with a great number of statements .
Unfortunately , for all that they are correct , it primarily contains descriptions of the situation , but the underlying philosophy of a realistic future perspective has not been developed .
The human rights situation in Iran is intolerable .
However , sanctions will not bring about a lasting improvement in this situation .
In order to promote democratisation in Iran , we must do everything we can to make the international situation less tense .
Worsening international relations brings with it the danger that further anti-democratic measures will be taken inside Iran , which will result in weakening the opposition .
A policy of detente would also have to put an end to every form of threatening behaviour .
Negotiations and international relations can only be successful if diplomatic recognition of all partners is a given .
Only in this way can meaningful compromises in the dispute on the nuclear programme be achieved .
I have set out our ideas for a carefully targeted Iran strategy in an alternative motion for a resolution , and on the grounds that I have described , I shall call for the Belder report to be rejected .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Belder on his excellent work .
Whilst the world is watching the revolt in the Arab world , Iran continues to repress dissidents .

The arrest of the two leaders of the opposition , Mr Mousavi and Mr Karoubi , is the most obvious proof of this .
The West took action against Mr Gaddafi , but it continues to dither over Iran , perhaps because Mr Gaddafi has already fallen whilst Mr Ahmadinejad so far has not .

The largest rebellion since the post-electoral revolts of 2009 is currently under way in Iran .
What are we waiting for before we freeze all the assets held by Mr Ahmadinejad , the companies controlled by the revolutionary guard and all supporters of the regime who are involved in this repression ?
What are we waiting for in order to impose travel restrictions on these figures of the regime ?
( DE ) Mr President , as is well known , it remains open to doubt whether the Iranian nuclear programme is really intended for peaceful purposes .
For this reason , Iran 's cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency is particularly important .
It is crucial in order to confirm to the international community that Iran is applying nuclear energy for civil purposes .
With regard to Middle East policy , it is up to Mr Ahmadinejad finally to make it clear that Iran poses no threat to Israel and also that it recognises Israel 's right to exist within the borders recognised by international law .
Disarmament and the creation of a nuclear-free zone should , in my opinion , be an important goal of the EU 's Middle East policy , in order to guarantee peace and security in this region .
Iran is naturally an important player in the Middle East .
With this in mind , I am pleased to gather from Mr Belder 's most comprehensive report that there is constructive cooperation with the EU on the question of Afghanistan in order to increase security and stability in this region .
It is only in this way that we can remove the breeding ground from radical Islam or Islamism , which is rearing its ugly head increasingly often in Europe too .
( NL ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , two years ago , in other words , before the demonstrations in Tunisia , Egypt and Libya , the people of Tehran took to the streets .
They did so at the risk of their own lives .
They took to the streets because they wanted greater democracy .
They also wanted to protest against the intolerance and repression of a flawed regime .
I am therefore pleased that the emphasis in this report is on human rights and I congratulate Mr Belder for that .
The lesson that we need to learn is that we have to do everything in our power to assist the opposition and all those who have demonstrated .
We need to extend a helping hand to them against the regime .
Why do we have to do so ?
We have to do so because the regime has the money and the oil and those who are being oppressed will only be able to achieve anything if we also make an effort .
I think it is a very good thing that we are very clear about this point in paragraph 32 of your report , Mr Belder .
Mr President , when I see the repression , I would also like to hear from you what we are doing when it comes to the opposition leader , Mr Mousavi .
Are we still paying attention to the fate of Mr Karoubi ?
What specific options do we , as the European Union , have in order to provide more support ?
Proof of the dynamism of Iranian society can also be seen in the one million signatures campaign , a campaign led by women who have been collecting one million signatures for the cause of opposing discriminatory legislation .
I want to pay sincere tribute to these brave women .
I would like Baroness Ashton to tell me where she can offer consular assistance , as this is not always offered .
( SV ) Mr President , violations of human rights in Iran are extensive and are also thought to be on the increase .
There has been a definite deterioration in the situation in most areas , particularly when it comes to freedom of expression .
There are threats to carry out a number of death penalties to which attention has been called ; intellectuals , students and dissidents are persecuted ; people are tortured ; and women and ethnic and religious minorities continue to be discriminated against .
The list can go on .
This is something that was already disturbingly evident at the time of the election in 2009 and that continues to be so .
All of us who , on various occasions , meet official representatives of Iran , are also met with more severity and implacability .
In the light of this , I would like to say that I think the priorities that Baroness Ashton has outlined - which is to say human rights , strong existing sanctions and the nuclear programme - are the right ones and should clearly be our main concern .
However , the sternness of the EU 's reactions towards Iran must be made stronger and clearer .
We need to be more implacable , too , when it comes to crimes against humanity .
There comes a time when polite conversation is actually a form of deceit , and I believe that we are at that point now in relation to Iran .
( SV ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Belder for a very good report .
I am a member of the delegation to Iran and I receive letters from the Iranian regime in which they address me in God 's name , which I find extremely unpleasant .
On this pretext , they are succeeding in creating what , on the basis of Mr Belder 's report , can be clearly described as hell on earth .
It is incredible and hard to believe .
I have a little idea and a dream that I would like to present to Baroness Ashton in this context .
When you build a big new building for the External Action Service , would you possibly have room for a little office for a small group of people who could gather information on who the torturers , executioners and judges are in these grotesque societies that surround us , so that they know that we are monitoring their behaviour closely ?
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , I would like to congratulate Mr Belder for an excellent report .
I have the impression that the European Union has a double standard , and that we very severely criticise regimes just as they begin to crumble and fall .
The example of Libya is a case in point .
Meanwhile , we remain silent , guided too often by a variety of reasons - which include the economic interests of certain countries - when it comes to those regimes which are doing well .
The Iranian regime is doing well , and the report 's criticism of it is completely justified .
What has been going on for years in Iran is something which is absolutely unacceptable .
The European Parliament must speak about this .
We must say what we think about the death penalty , about torture and about the fact that the hopes which - let us remember - were associated with the fall of Shah Reza Shah Pahlavi have completely failed .
On the contrary - things are even worse .
( NL ) Mr President , I would like to start by offering my compliments to Mr Belder on his outstanding report .
Mr Belder has written a very pointed report that takes a stone-hard line on Iran .
It is the right line to take .
The dictator , Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , just carries on killing his own citizens , while political opponents are tortured .
Rumour has it that the Dutch citizen , Zahra Bahrami , was also tortured and I have asked for this to be looked into .
I would like to ask the left-wing socialists and the appalling Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance in this House not to water down this report with all sorts of different amendments .
The criminal Ahmadinejad regime continues to threaten Israel and is attempting to exert its influence in Egypt .
Ideally , Iran would like to see the advent of an Islamic republic including political ayatollahs , Sharia law , the stoning of women and the hanging of homosexuals .
Yes , ladies and gentlemen , for many Muslims , that is what pure Islam stands for .
Iranian warships have even sailed through the Suez canal , a downright provocative gesture to the West and to Israel .
I will make that my last point .
( LT ) Mr President , the European Union 's relations with Iran are more than a little ambivalent .
We are allowing ourselves to be manipulated .
We are talking about democracy , the democracy clause , but we detect a distinct smell of oil and gas .
If we do not have the goal of democracy in our hearts , let it be trampled on along with human rights .
A few years ago , I was astonished by public information on the powerful construction machinery that European Union companies are providing Tehran with .
This included deep mining equipment to build underground plants , where a nuclear weapon is most probably being produced .
Tehran already has rockets able to reach almost the whole of Europe , so why not help them produce just what we always wanted for Christmas .
European deep excavation machinery is digging a hole both for the Iranian nation , if Israel fails to hold its nerve faced with the spectre of a second exodus , and also for Europe and the whole world .
It does not seem as if Europe is ready for this scale of challenge , above all , nuclear Iran 's hegemony in the Near East and Northern Africa .
Is anyone analysing current events in this respect ?
Other notable equipment includes powerful German and Dutch construction cranes , which Tehran is using for the public execution of so-called criminals and opponents of the regime .
It is said that hanging using these European cranes is particularly cruel and the agony lasts for a long period .
Today , the executions of sinners continue , as does the supply of equipment from Europe .
Hopefully , the Iranian authorities will not order Mistral aircraft carriers in Saint-Nazaire , but will be able to acquire them a little later in Russia , built under a French licence .
There will definitely be a need for the Mistrals , so that the countries of the Persian Gulf feel the gun at their heads .
The feelings of small countries around the Baltic and Black Seas are of little concern to anyone , but the Persian Gulf is close to Europe 's belly .
I suggest we consider this .
( SL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the tragedy of Iran is great .
Thirty years after the revolution against the Shah 's dictatorship , a simple question arises : can Iran be considered a civilised country at all ?
The barbarity of the Iranian regime is reflected in its many diverse forms of oppression and in its anachronisms .
Women , dissidents , anyone who thinks differently , young people , people of same-sex orientation and so on and so on are being oppressed .
What can we do about this ?
On the one hand , the European Union needs a policy towards Iran and it needs to impose sanctions that will hurt the main representatives of the regime .
Let us prevent them from travelling and doing business , and that includes the Revolutionary Guard .
On the other hand , let us help young people and those fighting for human rights and democratic change .
Ensuring free access to information , freedom of the press , television , radio and especially the Internet is key .
Facebook , Twitter and YouTube are the strongest weapons for those who are humiliated and outraged , the numbers of whom in Iran are very large .
We have a responsibility to protect them .
( RO ) Mr President , in 2005 , this regime came to power with a message promoting nationalism and justice .
Even now , we have failed to turn Iran into a democratic regime .
All that we have managed is to witness the development of the only country which promotes a despotic regime on a large scale , worthy of the dark Middle Ages .
Fellow Members , I believe that Iran is becoming one of the burning issues in our foreign policy because we risk ignoring the huge influence it has in North Africa through funding terrorist-type movements , by which I mean Hamas and Hezbollah .
Unless the European Union carries out a clear assessment of Iran 's influence in this region , we are at risk of this lack of democracy in Iran becoming established .
More than that , we face within Europe a serious weakness and the risk of a threat to our security .
I believe that it is time for solutions to stop following the traditional principle encouraged by Talleyrand , which is to dance and then come to a clear , firm decision .
( NL ) Mr President , Mr Belder 's report is a very good one , as it is both realistic and pragmatic .
As far as I am concerned , the report could still have been much stronger in its criticism of the reprehensible Ahmadinejad regime .
This villain denies the holocaust and would like nothing better than to drive the state of Israel into the sea with no time to lose .
Christians literally have no life under Ahmadinejad .
What is more , he oppresses his own people in an appalling way .
Never have so many people been executed as over the last year .
The EU must therefore continue to support the forces of opposition , which focus on democracy and human rights .
The Ahmadinejad regime cannot be tackled hard enough .
I am talking about sanctions and targeted actions against the Iranian nuclear programme , as happened with the Stuxnet virus .
I look forward to the day that this regime falls .
Today would not be soon enough !
Mr President , human rights defenders in Iran are subject to death threats , acts of harassment , arbitrary arrest , judicial harassment , stigmatisation , violent attacks , ill treatment , torture and killings .
Women human rights defenders are particularly at risk in Iran .
Freedoms of expression , association and assembly are severely restricted in Iran and often come with severe penalties .
The death penalty is also arbitrarily used , especially on minors .
However , what I find considerably disturbing is how the European Union actually deals with Iran .
Once again , our High Representative seems to talk a lot but do very little .
I have often , and I repeat it again today , invited her to the Subcommittee on Human Rights to actually be questioned on her activities in the area of human rights .
She has told us today how important human rights are to her , but when has she ever come to the Human Rights Subcommittee ?
She is willing to send her underlings , but she is not willing to have a democratic cross-examination by this House .
She will listen to our speeches , come up with some rambling , pre-prepared statement and then go home .
That is not democracy , Ms Ashton .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , I do not want to take up too much time .
I just want to ask Ms Sinclaire this : when the High Representative comes to a special plenary sitting of the whole Parliament to discuss the annual human rights report and is cross-questioned by MEPs from across the whole Parliament , does she not think that this is a more satisfactory way for us to hold the High Representative to account on the human rights record than asking her to attend the subcommittee of the Parliament , even one that I dearly cherish ?
Mr President , with respect to my colleague , it is actually not satisfactory because as he knows - and if he spent as much time in the Human Rights Subcommittee as I do , he would - it is in committees that we actually get a chance to have more than one say and more than one minute , and then we actually get a direct response .
I have made many comments on the issues of human rights and I have yet to have one reply from Baroness Ashton - one reply - so how is that ?
I repeat that this is about democracy .
I represent five million people .
I have been elected here .
Baroness Ashton has not received a vote in her life .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , I would like to congratulate Mr Belder for an excellent report .
It is to be welcomed , too , that the report was amended during the negotiations .
I think that with these amendments it has now been given the appropriate wording .
The entire international community , which attaches great importance to democracy and human rights , is alarmed by what has been going on over many years in Iran , and we are trying to decide what measures should be taken .
They must , of course , come from within Iran .
Hence , it is obvious that the European Union supports the Iranian opposition .
I think there are three issues which we should now raise and which may influence policy in Iran .
The first matter concerns our policy of cooperation with Turkey in relation to Iran .
Turkey is an important partner for the European Union .
It is a country ruled by a party for which the Islamic tradition is important , but it is also ruled in a way which is much closer to European standards .
The second matter is cooperation with Russia .
We should put pressure on Russia to work still more closely with the European Union and the United States , so that cooperation with Iran does not look as it does today .
Thirdly , the last matter , and one which is very important , is that of the anti-missile shield .
The European Union should work with NATO and the United States to ensure that the shield is built in Europe .
Mr President , the initial text of this report was criticised for its aggressive language , focusing mostly on Iran 's nuclear programme , neglecting the human rights concern and lacking a positive perspective for future cooperation .
The numerous amendments presented by my group and by others correct these flaws , and the current text is a balanced one .
It distinguishes the two main dossiers : human rights abuses by the current government and the Iranian nuclear programme .
The two dossiers are not the same thing , and it is irresponsible to make threats to Iran of war or international intervention , as I have heard suggested in this Parliament today .
If you want to strengthen Ahmadinejad , just continue to do so , because all Iranians , regardless of their political positions , will take a stand against any foreign intervention .
The current policy that the European Council and also the High Representative are taking is the right one , because it is based on a careful appreciation of the situation on the ground .
Mr President , first of all , I congratulate Mr Belder on his excellent report .
Iran has the potential influence and wealth to be either a force for good or a force for evil in the greater Middle East .
Regrettably , its regime has become a force for evil masquerading in religious garb .
Iran 's nuclear weapon programme is cause for enormous regional and international concern .
Iran has become a source of extremist doctrine , it carries out and sponsors acts of international terrorism , has a dangerous influence on populations of young Shias in the Gulf States , in Iraq and in Lebanon and does not hesitate to ally with Sunni terrorist groups in Gaza and beyond .
It has helped train and arm terrorists that have attacked NATO forces in Afghanistan and it is a human rights abuser .
It would be tragically ironic if a tyranny such as Iran became the main beneficiary of the desire for greater freedom that we have seen so dramatically expressed across the Arab world in recent weeks and in a most sickening example of hypocrisy - I am just finishing Mr President - President Ahmadinejad has told the Egyptian people that they have the right to express their own views about their country .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Mr President , the international community is looking almost helplessly on as the human rights situation deteriorates in Iran .
However , we should not overlook the instruments we have available to make our voice heard .
The Treaty of Lisbon provides us , through the position of High Representative , with a means of persuading the Iranian Government that human rights must not be restricted through repression .
They are an inalienable privilege of the individual and must not be brought into question by any political regime .
Mass executions , particularly those involving juveniles , stoning , discrimination against women and minorities and torture are , unfortunately , part of a much longer list .
Democratic change cannot be imposed from outside .
However , the European Union must constantly support the people inside this country , and not only through making statements , who are risking their lives every day to protest against these injustices .
( CS ) Mr President , in light of what is happening in the Arab world , in Libya , Egypt , Tunisia and elsewhere , the rigidity and immobility of the Iranian regime is even more apparent .
It is an intolerant regime , a fundamentalist regime , a regime which murders political opponents , and a regime which must be kept under international pressure .
We must support the Iranian opposition in exile , which is legitimate , and we have European Parliament resolutions on this .
It is necessary , among other things , to monitor the situation in the Ashraf refugee camp in Iraq , where there are more than 3 000 Iranian refugees from exiled opposition organisations , and where there is a risk of a humanitarian catastrophe , and it is necessary to provide protection to these people .
I would therefore like to hear a clear opinion from Baroness Ashton on this matter , and I would like to hear a clear statement as to how , under her leadership , the EU will be helping these refugees in the Ashraf camp .
Mr President , now that the EU is calling for an immediate end to the brutal Gaddafi dictatorship and insists on completely isolating him , the same applies to the brutal and bloody Iranian regime .
Cherishing hopes for confidence building is not a realistic option any more , especially since Tehran has completely eroded its credibility regarding its nuclear programme .
Instead , we should address the great potential of people-led democratic change in Iran .
True , this change cannot be imposed from outside .
However , the EU 's priority should be to extend our clear moral and political support to these forces .
I have especially in mind blacklisting top Iranian officials ( Ms Schaake mentioned eighty names ) , supporting the start of Farsi-language Euronews broadcasts and insisting that parliamentary relations - if any - should be conducted under strict conditionality .
Mr President , the current dogma is that Iran will be the big winner of the revolutions in North Africa and beyond .
This is possible but less probable .
Firstly , the Iranian model is not exactly what the young people who are revolting in these countries are aspiring to .
Secondly , the regime does not enjoy internal peace in order to concentrate exclusively on promoting a more assertive foreign policy .
Finally , because other countries like Turkey - or even Egypt after , but also during , transition - are powerful competitors to Iran 's ambitions .
Of course , Iran can always derive a degree of influence through proxies , but that would probably not prove decisive in gaining control in those countries .
Paradoxically , the only way to derive an advantage would be to look at the current developments as an opportunity to start reinserting Iran into the international community .
It would be a long road but the only sensible one for Iran .
I congratulate Mr Belder on an excellent report .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Belder for his excellent report .
Just one day after celebrating the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day , I would like to make a special point about the situation of women in Iran , and please allow me to dedicate this speech not only to Sakineh Ashtiani and Zahra Bahrami , but to all women put in jail and those who are missing because of the current Iranian repression .
The EU has to take into account the aspirations for democratic change of the people of Iran and the unacceptable situation that Iranian women have to face .
We know that there is discrimination , and even political and social repression , affecting women in this country , and we should echo these unacceptable facts when considering our approach towards Iran .
While the situation is currently deteriorating , women 's rights activists in the country have continued taking the lead in opposing the current repression and denial of civil liberties and human rights .
Women 's rights should not be an optional negotiation point and I hope , Madam Vice-President / High Representative , that the EU will uphold this violence without compromising them .
( EL ) Mr President , the report by Mr Belder , as presented to us , is an accurate , balanced and objective report .
I personally sympathise with the people of Iran , who are an ancient nation with an ancient culture and important traditions .
Iran is a rich oil-producing nation and has an important geopolitical position in the Middle East .
The systematic violation of human rights noted in the report and by all the speakers does not sit well with such a nation with such a tradition .
First of all , however , the Ahmadinejad government needs to realise this and take the necessary measures .
This country 's insistence on pursuing a nuclear programme which is unacceptable to the international community has caused massive tension in the area and raised huge questions .
Whatever else , it does nothing whatsoever for geopolitical stability in the area .
We must not forget or overlook the massive uprisings in North Africa and the Middle East and the fact that the Muslim communities are turning towards a political Islam .
( DE ) Mr President , the green revolution and the latest protests demonstrate quite clearly that there is great potential for civil society in Iran .
This must be supported , for it is the only way that a democratic opening can develop .
Unfortunately , sanctions often hit precisely this young and active civil society .
The holding of Tests of English as a Foreign Language ( TOEFL tests ) has been abandoned , for example .
This test is , however , a prerequisite for study at most Anglo-American universities .
The victims of this abandonment are thus internationally minded students .
The report uncritically proposes further sanctions , such as restrictions on the export of technology for mobile phone and communications networks , yet it is precisely these rapid communications and information technologies that are needed to spread pluralistic ideas .
Ultimately , it will be the third countries China , Russia and India , who will carry on doing business , exporting and securing raw materials for themselves , and who will unfortunately not comply with these sanctions , who will be left laughing .
( RO ) Mr President , at the moment , Iran is joining the Arab states which are seeking their path to democracy , and the situation in the country is described in detail in the report drafted by Mr Belder .
The Tehran regime is firmly opposed to change , with its suppression of demonstrations and arrest of the movement 's leaders .
I strongly condemn this stance which has been predominant in Iranian society for a good number of years .
The people are asking for their right to free expression and the government ought to listen to their requests .
Furthermore , the Iranian authorities have turned violating human rights into a habit .
At this point , I would like to mention Neda , the ' Angel of Iran ' .
They support the use of the death penalty , stoning , the execution of juvenile criminals , all by ignoring their international obligations .
Iran 's nuclear ambitions are also endangering the population .
Operations in the newest nuclear energy plant had to be halted recently due to contamination risks .
( FI ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , this report is especially welcome because the European Union must have a clear and consistent strategy for countries like Iran .
Over what was just an 18month period , in 2008 and 2009 , Parliament adopted a position on access to justice for 36 Iranian people in connection with single human rights violations .
This is more than with any one other country .
Moreover , each of them would deserve being mentioned and remembered individually here even now .
Where Iran is concerned , human rights should not be accorded secondary status with trade and tariff preferences .
That is morally wrong and to the EU 's shame .
That is why the European Union and Parliament must , in future , closely monitor developments in Iran 's human rights situation .
Mr President , I also want to join my colleagues in the call to support the Iranian opposition and provide for better protection of refugees in Camp Ashraf .
These poor people and their families are constant targets of a brutal and vicious Iranian regime .
Adding to their plight is the daily harassment and hostile attitude of Iraqi forces who are supposed to protect them .
Madam High Representative , let us not forget these sorely tried people .
Together , we need to ensure that the EU plays a key role in their transition from persecuted opposition to a democratic government .
After all , it is in everybody 's interest to see - and hopefully soon - a stable and democratic Iran whose citizens enjoy the same freedom and rights as we do here in the EU .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I think that this has been an interesting debate and I wanted to just deal with the two specific issues that were raised in a sense outside of the debate before winding up on that matter .
Ms Paulsen asked me whether we could find space in the - I think the word was ' glittering ' - new building , to be able to have people working on the issues of concern in human rights .
Can I just say that I was delighted that Madam Hautala , the Chair of the Subcommittee on Human Rights , wrote to me to say that she was pleased with the design of how we plan to deal with human rights within the new organisation .
However , I am only moving people into one building to remove them from eight buildings where they are currently scattered around Brussels , believing as I do that enabling people to work together will make us more effective .
We will have to squeeze them in , because I am also trying to save money on the way .
Therefore I hope , when you see what we do , that the word ' glittering ' will be a nice word and not a word , I fear , that suggests I am trying to do something that I genuinely am not .
In response to Ms Sinclaire : the way that I was told to respond on human rights issues by Parliament , by decision of this House , was to attend regularly the Committee on Foreign Affairs ( AFET ) to which the subcommittees - of which the Subcommittee on Human Rights is one - would be invited and where they would be able to put questions to me .
I have done that and I am more than happy to meet with Ms Hautala , as I do , and to respond to queries from her , as well as to attend the plenary debates in this House .
I am more than happy to try and do more ; I simply ask you to recognise that there is a limit to the amount of hours I have got in the day and the number of things I can do .
But it is not out of any disrespect to the Committee or indeed to you personally at all ; far from it .
I do hope that you will feel able to contact my office with issues of concern and indeed to attend the meetings where I am able to come and speak .
I am very well aware of my own background in terms of being a leader of a House of Parliament and not being elected , but I was very privileged to be elected by this House and , of course , to be invited into this role by 27 Heads of State and the President of the Commission .
As far as that goes , I am very mindful of my responsibilities .
In relation to the debate itself and the human rights issues that have , in a sense , dominated our debate : I am trying to look at what more we can do .
I will not comment on what currently is being dealt with specifically because I want to present this when we finish the work , but we are talking to human rights activists and to organisations , as well as considering across the 27 Member States what might be a more effective way of being able to address this issue and to put as much pressure as we possibly can .

As regards Mr Karoubi and Mr Mousavi , as I have said , it is even difficult to establish precisely whether they are in prison or under house arrest .
I am trying to continue to get that clarification .
Of course , we are supporting the resolution in Geneva for a special rapporteur on Iran .
We do raise these issues directly as well ; it is really important that we all stand together in pushing forward on human rights in Iran .
Many honourable Members have raised specific cases and the terrible record that this country has , and we need to do as much as we possibly can and I think we can do better if we do that together .
Finally , on the nuclear issue : I spent four and a half days in direct discussions with the Iranian negotiators and I am very clear in what I am trying to do , which is to provide an opportunity for this country , for Iran , to show what it keeps saying , to demonstrate that it is moving in a civil nuclear power direction and not in a nuclear weapons direction .
As I have said to them , it is not difficult : what they have to do is be open and transparent , to allow the inspectors to do the job they are supposed to do and to do the confidence building that we have ofttimes explained to them in great detail .
It is for them to choose .
I am absolutely clear as well that the Security Council and my role with the E3 + 3 will continue to put pressure on to try and make sure this happens .
What is really encouraging is that although I lead the negotiations , I do so with the E3 + 3 sitting with me ; and that shows very clearly to Iran that we are totally united in our approach , and I pay tribute to all those who work with me .
They have to show the political will to do what is necessary ; and if they do not , I say to the honourable Members , we will have to do more to keep the pressure on .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me start by offering you all my sincere thanks for your valuable contributions to this debate .
I listened very attentively to what you had to say .
Your contribution makes it clear what my intention is with this report , namely , to point out that our fundamental rights - our human rights , which are so fundamental and form the basis of our existence - are also the rights of the Iranians .
For me , it is identical .
In other words , the attention that we pay to fundamental rights and to their observance is essential .
I am convinced that such observance also creates future prospects for Iran , and specifically for the youth of the country .
It struck me during the debate that Mrs Lösing - who is no longer present , unfortunately - hit the nail on the head with regard to future prospects .
That is certainly something that is close to my heart .
If we just take a look at the facts , we see that for years on end now , over 150 000 young , highly-educated Iranians have left the Islamic Republic precisely because of the lack of any prospects for the future .
They did so not only because of the repression , but also because of the oppressive socio-economic situation and the climate of a lack of freedom .
The bottom line - and I was told this by an insider who is also an economist - is that this alone generates a loss of 40 billion a year , and that is not including the brain drain .
Through my report , what I wanted to highlight was precisely that the attention we pay and the promotion we give to more leeway and the observance of human rights truly provide some future prospects in Iran .
This also benefits the region in terms of overall security .
Finally , Baroness Ashton , I was really curious when I found out - I had not been aware of this , but my fellow Members brought it up - that a couple of weeks ago in the American press , a report circulated that there is , in actual fact , to be a list of serious violations of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran and of those responsible , from top to bottom , right down to the jailors in the prisons .
I would be extremely appreciative if you were to follow the American example in respect of a list of this kind , as we would not then all merely focus on those bringing about nuclear proliferation and thus threatening world security , but also on the terrible prevailing climate in Iran .
At the same time , this sends a signal to the Iranians that we are looking at the whole picture in Iran , not just at the nuclear threat , and that we nonetheless believe that Iran should be a normal civil society , in line with the high level of civilisation that the country has traditionally enjoyed throughout its history .
Finally , you must not think ill of me in relation to the fact that for me , as a Protestant , the freedom of religion is extraordinarily important .
Let me be clear on this point : for the Sunnis - the minority - for the Baha 'i , for Christians and Jews - this is such a terribly embarrassing point - my report unfortunately is already out-of-date , I admit straight away .
I say this as there has been a tidal wave of repression that has hit the Sunnis , the Baha 'i and Christians , in particular , over recent months , and I apologise to my fellow Members that my report is not up-to-date in that regard .
For me , this is a spur to do more with Iran - I am working on the basis of an open-door policy - and I hope to be in touch with you on a regular basis in order to help bring about an Iran with a future for its entire population .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at midday on Thursday , 10 March .
16th session of the United Nations Human Rights Council ( Geneva , 28 February - 25 March 2011 ) ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the 16th session of the United Nations Human Rights Council ( Geneva , 28 February - 25 March 2011 ) .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I am pleased we also have the chance this afternoon to debate the work of the UN Human Rights Council and , in a sense , to look at how we can strengthen its overall impact .
As honourable Members may know , I addressed the Council last week together with many Foreign Ministers from across the world .
For obvious reasons on that occasion , the situation in Libya was at the heart of our discussions .
I am pleased that the international community sent a strong and united political signal regarding the ongoing human rights violations in Libya .
Already before the High-Level Segment , the Council had called for an inquiry and recommended the suspension of Libya 's membership of the Council - which , as you know , has since been confirmed by the General Assembly in a unanimous decision .
All that is proof that multilateral institutions can live up to their mandate and can act in what we call real time .
As I stressed in my remarks there , the UN Human Rights Council has a responsibility to ensure that stated intentions are translated into real action and real progress .
I think that Ms Pillay , the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights , whom I met in Geneva , is giving exactly the right direction politically in order to make a difference on the ground .
What matters in the end is not the number of resolutions that are passed , but results in the real world that make a difference to people who are in need .
I also emphasised that human rights are universal .
I pointed out that we in Europe reject the accusation that somehow , the EU is trying to ' export ' so-called European values to other countries .
The rights to free speech , freedom of assembly , justice and equality are not European rights : they are universal rights .
We must never fall into the trap of believing that people in other parts of the world - whether it is Africa , Asia or Latin America - should be any less passionate about their rights .
That is why we speak out and we act against human rights violations wherever they occur .
We also recognise that Europe 's own path on human rights protection has not been a straight line and that constant efforts are also needed inside Europe .
At the Human Rights Council , we are ready to discuss our own challenges , share experiences and offer support to those working to improve respect for human rights around the world .
We have several priorities for the 16th session of the Human Rights Council and we have discussed these actively with our partners .
The EU will present an initiative on freedom of religion or belief .
Faced in recent months with an increasing number of acts of religious discrimination and violence in different parts of the world , we need to send a strong , collective message against religious intolerance and in favour of the freedom of religion or belief for all people everywhere .
We will also table resolutions on Burma / Myanmar and the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea .
We believe that in both cases , the severity and number of human rights violations justify the extension of the mandates of the respective UN Special Rapporteurs .
The EU also supports the initiative to create a Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Iran , as proposed by several countries and regions .
We are seriously concerned about the deteriorating human rights situation in Iran .
This was highlighted by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights , Ms Navi Pillay .
A particular concern is the dramatically increasing number of death penalty cases - more than 100 so far this year , as we discussed in our previous debate - and the repression of those exercising their rights to freedom of expression and assembly .
We feel the Council should address the situation in Egypt in an appropriate manner , taking into account the rapidly evolving situation in that country .
The EU welcomes Egypt 's invitation to Ms Pillay to send members of her Office to the country .
We hope this mission will be dispatched without delay .
The EU also is engaging with the Tunisian authorities to jointly present a draft resolution on the subject of boosting UN technical assistance on human rights in the context of ongoing transition .
Other key situations that need to be addressed by this session of the Human Rights Council are Belarus , where we are deeply concerned at the number of political prisoners , the Democratic Republic of Congo - where there are distressing reports of continuing human rights violations , in particular , widespread sexual violence - as well as Côte d 'Ivoire .
Let me conclude by stressing once again the importance of the Human Rights Council for the EU : the debates , the resolutions and the rapporteurs .
But in the end , these are only inputs .
What truly matter are the outputs .
The real test is whether we make a difference on the ground .
For that reason , the EU will work hard to strengthen the Human Rights Council and especially its ability to address urgent situations .
This is a key objective of the ongoing review process .
We will continue to push for an ambitious result .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to express my full support for the decision taken by the UN General Assembly on 1 March to suspend Libya 's membership of the United Nations Human Rights Council .
I think this sends a strong signal , not only to Colonel Gaddafi and his regime , but also to those countries in the world where human rights violations are frequent and widespread .
In my report on the UN Human Rights Council and the EU 's role in it - adopted by this House in February 2009 - I strongly advocated the introduction of membership criteria for this important UN body .
In the case of Libya , the United Nations General Assembly acted in line with the European Parliament resolution and took a correct and timely decision .
Speaking of the 16th session , I would like to draw special attention to the Council 's review process .
It is important that the EU Member States and the European External Action Service actively engage in the 2011 review of the Council to strengthen compliance with its mandate .
The UNHRC should become more an early-warning and preventive mechanism .
There is also a need for a transparent and all-inclusive review process , including NGOs , civil society and all relevant stakeholders .
Last but not least , I would like to welcome the establishment of the Directorate for Human Rights and Democracy in the EEAS system .
The establishment of the External Action Service also provides us with a unique opportunity to streamline our action on the protection of human rights in the United Nations Human Rights Council .
I therefore want to encourage the High Representative to make sure that European efforts in the Human Rights Council are well coordinated and that EU Member States belonging to this body are united and effective as never before .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , I shall start by welcoming yesterday 's appointment of Mariangela Zappia as Head of Delegation in Geneva .
Her appointment contributes to advancing gender equality in the External Action Service .
We look forward to working with her .
Our Parliament will be present at a crucial time for the review of the Human Rights Council , as the global fulcrum for respect of human rights , the universal periodic review of all UN members , the independence of its experts or so-called special procedures , and the enhanced role for civil society participation .
They are key characteristics of the Council that we should work to protect at all costs .
I am disappointed that the outcome document for the working group on the review omits any independent trigger for special sessions , that there is no requirement for member countries to justify failure to respond to recommendations , and that there is no provision at all for addressing specific country situations .
It is ironic that this session will address seven individual country situations .
As it is doing in the cases of Libya and Côte d 'Ivoire , the EU must continue to find creative ways within existing rules to make sure that human rights violators can never escape accountability .
To show in this debate that the High Representative does answer questions , can I ask her three in particular ?
Firstly , given what she said about the Democratic Republic of the Congo , will Europeans support the appointment of a special mandate holder for that country ?
Secondly , does she accept that , at some stage , a judgment has to be made as to whether the Palestinian and Israeli investigations in relation to the Goldstone report meet international standards , with a deliberation on the possible referral to the International Criminal Court if they do not ?
Thirdly , will the EU lodge an objection to Pakistan 's reservation on Article 40 - the obligation to report - of the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights ?
In conclusion , I believe that Libya 's suspension from the Human Rights Council creates a historic precedent for respect for human rights in the UN system , which , in these dark days , shines a light on the silver thread .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the UN Human Rights Council has the potential to address the ever more urgent and elaborate human rights violations across the world in different countries - Iran , Belarus , Burma , Tunisia , Libya , etc . , there are too many to mention - but also horizontal themes such as LGBT rights , free expression , rape as a war crime and the role of human rights defenders .
In a sense , the UN Human Rights Council is in a similar position to the EU and it has to act as a global player .
But both bodies suffer from the same problem - a lack of credibility , double standards at times , and they are not able to act quickly enough .
The EU thus far has been unwilling to scrutinise its own human rights record sufficiently , for example , its participation in renditions and the lack of press freedom in some of our Member States .
Until last week , Libya was a member of the UN Human Rights Council .
It has , rightfully , been removed .
This is a very important precedent .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , with decisive and timely action towards Libya , the EU and the Human Rights Council have indeed shown that they can take action when needed .
They can indeed .
They can show that different regional groups can come together and they can show that the Council does not need to be divided .
Today , there is no longer a reason why action on Iran , North Korea , the Democratic Republic of Congo , Burma and Sudan could not be next in line .
This time is significant for another reason .
A first comprehensive review of the working methods of the Council has come to a conclusion and , like my colleagues , I feel disappointed by the fact that the Council failed to appreciate the importance of the review .
The EU prepared itself well but failed to win the support of others .
But at least the independence of the Human Rights Commissioner and of the special procedure was not damaged , so this is already an achievement under the present conditions .
In any future discussions of the Council 's work , the European Union must be able to build alliances and to reach across to other partners .
It must also be willing to listen and able to compromise .
I think we had a very welcome participation by the High Representative in the meeting some weeks ago .
High Representative , I salute you for taking this step and giving a very impressive presentation there .
So to my last point : the EU 's performance .
After the creation of the Human Rights and Democracy Directorate at the European External Action Service , the EU delegation in Geneva will have a central role to play in EU human rights policy in the world .
It needs increased resources and its work must be integrated into all fields of EU foreign policy .
I am very honoured to be leading Parliament 's delegation to the Human Rights Council 's 16th session at this critical time next week .
Mr President , Lady Ashton , you began work with the world in disarray ; a world in the midst of financial , food and energy crises triggered by attempts to regulate the markets .
The truth is that your difficulties are the result of the underlying approach , whereby an unregulated free market structures our lives : this has caused serious human rights issues , both in developed and developing countries .
This is our problem , one we have been unable to resolve , yet there are no signs of moves to rethink the economic policy that is leading the whole of humanity down a blind alley .
I believe that is one problem that needs to be resolved , first and foremost , followed by the European Union 's cynical exploitation of human rights , and our foreign and neighbourhood policies , which require a comprehensive overhaul in light of the upheavals in north Africa .
We have given the impression - in the foreign policy that you inherited - that we are more concerned with free trade than with human rights .
We have never applied Article 2 of the association agreements : not with Tunisia , not with Egypt , nor in the association agreements that we are seeking to conclude with Colonel Gaddafi , Prime Minister Netanyahu or King Mohammed VI .
The article has never been enforced , giving the impression that we are not interested in strict compliance with the human rights obligations set out in the association agreements .
This issue has yet to be resolved and I hope that at some point , the House and the European Union will take action .
Mr President , Commissioner Ashton , I will not say that man is hypocritical , but I will say that he is contradictory .
The whole of world philosophy , all of literature , everyone with an education , and all of us here in this House , recognise human rights and yet , as you said , half the UN members are in breach of human rights .
We are talking the talk , but not walking the walk .
We know that , for the sake of grand ideas , we have become the biggest criminals in mankind .
This being so , I welcome the 16th session of the United Nations Human Rights Council and I trust that , with current developments and with the lessons we have learned from experience , it will adopt fundamental resolutions .
As you know , I have been a lawyer for forty years and I have understood and I have as my creed the fact that respect for human rights is a way of life and is not easily imposed .
Please adopt a more fundamental policy on this issue .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , human rights , liberty and equality are far too important for all of us to allow games to be played with them , for them to be put in the balance against powerful interests , and for commercial interests perhaps to take precedence over these values that are so important .
They deserve our full commitment and it is incredibly important for the international community to help in matters relating to human rights quickly , efficiently and in a targeted way .
The Human Rights Council is on the right track here .
We have seen that the mission to Tunisia made sense and the mission to Egypt made sense .
Libya 's loss of its seat on the Human Rights Council was a proper and important signal that things could not go on in this way .
However , it is also the case that missions , resolutions and perhaps other things that happen in this way , have been knocked flat .
You are quite right , Baroness Ashton : it is not enough to decide to do something , we must also take care that it is implemented .
The European Union could still make a greater contribution here than it does at the moment .
However , it is also essential that the United Nations accept that after the Treaty of Lisbon , the position of the European Union has altered .
Baroness Ashton , I should like to ask you to ensure that especially those who have always called themselves our friends and whom we also call our friends , and for whom we show great consideration ( particularly when it comes to trade policy ) , to remember in future that they are our friends and not to leave the European Union in the lurch , as they did in the vote in September .
( FR ) Mr President , in this debate , we are going to emphasise once again the importance of putting ...
( The President interrupted the speaker )
social , cultural , civil and political rights on an equal footing .
Very well .
Unfortunately , to fully meet that requirement - a legitimate one , certainly - is not quite so easy in practice .
Why are we unable to make second-generation human rights as binding as first-generation ones ?
Because traditional human rights - those stemming from the French Revolution - are codified properly today , which is unfortunately not the case for social rights , for example .
We should not be fatalists , however .
The European Union , with its battery of instruments , can bring all its weight to bear , particularly at the United Nations , in order to enhance texts relating to rights that are not yet codified properly and , in particular , social rights .
I would add that , with development cooperation and humanitarian aid , this requirement becomes a little less unrealistic .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , I confess that I was not a great supporter of your taking up the eminent position which you hold today , Mrs Ashton , but I must say that I am , today , pleasantly surprised by at least three things which you mentioned in your speech .
I would like to stress this and to commend you for this .
Well , firstly you stressed the universality of human rights .
I fully agree that irrespective of where we are - in Strasbourg , Libya , Russia or Iran - this universality must be fully respected .
I am very pleased that we are on the same wavelength .
The second thing is that you stressed religious intolerance , or rather the fight against it .
Indeed , the European Parliament 's resolution calls on the representatives of Member States to take up this matter .
I am very pleased that you stressed this .
The third matter which I am pleased about as a member of the delegation for relations with Belarus is that you stressed the possibility of intervention in matters relating to Belarus , where fundamental human rights are being violated .
There is a chance that a Regional Council will be established .
I am very pleased that you support this , because this is something we should be doing . Thank you very much .
Mr President , I welcome the opportunity to participate in this debate and can I say at the outset that I appreciate the briefing arranged by the High Representative yesterday on the issues surrounding Libya .
Six million Jews were murdered in the Second World War here in Europe .
Between the two World Wars - the First World War and the Second World War - 60 million Europeans were killed , leaving aside the people from all other parts of the world who died .
According to a recent edition of The Economist magazine , there is a deficit of 100 million women because of gender-based abortion .
This is not to do with abortion because a woman 's life is in danger , or because she is in danger of having a back-street abortion .
It is because she is a woman .
Yesterday was Women 's Day .
This was not raised here .
When is political correctness going to be overcome , so that we can have respectful debates here , so that we do not turn our heads the other way , as happened in the first half of the last century , so that we raise these issues , so that we ask why this is ?
This House disgraced itself .
It voted down an amendment not to fund infanticide .
Not to fund coercive abortion .
How in the name of God could we vote down something like that ?
I am sick of this political correctness that does not allow debate on issues in this House in a respectful manner that allows different views to be expressed .
I want to know from the High Representative if you are you going to raise this issue with the UN ?
May I say in conclusion that I find the attitude and some of the decisions of the Court of Human Rights here in Strasbourg , which is not an institution of the European Union , absolutely extraordinary .
When are we going to be able to discuss this issue ?
Why were there no women yesterday who asked about the missing 100 million women who have been terminated because they were women ?
It is wrong and there should be no disagreement in this House on that issue in particular .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on Women 's Day , you perhaps failed to notice that in the report by your group member , Mrs Nedelcheva , abortion was not a taboo subject , it was addressed , and it was debated and voted on democratically .
It is not a taboo subject ; this is a democracy .
Mr President , I know Ms De Keyser 's position on this and I respect it .
It is more than I received from her in relation to my view .
We have to have respectful debate in this House , where people hear each other 's views and then we come to conclusions .
I have not heard anybody from the Socialist or Liberal side raise in this House the issue of gender-based abortion .
Not only did they not raise it , they voted down a resolution put to this House not to fund infanticide or coercive abortion .
It is a shameful occurrence , on the record of this House , for those people who did it .
Please let us have respectful debate in this House .
That is what this European Union is supposed to be about - unity in diversity .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , of course I respect Mr Mitchell 's views .
Like most , if not all , of the Members of this Parliament , I deplore the fact that in a number of societies in the world , female foetuses are aborted , whether with the consent of the mother or under coercion .
However , I fear that , by mixing up this issue with the issue of reproductive freedom , Mr Mitchell is obscuring the issue .
If the issue were limited to the fact that female foetuses are aborted , it might be easier for us to reach an agreement on it .
Mr President , I would like to thank the honourable Member for that point .
If we were a bit more respectful of each other 's positions and tried to reach common ground , we would find that there is a lot we can do to roll back on this agenda , but please can we all open our minds ?
I really do find it hard that Parliament would vote down an amendment not to fund coercive abortion , not to fund infanticide .
Let us have this sort of discussion and see what we can do to stop this gender-based abortion .
We can have disagreements in other areas .
I personally have no difficulty with reproductive health support ; it is when it comes to the abortion area I have difficulty for very good reasons and I would be happy to debate them .
I am not an ogre ; I am not something from the past .
I have a well thought out view on this and I would be happy to discuss it with anybody .
I thank the Members for what they have said .
( EL ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , the session of the Human Rights Council is being held this year in the shadow of events in North Africa and the Arab world in general , which have a great deal to teach us .
We , as Europe , must make sure that we are up to the job .
This is therefore an opportunity for us to make a fundamental evaluation of the Council , so as to further improve its working methods and emphasise our support for its independence and its role in defending human rights in the world .
In these times of historic change in our part of the world , the message of the universality of human rights is more topical than ever .
At the same time , however , all the international players need to work to eliminate the practice of double standards when it comes to citing human rights .
We need to be fair and consistent .
Just as we welcome the recent adoption of the resolution condemning human rights violations in Libya , we must take the same hard stand on the continuing illegal colonisation of the occupied areas in Palestine .

( FI ) Mr President , I would like to pay tribute to Mr Mitchell 's speech , as of course , the primary human right for each girl and boy is the right to be born into this world .
The Human Rights Council is the UN 's main body responsible for human rights , and now at last we must venture critically to assess its status and policies .
The Council at its best could have a decisive role as a promoter of human rights and democracy .
Unfortunately , its work is characterised by double standards , selectivity , politicisation and the creation of blocs in human rights issues .
It is typical that the Council was very close to adopting the resolution on progress ( progress mind ! ) in the human rights situation in Libya .
Among the countries giving Libya recognition were Iran , North Korea , Egypt , Sudan and Pakistan .
Do declarations by these countries carry any weight ?
Should these countries not be the next to be expelled from the Human Rights Council ?
Just the fact that such a resolution was even considered shows just how ignorant the international community has been or has wanted to be concerning the situation in Libya .
Over the last few decades , however , around two thirds of the condemnatory resolutions that the Human Rights Council has adopted have concerned Israel , which is nevertheless the sole democracy in that area of the Middle East .
At the same time , it has ignored the poor state of the rights of women and minorities in all the surrounding Arab countries .
The work of the Human Rights Council will lack credibility unless it changes that work and its ways of working .
( ES ) Mr President , I do not wish to repeat the important points already made by my fellow Members , so I will simply add that it is good to hear of Lady Ashton 's involvement in the Human Rights Council session held at this very important time .
We hope that the session will constitute a step forward , allowing the European Union to make its actions more consistent and raise their profile , to reach common positions on all relevant human rights issues , and to use the Human Rights Council to build coalitions with countries , civil society and relevant international organisations , in order to make real progress in the field of human rights , as Lady Ashton said in her speech .
We also hope that the European Union will be able to uphold the universal nature of human rights in the face of relativistic arguments and that it will finally achieve something that is within the compass of our generation ; to achieve something comparable with the universal abolition of slavery in the past : namely , the universal abolition of the death penalty .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that the inviolability of human rights is the real essence of all societies , which indeed gives rise to democratic values .
For this reason , the Human Rights Council meeting that will take place in Geneva must have precise and appropriate priorities : of course , this includes combating discrimination in its various forms - race , sex , religion , political orientation - whilst , on the other hand , there is also the issue of protecting minorities and vulnerable groups .
The climate in which the Council meeting is taking place is particularly delicate .
We are all aware of what is happening in North Africa and , above all , in Libya .
Today , in a lengthy debate , we have listened to and largely welcomed the speeches made by Baroness Ashton .
However , there is also the problem of the Middle East and , at the same time , the Treaty of Lisbon urges us to adopt an even stronger and more decisive stance in favour of the European Union .
We need strength of resolve and solidarity , which must be the guidelines for tangible and decisive action , because , after all , the Libyans , the Tunisians and the Moroccans wish to stay where they are currently living .
To make this possible , we will need to act quickly .
I should like to make one final consideration , which is also a question for Baroness Ashton : we have listened to your speeches , as I just said , and largely welcomed them .
One form of serious discrimination relates to religion : how on earth , bearing in mind that the bloodiest violence of recent times has been perpetrated against Christians , did you fail to mention ' Christianophobia ' in her speech ?
( RO ) Mr President , I do not know whether this session , which is currently going on , will end in success or failure .
However , what I do know is that it would have been worthwhile holding this debate much earlier because the European Union will have a voice at this session , which is coherent , articulate and , above all , effective .
This review , which is getting under way now , partly in New York and partly in Geneva , sends out a very complex signal to a world which is changing and has a major problem with the failure of a certain type of human rights policy .
Fellow Members , I believe that we will have to discuss very seriously this institutional mechanism created by the UN , certainly without giving any priority to particular rights .
However , we must discuss its effectiveness and , in particular , think about whether it would not be worth having one of the global agencies involved in immediate prevention .
In this context , I do not think that we need to restrict ourselves simply to watching what has happened so far , but should also try to prevent it .
I believe that a different way of handling the human rights issue is on the cards .
Mr President , the fact that Libya was a member of the UN Human Rights Council tells us everything we need to know about this discredited and politicised organisation .
Gaddafi 's 42-year rule has systematically crushed any vestige of human rights in his country and we have now seen the consequences of the culture of violence on which his reign-of-terror regime was based .
However , it would be unfair to single out just Libya .
Other human rights abusers also enjoy membership of the Council , including China , Cuba , Saudi Arabia , Pakistan and Uganda , where homosexuals are persecuted .
Bizarrely , it was even mooted that Iran should head up the Women 's Equality Commission at one stage .
The UNHRC also spends much of its time vilifying our democratic ally , Israel .
However , I suppose , on reflection , that this Council is all that there is on human rights at UN level , so we will have to engage , albeit fully cognisant of the inherent contradictions of having brutal non-democratic regimes as members of the UN Human Rights Council .
Mr President , I would like to say to Baroness Ashton that she did not answer my colleague , Jan Zahradil , in the last debate on Iran on the question of Camp Ashraf .
The 3 400 people there are suffering psychological torture .
This is a breach of their human rights .
We give EUR 1.2 billion to the rebuilding of Iraq and yet , every time we pass a resolution in this House , every time we pass a written declaration with a big majority , we are simply ignored by the Iraqi Government and by their Iranian cohorts .
They are psychologically torturing the people in Camp Ashraf with 210 loudspeakers blaring propaganda and threats at a high decibel level day and night for the last year .
They are prohibiting access to medicines and the hospital for injured people and people dying of cancer .
Why are we not saying , ' Stop , or you get no more help , no more money , from this House ' ?
Mr President , I would like to ask the High Representative , in the light of all of the events that are going on in Libya at the moment and the much vaunted anguish that we rightly display about the violation of human rights in Libya , whether she will support the cause of those people in the United Kingdom who had relatives , friends and loved ones blown up by Semtex or killed by guns that were supplied by Colonel Gaddafi and his murderous regime in Libya .
Will she support their case in any new regime that would emerge from the conflict in Libya ?
( ES ) Mr President , in the context of our debate on the current human rights situation , and in view of the last report discussed , I would like to address the following question to Lady Ashton .
In view of the current situation in some North African countries and within the region , do you feel that this is the right time to be opening a European Union delegation in Iran ?
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , again , this was a very interesting and full debate , which has raised a large number of issues that honourable Members feel very strongly about .
Firstly , I would like to thank all honourable Members for the energy and passion with which they have conducted this debate .
I reflect on the fact that it is two years since the publication of Ms Andrikienė 's report on the development of the UN Human Rights Council , including the role of the EU , and on the resolutions that have been passed since that report was produced .
I would like to thank her for her comments about the work we are doing in the External Action Service and the beginnings of our work to build the new pieces of work on human rights .
I am also very pleased to see that Ms Hautala will be going to the session of the Council .
I think it is extremely important , with her knowledge and expertise , that she is able to participate there .
I also hope that she will back up the efforts that we have been making to try to ensure that the work of the Council improves and increases .
I hear the criticisms that are made of it .
I think we have all been pushing hard with the review to try to make that review as strong as possible .
It is certainly not quite where we would have wished it to be , but now that we have seen the transfer to New York of some of the discussions , we can continue to work there as well .
This really is an area of work where parliamentarians working with us can make a significant difference .
I have full confidence in Ms Hautala 's strength in pushing forward on that .
I want to deal with some of the particular questions that have been asked of me .
I will start with Mr Howitt 's , because he said that there were three in particular .
Regarding the Democratic Republic of the Congo , we are in favour of a strong resolution and indeed , we have said there ought to be a specific mandate now on this particular situation .
On Goldstone , we are trying to engage to find a consensual resolution .
That is what we are doing at the present time .
In Pakistan , we made a démarche on 5 March specifically on Article 40 , which is the point concerned .
To those honourable Members who specifically talked about freedom of religion and belief , let me first of all say that I do indeed talk about the terrible tragedies for Christian communities anywhere in the world where these terrible tragedies occur .
My general point is that we believe in the right of freedom of religion and belief , whatever that religion or belief might be in that context .
It is important that we continue to make those statements as clearly as possible , when you see terrorism or attacks on any religions , including Christianity .
My team has just been meeting with a group of MEPs to talk further about what more we should do on this .
I have already said that we plan to do something at this session of the Human Rights Council specifically on this because it is so important .
I apologise that I did not answer on Camp Ashraf .
I intended to , but I turned the paper over too quickly .
I think we have a total of 3 000 people - or perhaps 3 400 , the numbers vary - and we are in weekly touch with the UN who , as you know , are visiting the camp .
They assure me that the basic needs are being met .
There are really difficult issues , as the honourable Member knows very well , in looking at what might be done around Camp Ashraf .
I am very conscious of the very different opinions that we hear on this .
However , the honourable gentleman is completely right that the significant part of this is to make sure that people 's rights are not violated and that we ensure humanitarian support is given .
We do indeed - hence I know about the weekly reports .
That is not by accident .
It is because we are engaging on this issue and engaging with the government there to try to deal with that in the best possible way that we can .
I also agree that it is now important to get a strong delegation in Geneva .
Again , Mrs Hautala raises specifically the fact that we have just appointed a new Head of Delegation .
I talked with the team while I was in Geneva .
We have split the delegation in two so that one can concentrate on the issues , particularly of the World Trade Organisation , and the other can focus much more on the UN agencies .
In my conversations on this , I am also clear on the need to think better and more creatively about how we operate in Geneva .
We need to build alliances on human rights and to have the opportunity to talk with partners across the world where we can make common cause on some of the most important issues that concern us .
I hope that we will be able to move forward on that over the coming weeks and months .
If I might just finish with this , I was very taken by what Mr Salavrakos said when he said that human rights is a way of life .
I think that is probably right .
I describe it as being this simple : for human rights to apply to you , you simply have to be here and human .
There are no other criteria that should apply .
I think that in all that we do , it is really important that we do not forget that very simple basic principle .
Honourable Members , there will be many issues upon which we disagree , many issues which create - as I witnessed - real passion and concern , but the ability to be able to debate those issues and the ability to put our strength of feeling on human rights at the core of what we think is absolutely essential .
Very finally , I have not made any decision about opening a delegation in Iran .
That is partly a resources question but , of course , I will keep honourable Members informed about that .
Meanwhile , I would like to thank everyone for this debate and to assure honourable Members that I will do all I can to make the Human Rights Council as effective as possible and - more important even than that - to represent the European Parliament and the European Union on issues of human rights as effectively as I possibly can .
( ES ) Mr President , I did not really understand Lady Ashton 's answer .
I am not sure whether she gave me an answer , whether she said that she would respond at a later date to my question on whether it is the right time to be opening a European Union delegation in Iran given the current human rights concerns , or indeed whether there was no answer .
As I did not understand the answer , I would like to repeat my question .

Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , in response to Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , I was trying to say that there are two issues .
One is resources , inevitably .
The second is that this will require a decision to be made and for proposals to be put by me , obviously not least to the Commission , on the opening of a delegation .
There will be a discussion in the Foreign Affairs Council and Parliament will also take a view on this .
I have had no discussions with anybody about doing this at the moment .
As you well know , at the present time , my engagement with Iran is very much on the nuclear talks and the human rights issues .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at midday on Thursday , 10 March .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - In light of the current situation in North Africa , and taking into account the fact that human rights are being violated more than ever across the world , the work of the UNHRC needs to be reformed .
The UNHRC has to act in time and to react efficiently to the new challenges .
Regrettably , this is not the reality .
The problem could be partly solved if additional meetings beyond the current sessions would take place .
Further , the UNHRC needs to seriously review its membership to make sure that its members fulfil the minimum criteria .
It is shameful that dictatorships , such as Libya , could so easily take a seat in the body intended to safeguard human rights .
More than ever , the credibility of the UNHRC is being challenged by politically motivated behaviour .
Using the EEA , the EU now has an opportunity to speak with one voice and to function as a global actor .
The Vice-President / High Representative has to make sure that the actions are coherent and that an efficient coordination takes place between the EU Representations in Geneva and New York .
There is no practical alternative to EU value-based foreign policy .
in writing . - No convincing and efficient resolution can be adopted while human rights are being strongly violated within the European Union .
All loud statements and words turn into cynicism and undermine the basis of the fight against global injustice and lies .
The European Union should not give advice to third countries while in its own territory , namely in Latvia , the government treats Parliament 's resolution of 11 March 2004 with scorn and derision .
It is not acceptable to demand that other countries do what the European Union is not able to demand that the Latvian Republic should do .
How can the EU be called ' united ' when rules are not for every Member State ?
Until the resolution on 335 000 Latvian non-citizens is implemented , there is no sense in asking for changes in the area of human rights in third countries .
It is a rough derision of democracy and human rights .
It is to be welcomed that in the programme of the 16th Session of the UNHRC , alongside the general problem of respect for human rights , reports and panels have been included concerning the rights of the child , violence against women , the rights of national , ethnic , religious and linguistic minorities and the fight against terrorism .
Also to be presented at the session is a cross-regional statement on LGBT rights .
The UNHRC needs new legal tools for the continuous monitoring of constant violations of human rights and for reacting rapidly to urgent situations which arise due to the political situation around the world ( Tunisia , Egypt , Iran , Belarus ) .
Therefore , I endorse the idea proposed in the resolution for independent ' triggers ' which will allow a prompt response to human rights crises .
I welcome the establishment of the new Directorate for Human Rights and Democracy and the creation of a Brussels-based EU Council Working Group on Human Rights , because this will allow better coordination and monitoring of EU policy on human rights .
A major role should be played by the high-level EU Special Representative for Human Rights .
UNHRC panels should also be held in-between sessions , and the sessions themselves should be moved to other regions , including to places where conflicts are currently in progress .
Finally , I also appeal to the EU 's Member States to respect human rights in their own domestic policy , because failure to do so weakens the Union 's position in the UNHRC .
State of play of the peace process for the Middle East ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission , the Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , on the state of play of the peace process for the Middle East .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I am grateful for the opportunity to have today 's debate on the Middle East peace process and I am extremely interested to hear from honourable Members on this .
I believe that achieving progress on the peace process is very urgent and very important .
As we have discussed in this House earlier today , our Southern Neighbourhood and the wider Middle East are changing fast .
We have seen historic events in Tunisia and Egypt and ongoing violence in Libya , and we also know of protests which continue in Yemen , Bahrain and elsewhere .
With the region in upheaval , some have said that it is not the time to focus on the stalled Israeli-Palestinian peace process , but I believe the opposite to be true .
At this moment , it is even more important to try to put an end to this conflict , as a key contribution towards a peaceful and stable region .
This is the message which I have delivered in my visits to the region in January and in February and in my discussions with President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu : for the greater security of both peoples , an agreement should be found .
I also believe the European Union has an important role in this process .
The Foreign Affairs Council set out its position very clearly , most recently in our Council conclusions in December .
The only viable choice is a negotiated outcome on all final status issues .
If there is to be genuine peace , there has to be a solution to the status of Jerusalem as the future capital of two states , with the state of Israel and an independent , democratic , contiguous and viable state of Palestine living side by side in peace and security .
The EU position on settlements is clear : settlements are illegal , they constitute an obstacle to peace , and they threaten to make a two-state solution impossible .
I chaired the Quartet meeting in Munich on 5 February .
The EU went into this meeting seeking an invigorated Quartet and I think we managed to achieve that .
Together with our partners from the UN , from the US and Russia , we agreed on an ambitious schedule .
Last week , Quartet envoys met in Brussels , under the chairmanship of Helga Schmid , the Political Director and Deputy Secretary-General of the EAS , with , for the first time , the Palestinian negotiators .
Tomorrow , the Quartet envoys will meet the Israeli negotiators for the first time .
The envoys are now moving to prepare the next principal meetings when Ban Ki-moon , the Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov , Secretary Clinton and I will meet again .
But , if there is to be a two-state solution , both states must be viable .
For that reason , it is important that the EU is the largest contributor to the Palestinians .
We remain committed to continuing to support their state-building plan and its implementation , both politically and financially .
In this regard , we have already approved a first package of EUR 100 million out of the EUR 300 million earmarked for 2011 .
Funds for institution-building have been further increased to reinforce Palestinian capacities on their way to statehood .
This work is crucial for the establishment of a future state of Palestine and crucial to finding a way to a two-state solution .
As honourable Members know , I have twice visited Gaza and , after meeting with business , with civil society and especially with many children , we have proposed a comprehensive package of support , focusing on infrastructure , equipment and training for the Kerem Shalom crossing .
This is specifically to support greater movement of goods , allowing exports to promote economic recovery .
In both my visits to Gaza , I called for a greater opportunity for the people there to develop the economy and provide jobs and a future for their children .
I also called , and continue to call , for the release of Gilad Shalit .
On 13 April , I will host the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee led by Norway ; we are in discussion on the possibilities of a donor conference in June .
Honourable Members will know that on 22 February , there was a useful and productive exchange of views with Israel at the Association Council , where the Middle East peace process was discussed , along with other regional issues , particularly , of course , the changes occurring in the region .
The discussions included our bilateral relations and how better cooperation can go forward on the current action plan and in the context of the desire for a solution .
I also welcome the willingness of the Israelis to meet with the Quartet envoys tomorrow , but I urge Israel to make positive moves now to find a solution and to promote and support moves towards direct talks .
As I said , I believe that this is in the interest of both peoples in that region and I believe Prime Minister Netanyahu has a vital role in helping to get the talks moving .
Honourable Members , I very much look forward to hearing from you so I will pause at this point .
I believe all of us in this House share the desire to see this conflict finally end and both parties find a solution for the stability of the people of Israel and for the people of Palestine , which will also help enhance the stability and security of the region .
I urge and hope that this will happen soon .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , you quite rightly said , Baroness Ashton , that the situation in the southern Mediterranean is diverting attention from the conflict in the Middle East and the peace process , which has already been drawn out over almost 30 years and appears to have come to a standstill .
As your visit has demonstrated , current events and the general situation in the region have had an impact on the process .
In the light of that visit , I would like to ask your views on a number of issues .
This morning , we discussed the difficulties that the United Nations Security Council is having in obtaining a further resolution to impose a no-fly zone in Libya .
To what extent do you feel that the peace process and the credibility of a key player have been affected by its recent veto of the proposed resolution condemning the settlements in the Palestinian territories ?
In your opinion , how does the lack of a Security Council decision affect perceptions of the Obama administration 's commitment to pursuing this process ?
Secondly , how do you view the decision taken by the Palestinian National Authority to hold presidential and legislative elections before September and Hamas 's decision not to take part in these elections ?
Lastly , Baroness Ashton , I would like to hear what you think of the resignation of the Palestinian chief negotiator following the publication of documents by WikiLeaks , the reshuffle within the Palestinian National Authority and the repercussions that the leaked documents have had on the Palestine side , on the Israeli Government , or on both parties as a whole .

Mr President , Baroness Ashton , we have spoken about it all day long : the tremendous hope that has emerged following the revolutions in the Arab world shows us that democracy is something that we all aspire to , and that there is nothing exclusive about it .
The right to live freely is something that must be universally recognised .
This also applies to the Palestinians , when , at this very moment in time , in Gaza in particular , young Palestinians - and there are an awful lot of them - have no prospects , no future , no opportunity to educate themselves , to move around and sometimes even to access healthcare or to eat .
This is clearly unacceptable .
We share these sentiments ; I think they are shared by pretty much everyone .
However , I then ask myself , and I fail to understand - let me make that clear - what the European Union is trying to achieve in its association agreement .
You spoke about this .
I have read and reread the minutes of the association agreement .
Even though the European Union has denounced the violation of international law in many respects , as you pointed out earlier , we have provided a series of positive incentives - you call them positive incentives - in the areas of agriculture , fisheries , the environment , policing , judicial cooperation , transport , space cooperation , enhanced scientific cooperation , and in an ACCA agreement , with no guarantees and nothing in exchange .
You had invited the Israelis to your Quartet meeting , but they did not come .
Thus , I do not want to criticise you , Baroness Ashton .
I am aware of your efforts ; you are putting a lot into this issue .
I do not even want to tell you that these positive incentives do not work .
What I want is to ask you whether we still have the right today to dispense with any forms of pressure other than sanctions .
Do we have the right to provide economic and trade incentives when so many human rights and so many aspects of international law are constantly being violated ?
I do not think so , and what is more , I believe that this is a political mistake in the light of the revolutions taking place today in the Arab world .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Madam High Representative , on behalf of my group , I would like to start by saying that we could not agree more with your introduction , with the aims you have put forward , and with the efforts you are making to re-instil life into what you yourself called the ' stalled ' peace process .
I believe that it has stalled and it should be restarted so that we can see some progress .
Last week , Parliament had the honour of being addressed by the Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister who came to make his case to us .
He urged us , on the one hand , not to constantly focus on what is happening in the Occupied Palestinian Territories and , on the other , rather to re-orient our focus on what we could do together , Israel and the European Union .
It would be easier for us to do that if we had some serious indications that Israel is really willing to breathe new life into the peace process .
I cannot help but feel that Israel believes that upheaval in a number of Arab countries gives it more breathing space .
Like Ms De Keyser , I am afraid that this could turn out to be a major political mistake .
On the contrary , Israel should make use of what is happening today to speed up the process and try to conclude a peace agreement as soon as possible .
Mr President , I would like to thank Baroness Ashton for her speech , in which I am a little disappointed .
I quite agree with Baroness Ashton that now is the time - with this historic situation - for the Palestine-Israel issue to come to the fore .
Yet , why was not a single word said about the recognition of Palestine this coming September ?
We all know very well that time is now running out .
We all know very well that this issue , in particular , urgently needs to be resolved and that we desperately need to hear from the EU 's principal representative in particular that this is what we are working for .
Many of us were proud and stood tall when we were recently granted a joint EU seat on the Security Council .
That was excellent and I would like to express my thanks for that .
It also had a beneficial effect .
A great number of fine statements are made at a high level - a great deal goes on up in the ethereal regions .
The terrible thing is that when we come down to earth from these lofty heights - to reality - we experience considerable problems .
As Mrs De Keyser also mentioned , we saw the EU accept the further upgrading of relations with Israel .
It was referred to as a mere technicality to avoid conflicts with Parliament , but what is much worse is the fact that the Israeli settlements are expanding as never before .
The siege of Gaza is certainly not over , and unfortunately , Baroness Ashton only mentioned Kerem Shalom instead of talking about openness towards all parties .
This is , in fact , a very serious matter .
Why is it that all we hear about is money ?
We have paid and paid , and that is important .
We have given money to Salam Fayyad , but if we do not give him the chance to build his state , it will all have been in vain .
Allow me to finish by saying that the EU 's credibility in this historic situation is now truly on the line .
If we do not actually understand that we need to back-up all of our fine words with action , where will our credibility go in relation to the rest of the North African and Arab countries ?
Every single time it seems , when it comes to the crunch , at best we give money , but otherwise we do not go on to take any political action .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , Baroness Ashton , I am deeply concerned about the progress of the situation in Iraq .
The recent uprising there - when the people took to the streets , particularly young people who cannot get jobs , who see the broken economy , the continuing lack of security and sectarian killings - was brutally repressed .
Twenty nine people were killed , many hundreds were injured .
There is now an indication that Ayad Allawi , whose al-Iraqiya Party won the election last March , is going to withdraw from the coalition because Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki has defaulted on the many promises that he made to al-Iraqiya in the coalition deal .
If that happens , we are going to be back to square one , with a sectarian government , backed by both al-Hakim and Muqtada al-Sadr at the behest of Tehran , and we will have a destabilised situation where the party who won the election is no longer in government .
That cannot be acceptable surely , in terms of the future of the Middle East .
Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity , following what has been said today , to comment on the EU 's stand on the events taking place around us in the Arab world .
This stand confuses stagnation with stability ; it is a reprehensible stand , because it has failed to heed the demands of the people in the area for freedom and social justice .
However , the European Union can behave differently ; it can behave correctly .
It proved as much in the case of Palestine , at least as regards so-called ' state building ' .
Even if , in the Arab conflict , the European Union has again failed to send out a strong political message , it has , nonetheless , supported the government of President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad over the last two or three years and , as such , they have been able to construct the necessary institutions so that , by next September , Prime Minister Fayyad will be in a position to ask the UN to recognise the independent state of Palestine and I hope that , when it does , the European Union will support that request .
The European Union could play a similar role in the countries in the area .
I hope and pray that it does and I call on the European Union to negotiate and to enter into agreement with each of the countries whose people are calling for change and , together with the representatives of those people , to define the sectors in which the European Union could help financially and otherwise , by exchanging expertise and setting out joint programmes for the social and economic development of the area .
In this way , the European Union will also address the objectives which it has laid down in its neighbourhood policy .
Mr President , High Representative , I would like to back you up on two points in your introduction .
You spoke about direct negotiations .
Last week , I had the privilege of holding extensive discussions with the representatives of the Israeli Government and of the Israeli Parliament , the Knesset .
You have to trust and believe your discussion partners , and they say that they want direct negotiations with the Palestinian Authority .
I would thus like to ask you to use all your diplomatic inventiveness to bring these direct negotiations about as , ultimately , you do need both parties to the conflict around the table if you are to conclude a peace .
Given the background of the events in which Arab masses are calling for responsible governments , we can conclude that the momentum to bring about a breakthrough is now present .
My second point is that I was very pleased that you made reference to the sad fate of Gilad Shalit , who has now been incarcerated for nearly five years .
Exactly one week ago , I spoke with his father in the heart of Jerusalem , and he was wondering whether Europe still cared for his son .
You gave me the answer .
I hope that you persistently continue to strive to re-unite father and son as soon as possible .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the Arab world is in the grip of profound change .
People are fighting for their dignity ; they wish to live in liberty , in a democracy and under the rule of law , as we do .
It is our political and moral duty to give our full and committed support to people in the Arab world involved in this cause .
I was in Cairo last weekend and met many young people there in Tahrir Square .
The openness , confidence , courage and optimism of the young people in Cairo left a deep impression on me .
Egypt and other Arab countries now have the opportunity of democratic development .
This is also an opportunity for Israel , for it not to remain the only democracy in the Middle East besides Lebanon .
The change taking place in Arabia must be seized as an opportunity for peace between Israel and Palestine .
We must refrain from everything that is a hindrance to this peace .
This means that settlement building by Israel is a provocation to the Palestinians and the Hamas rockets are a provocation to the Israelis .
There must be an end to both .
Peace between Israel and Palestine is possible - two states living together peacefully within secure borders as good neighbours .
Now is not the time for pusillanimity and tentative dealings .
Now is the time for courage , decisiveness and statesmanlike behaviour ; now is the time for peace in the Middle East ; now is the time for democracy in the Arab countries .

( DE ) Mr President , let us be honest , the state of no war , because we cannot talk of peace in the Middle East , has at least allowed the dictators and authoritarian regimes to keep their own people under control and conclude a non-aggression pact with Israel , and has allowed Israel to do so as well .
As we have seen , such props and such pillars are very fragile and can suddenly collapse .
Now they have collapsed .
I am pleased that Israel has not intervened in internal Arab developments .
However , non-intervention is not enough .
As Mr Pöttering said , we must seize the opportunity ; that is , Israel must seize the opportunity to conclude a lasting peace with democratic states ; a peace that does not rest on the shoulders of a few dictators , but is genuinely based on the will of the people to make peace .
Here , the development of settlements is not only a thorn in the flesh , as it always has been , but also an obstacle .
What is more , when the deputy Foreign Minister , who has already been quoted here , says , in the talks we had in Brussels , that we are not taking any new areas away from the Palestinians in any case , that is hair-splitting and cynical to boot .
Settlement development must be stopped .
I am very sad that the Americans have used their veto here , since they have thereby proved that they have no genuine interest in the peace process .
Now , briefly about the elections , about which questions have already been asked .
I hope that we recognise the elections .
We must recognise the elections and the outcome of the elections as a democratic step .
That does not mean that we must recognise any policy that is implemented as a result of the elections .
We must not , however , repeat the mistake of deciding who is the good winner and who is the bad winner of the elections .
We must instead recognise the democratic development .
Finally again , since we are all of one mind on this : I hope that you will strengthen your efforts to free Mr Shalit , so that this problem can finally be resolved .
For just as settlement development is an obstacle to really meaningful dialogue , so is the imprisonment of Mr Shalit an obstacle , as much as ever .
I hope that we can approach both problems in such a way that we can finally arrive at sensible , constructive peace talks in the Middle East .
( DE ) Mr President , the contrast is striking !
The revolution , the change taking place in the Arab world is fascinating for all of us .
We are trying to help .
We have discussed Libya today .
In recent days and weeks , we have discussed Egypt and Tunisia .
Yet , at the same time , we have a standstill in the peace process .
Against this backdrop , we must say quite clearly here , Baroness Ashton , that you did us a service when you managed to convene a meeting of the Quartet .
To produce movement now , at this period of profound insecurity in the region , and profound insecurity in Israel , was an extremely positive service .
I should like to make this very clear .
You occasionally have to endure criticism from this House , too .
For this reason , some praise is perhaps also in order .
As far as the contents are concerned , I should like to make it clear that I do not believe that Israel is sceptically disposed towards democracy in Arab countries .
It is merely that these changes have not yet come to an end .
When and if there are democracies there , I agree completely with Mr Pöttering and with you too , Mr Swoboda , then there will clearly be a great opportunity finally to get the Middle East peace process going too .
Settlement building must stop , that is clear in any case , as must the sophistry with which it is defended .
There is a consensus among all groups in this House on that point .
Connected to the uprising in the Arab world , we also have experienced protests against the Hamas regime in the Gaza Strip .
The situation in the Palestinian Territories is in no way simple .
Democratisation must succeed here too .
For the time being , we fortunately have a moderate and conservative partner in the West Bank , but that is absolutely not the case in the Gaza Strip .

( FR ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , I have observed a strange tendency within the European Union : despite statements criticising Israel 's human rights violations , the Member States and the Commission are working tirelessly to strengthen political and economic relations with Israel , with no conditions attached .
On 22 February , the Union actually upgraded its association agreement with Israel , promising to step up cooperation in several apparently technical agreements in various areas : competition , access to public contracts , Israel 's integration into the European Research Area and into European agencies such as Europol , the European Space Agency and so on .
On 31 January , the Commission authorised the transfer of EU citizens ' personal data to Israel , a country suspected of having used EU citizens ' passports to carry out an extrajudicial killing in Dubai last year .
Israel , which already participates in more than 800 projects with European universities and businesses , will receive more than EUR 500 million in subsidies in 2013 .
Among the beneficiaries will be the arms manufacturers Elbit and Israel Aerospace Industries , which manufacture the drones and aircraft used against the people of Gaza .
At the Association Council , the European Union welcomed the new measures announced by Mr Netanyahu for Gaza and the West Bank .
Baroness Ashton , please could you indicate what this facilitation measure consists of when hundreds of lorry drivers are protesting in Gaza as we speak to denounce the closure of the Karni crossing ?
Also , how does Mr Netanyahu propose to stop the rapid colonisation of Jerusalem and the West Bank ?
I would be grateful , Baroness Ashton , if you could send a message of encouragement and a true message of hope to all those women who took to the streets in Palestine yesterday and who are expecting a great deal of the European Union .
( FR ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , the revolutions in the Arab world are consistent with the aspirations of the Palestinian people .
There is one difference , however : the Palestinians are fighting not against their leader but against an external power that is dominating them , humiliating them , plundering them , colonising them , imprisoning them , stealing their land and their homes , building walls and imposing a blockade on Gaza , while leaving one million of their people in refugee camps , in defiance of international law .
Baroness Ashton , I have heard your explanations , but the European Union has to be firmer and more active .
The Arab peoples are watching us .
Wholesale changes are taking place in the Middle East .
Wholesale changes are also required within the Israeli leadership , which must respect the universal values laid down by law .
Use all the resources at your disposal , which include calling the association agreements into question .
I agree with what you said about Gilad Shalit , but I have already asked you how you plan to secure the release of a young Franco-Palestinian , Salah Hamouri , who is rotting in an Israeli prison for no reason .
Lastly , Baroness Ashton , carry out a strong political act , a political act of the utmost importance : ensure that the European Union officially recognises , without delay , the Palestinian State within the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as the capital .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is the principal financial backer of the Palestinian Authority , providing it with around EUR 1 billion per year , and yet Europe 's political role in the peace process remains marginal .
This large-scale financial assistance gives us the right to ask the Palestinian National Authority ( PNA ) to return to the negotiating table .
On the issue of the recognition of Palestine , we must be clear .
The problem of peaceful coexistence with Israel will not be resolved through unilateral recognition of the Palestinian State , which , moreover , still has not been self-proclaimed .
The PNA must instead go back to taking an active role , sit down at the negotiating table and resolve the ongoing disputes , particularly over safe borders , on the status of Jerusalem and on the issue of refugees .
Even a partial agreement would strengthen the moderate sections of both sides and reduce the influence of extremism .
Mr President , the wind of change blowing through the Middle East promised democratisation , and no true democrat can deny that the people of Egypt , Tunisia and now Libya deserve both freedom and democracy .
I can also fully agree with the High Representative that these events , rather than being a distraction , demand a refocusing of our attention on the peace process .
In recent visits to the area , I found an understandably nervous Israeli people .
Past experiences have seen political vacuums filled by Hamas and Hezbollah .
In this situation , we must consider how best we can help , both in the peace process and in the stability of the region .
Recognition of Israel 's need for security and the validity of agreements with neighbouring countries are important cornerstones .
We must also admit that the neighbourhood policy has failed .
We currently spend EUR 1.5 billion per year on this policy .
We must assess the tangible benefits of this .
If we consider Egypt , where tens of thousands of people are added to the labour market each year with no economic future and no hope , perhaps we should realistically acknowledge that the seeds of further revolution are already there .
( ES ) Mr President , as indicated in the Middle East Quartet Statement made in Munich , we would all like to see the end of negotiations between Israel and Palestine in September 2011 in the form of an agreed solution for the two states that will bring peace and security .
Unfortunately , the prospects are not rosy .
With only six months left , negotiations have come to a standstill , stalled over the question of the settlements .
Ladies and gentlemen , I do not think that the loss of valuable time will benefit Israel , nor will it contribute to finding a successful solution .
On the one hand , I am concerned that it will become ever harder to find moderate leaders in Palestine with enough political support to be able to conclude agreements with Israel , which is no easy task .
On the other hand , if the settlements remain , it will become ever harder to create a truly viable Palestine state .
Lady Ashton , I agree that the peace process should not be put on hold because of political upheaval in the region .
If the current events result in democratic regimes , as we all hope , regimes that will listen to the wishes of the people , the climate in the region will become even less propitious for Israel .
It may be that Israel will become even more isolated and come under greater pressure from some of its Arab neighbours .
In conclusion , everyone , including Israel , would benefit from reaching a solution as soon as possible .
I would therefore urge the European Union to contribute actively to restarting the peace process in close cooperation with the United States and the other Quartet members .
Lady Ashton , I hope that there will be a high-level Quartet meeting this month , as set out in the Munich Statement .
Can you confirm whether that will be the case ?
Mr President , the current situation in the region is both full of risk and full of hope .
For me , the emergence of democratic movements among Israel 's neighbours is a cause of celebration .
We must reject the racist stereotype that regards them as a threat .
I led a parliamentary delegation to Gaza and the West Bank in December 2010 .
The most heart-rending story was that of a little boy who brought his toys to school every day because he was not sure when he came home whether his home and his family would still be there .
That child 's parents want peace .
Every member of the PLC that we met , both in the West Bank and in Gaza , wants secure Israeli and Palestinian borders based on the 1967 green line .
They also want the settlements to stop .
It is incomprehensible that Prime Minister Netanyahu has refused appeals from all of Israel 's allies to stop the settlements .
Simply to stop them .
Not to dismantle them .
To stop them .
It is necessary , in order for serious negotiations to get under way , for those settlements to stop .
I would appeal to Ms Ashton to ensure that that appeal goes again to the Israeli authorities : to please stop the settlements and get the talks going .
We must support the efforts of President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad to peacefully lead the Palestinian people to a Palestinian state .
We do not know what the consequences will be if we do not do that soon .
Mr President , there cannot be a greater friend of Israel in the European Union than Germany , so it is quite something to read that Chancellor Merkel has been shouting at Prime Minister Netanyahu , saying ' you have done nothing to promote peace , give me something ' .
Quite something !
She is right , of course .
Israel has played for time .
It likes talks about talks because all that time gives it the opportunity to keep changing the facts on the ground and making a two-state solution that much harder to achieve .
High Representative , you have the power to make a difference .
Here is the statement of the European Union from last month on the association agreement : six pages of condemnation of human rights abuses and illegality and infringements by Israel - and yet a summary which says we seek closer cooperation with Israel .
What is this about ?
Is it surprising that Palestinians regard the European Union as having double standards ?
You are putting your trust in pleasant dialogue .
But Israel just thinks we are weak , weak , weak .
And until you use your power , until you stand up and use a word to Israel which they are not used to hearing , nothing will change .
That word is ' no ' .

Mr President , whilst good Libyan people are being bombed and terrorised by Mr Gaddafi , the EU has been shelling out on projects for Libya like ' enhancing respect for international humanitarian law ' .
It is pretty obvious that has not worked .
Meanwhile , Baroness Ashton here is demanding yet more resources , on top of the almost EUR 3 billion the External Action Service is due to receive .
Instead of being immersed further in this bloated , duplicating and insatiable EU foreign service and European Defence Agency , Britain should spend the GBP 48 million a day we pay for EU membership on our own national defence interests .
The Libyan crisis has shown the value of having aircraft carriers with fast jets stationed off crisis zones .
I appeal to David Cameron to see sense and reprieve both the carrier HMS Ark Royal , and at least a minimum number of Harriers .
During the Falklands crisis , Mrs Thatcher successfully reprieved the Ark 's sister ship , HMS Invincible .
We must do the same for the Ark Royal .
( RO ) Mr President , I would like to begin by mentioning the very sceptical , pessimistic voices which have recently expressed the view , since the uprisings in the Mediterranean region , that the Middle East peace process is in danger of becoming a kind of collateral victim .
Based on this interpretation , the process would become even more deadlocked than it currently is , which would cause further disruption .
I believe that we do not need to take such a pessimistic view of things .
I actually believe that it is these recent events which show us the need for significant progress in the peace process .
In this respect , we need European leadership , mainly so that the September 2011 deadline for reaching an agreement can be met .
From this perspective , I would like to congratulate the High Representative for the commitment that she has shown and the efforts that she has made in recent months .
In order to implement the two-state solution and promote the cause of a global Arab-Israeli peace , I believe that we need , once again , to bring both sides to the negotiating table and , in this regard , the Quartet 's initiative of consulting with the Israeli and Palestinian negotiators separately marks a first step .
We certainly need to take a further step .
I believe that the climate of revolution in the Mediterranean may give new impetus to the peace process .
However , we must take care that the changes taking place do not lead to a review of the commitments made previously by some of the countries in the region in relation to Israel .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Mediterranean has made a dramatic return to the global political agenda and Europe has found out that it is very weak indeed .
We failed to invest in a neighbourhood policy with the Middle East and the Maghreb , we did not give our backing to an area of free trade or a common immigration policy and what is happening in North Africa is having an effect on the Middle East , where the peace process has stalled .
Baroness Ashton , Europe must help Israel and the Palestinians to restart negotiations on the basis of proposals that are now supported by both the Council and Parliament .
The changes under way also affect Israel and , by investing in change , we can bring together security and peace .
Europe must exert pressure on Israel to weaken its grip on the occupied territories and to halt the settlement policy , which is a necessary condition to restart negotiations .
As we are currently seeing , these days , nobody is impervious when the desire for freedom explodes like this .
Any further delay in resolving the conflict risks compromising Israeli and Palestinian hopes of reaching a fair solution and compromises the future of such a fragile area of the Mediterranean and the Middle East .
( FR ) Mr President , everyone can see that the situation is changing in the Middle East with this democratic wave that is sweeping through the Maghreb and the Mashreq via Egypt .
This historic uprising taking place in the Arab nations must be seen by Israel and by the Palestinian leaders as an opportunity , not as a risk .
Indeed , I believe that the sudden emergence of democratic movements at the borders of Israel and the Palestinian territories is an opportunity to be seized by both parties .
Today , Israelis and Palestinians are having to face facts : the world around them is changing , and it is time for them to change too .
Therefore , the time has come for Europe to force a dialogue , to open real negotiations and to launch a genuine peace process with a view to finding a lasting solution that sees the two nations living side by side in peace .
However , at this very crucial time , it would be incomprehensible and inappropriate for the Union to dispense with its special envoy for the Middle East .
I should therefore like it if you could shed some light on this matter for us , Baroness Ashton .
( PL ) Mr President , as a Member of the European Parliament , I have had the opportunity to visit several countries in the Middle East in the last few months , including Syria , the Palestinian Authority and Israel .
One of the region 's leaders told me : ' Please tell Europe 's leaders to be more strongly involved , because if this involvement achieves success , it will be a political success of the kind for which the Nobel Peace Prize is awarded ' .
I dedicate those words to Mrs Ashton .
However , speaking in all seriousness , all leaders said the same to me : the European Union must be more strongly involved in the Middle East process .
For example , the United States is affected by certain political restrictions , while , on the other hand , our involvement must include cooperation with a partner such as the United States , if only because of the strategic relations of the United States with Israel .
Secondly , all of us , including Mrs Ashton , should make use of every opportunity available to the European Union .
Last week , for example , there was an unprecedented joint sitting of the governments of Poland and Israel in the form of an intergovernmental consultation .
The Prime Minister , Mr Tusk , and the Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Sikorski , were in Israel .
We should make the most of this type of opportunity .
Mr President , the Middle East question , complicated as it was , has become even more complicated lately .
Naturally , the safe bet for everyone would be to wait and see .
On the Palestinian side , the question is who will tip the balance in their favour : Hamas , supported by Iran , gaining ground in the West Bank - more probable - or Fatah reasserting its presence in Gaza - less probable .
Then Jordan , a key country which is engulfed in turmoil , might blow up the entire peace process .
As for Israel , apparently there are two schools of thought : one favouring a restart of the current negotiations through breakthrough proposals , the other favouring the same ' wait and see ' policy .
However , with the vision and determination to take the right turn at each of these crossroads , there is a chance that the current impasse can be overcome , however far off that might appear now .

( EL ) Mr President , I agree with the High Representative 's observation that now is the time for serious intervention and proper negotiation in the Middle East . Firstly , because no one knows what will happen next in North Africa and , secondly , because it is clear that the situation between Israel and Palestine is being used as a pretext for global terrorism and tension and , in particular , to ignite tension in the Muslim world .
Therefore , the peace process needs immediate intervention , intervention by you , Lady Ashton , and by a special envoy .
This will also be a chance for Europe to find out if it really can intervene and play the role played once upon a time by the United States , but with different results .
Of course , financial aid is necessary , but it requires special regulation and special monitoring , because we all know what became of financial aid in the old days .
Of course , there is also the huge issue of democratisation because , without social democracy , the peace process will certainly become a very difficult process .
Thus , a special negotiator , with a special team to help towards proper democratisation and constitutional order , would be very valuable and I have the impression from what you said , Lady Ashton , that you will be making efforts in this direction .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , when I talked with politicians in the Middle East , I often heard them say that the European Union is a payer , not a player .
It was also said that the Union must be a player and not just a payer , because the European Union is the one institution in the Quartet which everyone trusts .
Some trust Russia , while the other side in the conflict is more open to the United States .
The European Union is predestined for this role .
It was said that the Union does not have a common policy because the Member States have very different attitudes to the parties in the conflict and the ways of resolving these problems .
We have , now , an exceptional opportunity , because there is Mrs Ashton , we have the External Action Service , and we can create a common policy on the conflict .
This week , the Commission published a new document concerning assistance for the countries of the Mediterranean region entitled ' A Partnership for Democracy and Shared Prosperity with the Southern Mediterranean ' .
I appeal for us to examine our policy on the Middle East and on Eastern Europe and to learn lessons from these experiences which can then be used when building the new policy towards the countries of the Mediterranean .
The European Union has given help to institutions in Poland and 10 other Member States .
It has helped civil society in the Middle East .
Let us , then , make use of this experience when building the new policy .
( IT ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , in order to achieve peace , all parties first need to take on some commitments , beginning with the recognition of Israel to all effects - which is still not the case in some countries - and therefore , all countries in the area need to offer basic , essential guarantees in order to establish relations built on mutual respect .
If the commercial policy has today become a new form of foreign policy , then we must try to propose and reach solutions not only democratically , but also through commercial agreements .
It is no longer conceivable for the Union to continue financing projects , as it has done so far , that bring neither the result for which the funds were allocated , nor even a slight improvement in the democratic process and the peace process .
Israel cannot be left alone and the Palestinian people have the right to a State .
However , we also need to take action in economic terms , with observatories that are capable of monitoring the use of the aid that we are giving out .
The new situation that has taken hold in recent months , which involves a wider geographic area , finally forces Europe to take stronger and more determined political action and to work more closely with young people , who can help build the safer and more democratic society that we still have not been able to provide for the new generations .
Mr President , having heard Baroness Ashton 's statement , I would like to put two questions relating to her evaluation of the impact on the Middle East peace process of what is occurring now in North Africa .
Baroness Ashton , do you not believe that we have a new opportunity , since the global platform for human rights is now much higher and the threshold of tolerance in the Middle East for clear violations of international law and human rights , such as Gaza and the settlements , is much lower ?
My second question is this : do you not believe that the psychology of a besieged fortress in Israel , which , in the past , was a driving force behind its foreign policy , now has much less justification , because the threat posed by what are becoming democratic regimes is very much less and also because democracies do not go to war against each other ?
Do not all these factors contribute powerfully to a potential reduction in tension in the Middle East ?
Mr President , the EU is part of the Quartet but sadly , there is currently not much progress in the peace process between Israel and the Palestinians .
Stalemate is likely to continue as long as there is so much unrest and uncertainty in the Arab world .
Certainly from Israel 's point of view - and I declare I am Vice-President of the European Friends of Israel - the unpredictable situation in Egypt is diverting attention away from the peace process .
I welcome the commitment by the military government in Egypt to honour the 1979 peace treaty with Israel .
Let us hope that the Muslim Brotherhood do not prevail in Cairo .
Whatever happens , we should make sure that future EU aid to Egypt is conditional on retention of the peace treaty with Israel .
Indeed , the fact that part of the putative future Palestinian state is ruled by Hamas , which is committed still to Israel 's annihilation , is surely the biggest obstacle to peace .
Iran also constitutes a threat to the very existence of Israel .
Peace in the region will never be possible as long as Tehran continues to fund and arm the fanatics of Hezbollah in Lebanon .
Therefore , I understand the recent concern in Israel at the passage of two Iranian warships through the Suez Canal on their way to Syria , which is the first time this was allowed to happen since 1979 .
Egypt getting closer to Iran is a very alarming trend .
Therefore , I wish the High Representative every success in this diplomatic minefield which lies ahead .
( SK ) Mr President , the Middle East peace process is , in my opinion , going through an endurance test at the moment .
The Arab world is changing and few can foresee what sort of governments or regimes will take power in the Arab countries .
The situation is all the more complex for the fact that the Israeli administration has again provoked the Arab world recently by building new settlements on Palestinian territories .
In my opinion , there is only one option open to us at such a time - intensive engagement on all fronts .
We must convince our Israeli friends to refrain from all actions that might provoke unnecessary anger among the Arab population .
However , we must , at the same time , carefully attempt , through close engagement with the Arab world , and particularly with countries that are now deciding on their future orientation , to support decent , democratic political forces that will be capable of resolving any disputes peacefully , in a businesslike manner , and without prejudice and hatred .
We know that the path to greater peace in the Middle East will not be easy , but I hope that the Israeli Government understands by now that today it has one of its last chances for a peaceful and pragmatic ordering of relations with Palestine .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Tannock referred to the Iranian ships that passed through the Suez Canal .
My question to Baroness Ashton , the High Representative , is : is it certain that Egypt has no possibility at all under international law to deny passage to the ships , whether it wished to or not ?
I only wanted to ask whether it was based on international law or whether some political connection is involved here .
Vice-President of the Council / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I will try to deal with as many of the issues that were raised as possible but , as always , when we debate the Middle East peace process , there is a real sense of urgency and a strong desire in this House to see us make progress .
Let me just tell you that this is reflected a thousandfold in the work that I try to do to see what we are able to achieve as the European Union .
I absolutely want us to move away from ever hearing the phrase ' payer , not a player ' again .
I am sick of it .
I have heard it enough .
I do not criticise Members here for saying it .
It is simply just a travesty of the role of the European Union , but I think it does reflect historically some of the ways in which we perhaps were perceived .
I have worked really hard in the course of this year to change that , not least on the ground , and I will say more about that in a moment .
I want to begin with you , Mr Salafranca , because you asked me about some very specific points .
We began with the issue of the veto of the Security Council by the United States - the 14 to 1 vote on the settlements proposal , the resolution that was put forward by Lebanon on the day , because they are part of the Security Council - which , as you know , created a huge amount of what we might call noise in the system and beyond .
I was in the Middle East with the Palestinians during the course of those final days leading up to that vote .
All the EU countries on the Security Council voted against the American position and voted for the resolution .
Our position is absolutely clear .
We are all united in recognising that the settlements are illegal under international law .
Those of you who , like me , have seen the settlements , will know that actually , they are not in anyone 's long-term interest and would have to be resolved ultimately by determination of the borders .
Our proposals have been the 1967 borders with appropriate swapping of territory , which is for the parties to agree and not for us to say , but I am sure that would take into account the reality of people 's lives and where they live .
I do not think it has had a dramatic long-term effect on the relationship with the US , not least because the United States has worked very hard to explain its position - and I am not going to try to explain it for them - and to continue to work with the Palestinians .
I think that the Palestinians have understood the position that the United States found itself in .
So there is still a huge amount of work going on , but I do not want in any way to suggest that it was not a difficult time .
I was very well aware of that .
You asked me about the Palestinian elections called for September , which Hamas has refused to participate in .
You will also know - and you will have seen it - that Prime Minister Fayyad is busy looking at the possibilities for some sort of reconciliation .
I will be speaking to him soon about that among many other things .
I am not sure whether the elections will now go ahead .
That will be for them to decide .
I know that they are thinking about the best way forward .
You also asked me about the leaks that occurred from the Palestinian side .
You know that Mr Erkat , who was the chief negotiator , is moving to a new position as a senior advisor for President Abbas on the grounds that it was from his office and he must take responsibility for it .
I think it had two effects .
One is , of course , great concern about what was going on .
When you are trying to pull together a negotiating position , lots of things are said .
Many of them do not end up in the final documents but people - and this is right and proper - spend time thinking about the different positions .
So without doubt , there was concern in Ramallah and beyond , and on the West Bank and beyond , about what was being said .
Interestingly , there was an equal and opposite reaction whereby , I think in parts of the Israeli press , when they saw what they thought was a Palestinian position , they asked , why are we not engaging with this ?
So it had an interesting effect on raising the debate .
Perhaps in the longer term - although I am never a fan of leaking anything , because it prevents people from developing good policy - this might not have the effect that originally we might have seen .
Let me just kill off this association agreement discussion , which is why I kept shaking my head .
What has not happened is a change in the existing framework and the position .
Progress in the association agreement remains dependent upon progress in the Middle East peace process .
What was being described was the aspiration to want to have those stronger relations , because we do believe in a two-state settlement and we do believe in the future of Israel .
We want to see a strong Israel - economically , politically , all of those things - as we wish to see a strong Palestinian state , but we cannot make progress until we see progress in the Middle East peace process .
I agree with Ms Neyts-Uyttebroeck that it is really important that we start to speed up .
This has been a point that I have made consistently in Israel and to the Palestinian Authority .
We have to get moving .
There are two reasons for this .
One is that the region is changing and those changes demand it and , as Mr Arlacchi said , there is a change in the region that demands that we recognise that an Egypt - not that I believe that Egypt wishes to create a problem militarily with Israel , I do not at all - a democratic Egypt moving forward will want to look again at the issue that is on its doorstep .
I think it is the interests of both .
I genuinely believe it is in the interests of the people of Israel as much as of the Palestinian people to find a solution now .
This could be a really important part of a secure , stable region .
I have said that and will continue to say it , and will continue to say it to all our partners , including everybody in the Quartet .
Mr Belder , we have to get , as you say , to direct negotiations , but we have to do it by making sure the positions of the parties are credible and credible with each other as well .
It is really important that the Palestinians are able to go to the negotiating table with the support of the Arab League .
I speak with Amr Moussa on this subject .
I will see him again in Cairo .
He will be leaving the Arab League in May , I think on 14 May .
He is becoming a presidential candidate in Egypt , as I understand it .
It is very important that the Palestinians can carry the people with them .
That is important for them and it is also important for Israel and for the security of both .
So all of this is tied up with trying to make sure that progress is linked to a certainty about being able to carry the people and the other partners who need to be engaged with that .
Mr Lambsdorff , thank you for your comments .
I think the Quartet is a really important vehicle , but it is not everything .
I am trying to make sure that we make progress on that .
I feel very strongly that we have played an important part .
I think we have played an extremely important part over the past weeks and months in how we have been able to keep momentum going .
We need to get further and faster .
With the Quartet envoys meetings that are taking place , we need to use that opportunity .
When the envoys arrived last week in Brussels , I sat with them for an hour to discuss how I saw the possibilities and to impress upon them the importance of using these meetings with the Israelis and the Palestinians .
I do not mind where we meet the envoys .
I understand with the Palestinians and with the Israelis that sometimes , they are very nervous about what is happening .
So if we go to Jerusalem to meet the Israeli negotiator , I do not care where we go .
Let us just have the meetings and actually , for the very first time , get the envoys meeting with the negotiators and having the chance to explore the positions in a way that we have not done before .
For me , that really matters .
When I talked about Gaza and Kerem Shalom , I really was not trying to suggest that there is only one crossing .
We did a complete piece of work on looking at the whole of the infrastructure on the crossings because , when I went into Gaza and met with businesses , particularly , but also in talking to the young people - and I went to the summer schools last year which we fund - it did seem to me that one of the most important issues for Gaza was to get the economy moving as quickly as possible .
I respect the fact - and I meet with the Israeli general who is in charge of opening the crossing each time I go and get an update - that there is some movement .
I appreciate that .
However , we wanted to make sure that we enabled exports in particular , which is vital for the crossings and vital for the economy , because getting more goods in if you do not have an economy does not help you as much as if you can do both .
So , getting that to happen mattered .
Kerem Shalom was the one where we saw that we could do three things .
First of all , we could put in the infrastructure - the road that would enable it to be used more frequently - and , secondly , we could put in the equipment that would enable the scanning to be done much more quickly to get the flow of goods moving .
Thirdly , we could also train the Palestinian people as part of our mission .
EUR 5.3 million is what it will cost .
We can do it and we are ready to roll .
The reason that matters is because , although of course I want to see a much bigger solution for Gaza , it is important that we offer our support to enable things to happen quickly that can help to alleviate that situation .
So that is my particular reference for Kerem Shalom .
We looked at Karni .
There are other crossings we have looked at , but that is the one where we can make a specific contribution right now .
We will try to do so but it does not alter the basic premise of what we have said - that the crossings need to be open , that people need to move freely and be able to do that as quickly as possible .
I just want to say to Mr Campbell Bannerman that I do not mind you attacking me , but please , let us get the facts right .
Most of the money that you are describing - and , in fact , there is more of it - is used for spending outside .
It is not actually for my service .
It is in order that we can build democracies , support human rights , the instrument for stability , development and so on , which I know you and other members of your group - and I think everyone in this House - absolutely supports one hundred percent .
You want us to support the people of Egypt , the people of Tunisia and the people of Libya .
Well , that is some money that we use to do it across the world over time .
The budget for the European External Action Service is EUR 460 million .
That funds 135 delegations , the central staff , everything that we do all over the world .
It is less than 50 % of the British Foreign Office 's budget .
So if you want to attack me for that , that is fine , but please do not accuse me of having billions and billions of euro that somehow I am using for a sparkling building or anything else .
That is the amount that I have for the moment to be able to spend under the budget that exists .
I will try to spend it as well as I possibly can in the interests of the things that I believe in and which this House believes in .
The rest of it is for us to give to other people who need it to achieve what we think is right .
I have been talking too long but , Mr Arlacchi , it is true that things in the Middle East are changing and the terms are changing .
What is really interesting , as we build the platform on which we operate , is to be able to look at the potential in the region - whether it is in Lebanon and the possibilities of what could happen there , whether it is in terms of the Middle East peace process and certainly what is happening in Egypt and also in my conversations with Jordan , where I speak to the Foreign Minister frequently .
We talk about the opportunities that we have there .
So I think it is the moment where we can really make changes .
I want to just say something about the relationships that we have .
I work very hard at the relationships with Israel and the Palestinians and I talk to a lot of people .
I talk to the leaders of both , privately for many hours , and with other people in the meetings .
I respect those conversations very much , but I tell you the European Union is respected in both countries and I intend to keep it that way because that is about a two-state solution .
They will tell me about things they do not like .
I am glad they do , but I think they have respect for the position that we are trying to take .
We do not have a marginal role .
We have a realistic role .
The role that we are able to play is one that I understand and I use to the best effect I can .
I cannot do what other countries can do .
I do not have the power to do some things , but what we can do is use our economic and political muscle - in the best sense of that word - to be able to try and support this process going forward .
I devote more energy to this probably than to anything else that we do .
Ms Dodds asked whether the neighbourhood policy had failed .
It has not , but it definitely fits into the ' could do better ' category .
I said a long time ago that we need to review the policy .
Stefan Füle and I have started that work .
The events of the last few weeks have proved we need to do it , to make it more effective , more able to achieve what we want and to be flexible and recognise that in the different countries , we need a differentiated approach that will really deliver for the people on the ground the things that they want against the values and aspirations that we hold for them and for ourselves .
I have upgraded the post of special envoy to Deputy Secretary-General for the moment because I think it is so important that the Quartet envoy is somebody who is absolutely at the heart and who is our political director .
I thank Marc Otte for his contribution .
Once Helga Schmid has finished this piece of work and we see where we going , I will then look to see what we should do for the future to make sure that we are properly represented in the region .
Finally , Mr Swoboda , you asked me about the Iranian ship .
As I understand it , the position is that the Iranians said they were doing a training mission in support of their work to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia .
Permission was given for it to go through on that basis .
As far as I am aware - and that is the last information I had because , obviously , as soon as we heard , we asked for the information - as a training mission with that in mind , I do not think there was any reason for the Egyptians to deny them access .
Whether that was what was happening or not is another thing altogether .
Honourable Members , thank you very much for this debate .
I hope in my response I have covered as many of the issues as possible .
Baroness Ashton , we thank you very much because you have had a very demanding day .
You have worked very hard in this Chamber today , so thank you for being with us and for giving us such excellent and detailed answers .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The situation in the Middle East and the Mediterranean region is at a particularly delicate juncture , as the High Representative has also mentioned in her speech .
I believe that this is an appropriate opportunity for the EU to focus on the peace process in the region .
Israel is one of the European Union 's biggest trade partners , while students from the whole of Europe have access to study centres in Israel , thanks to the university international exchange programmes .
I should also mention that the Middle East is where the challenges of the future are already taking shape .
The management of drinking water is one example of this .
The Arab revolutions have generated a climate of instability in the Mediterranean region , which has a particular effect on Israel .
Recently , due to such security risks , the step was taken to close a border point , leaving Kerem Shalom as the only commercial crossing which is completely secure .
The Israeli authorities are focusing their efforts at this location on ensuring a normal flow of civilian and commercial traffic .
In this context , I feel that it is vital to resume as quickly as possible the negotiations on reaching a peaceful solution .
Indeed , the EU 's involvement in this process may provide the support needed for this dialogue to be carried out in ideal conditions .
The revolutions in the Arab world must not divert our attention from the Middle East peace process .
On the contrary , they are an opportunity to be seized .
Palestine is due to hold presidential and legislative elections before the summer , and the Palestinian Authority wants to establish legitimate institutions and manage its security .
The ongoing construction of Israeli settlements is an injustice and a provocation to the Palestinians .
Today , we have the opportunity , with this wind of freedom that is blowing over the whole of the Arab world , to relaunch the negotiations .
The EU must take the initiative to relaunch them .
Why not do so within the context of the Union for the Mediterranean ?
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting closed at 18 : 20 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 00 )
Media law in Hungary ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Respect of national wage and retirement-setting mechanisms ( debate )
The first item is the Commission statement on respect of national wage and retirement-setting mechanisms .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank honourable Members for this opportunity to dispel some widely held misunderstandings regarding the Irish programme .
The S & D Group 's question that gave rise to this statement raises honourable Members ' concern that certain economic policy conditions set out in the Memorandum of Understanding of the Economic Adjustment Programme for Ireland are in legal conflict with Article 153 ( 5 ) of the Treaty .
That paragraph excludes the adoption of provisions in the field of pay under Article 153 , that is , in the field of social policy .
However , the Economic Adjustment Programme for Ireland is not a social policy programme and is not adopted under Article 153 .
It is a financial assistance programme set up , together with the Irish Government , to restore domestic and external confidence and remove the harmful feedback loops between the fiscal and financial crisis .
Therefore , it is grounded in Article 122 ( 2 ) of the Treaty , which allows for Union financial assistance if a Member State is seriously threatened with severe difficulties caused by exceptional occurrences beyond its control .
The role of the MOU is to specify the economic policy conditions that serve as a benchmark for assessing the Irish policy performance during the financial assistance programme .
The Member State has full ownership of these economic policy conditions and their implementation .
These conditions are commitments of the Member State that are undertaken by the state itself .
It is not EU action in the respective fields .
Indeed , many of the conditions , such as the minimum wage reduction , were already included in the Irish Government 's national recovery plan that was published on 24 November 2010 , before the start of the programme .
The aim of the conditions relating to labour market policy is to create jobs and to avoid long-term unemployment in Ireland amongst the most vulnerable groups .
The minimum wage reduction is part of this wider package of measures and needs to be seen together with activation policies and efforts to modernise the benefit system .
When evaluating the reduction in one of the highest minimum wages in the European Union - it is , for instance , the second highest in the eurozone - and although there was significant wage adjustment in the economy , with the minimum wage , in common with wages in general in Ireland , falling by 3 % in real terms in 2008 , followed by a rise of 0.3 % in 2009 , it should be noted that most of the labour market adjustments took the form of job losses .
In fact , the minimum wage cut only restored the status quo prevailing before 1 January 2007 , i.e. before the crisis .
The other condition mentioned in the question is an independent review of sectoral collective bargaining .
The motivation of the review is to discuss the fairness and efficiency of employment conditions for both employees and employers across sectors .
I would like to highlight the fact that Ireland has a long-standing tradition of tripartite consultation on economic and social policy and that the successive pacts between the government and the social partners since the 1980s have been widely recognised as major factors in the success of the Irish economy .
The review is an opportunity for the social partners to voice opinions and shape policy , and its announcement was welcomed as such .
I am fully confident that the review will be carried out by the Irish Government in a way that recognises the importance of social dialogue , includes all the social partners , and complies with Community law .
Finally , the conditions in the Memorandum of Understanding with regard to structural reform are not only about the labour market .
They also contain important measures to open up product markets such as overly regulated sectors and professions .
These reforms could have a major effect on customer prices and productivity , which support the purchasing power of households .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , I would also like to thank the Commissioner .
Yesterday , a new national government for recovery was voted into power in Ireland .
Fine Gael and Labour are part of the PPE and S & D groups respectively in this Parliament .
One of the issues high up on the agenda of the new programme for government will be the renegotiation of elements of the EU / IMF programme of support to Ireland .
At present , many Irish people fear that the conditions agreed by the then government in the EU / IMF programme of support are too stringent and place a heavy burden on ordinary citizens who have had to bear the brunt for the mistakes of the banks - both Irish and European - and the government .
We should note that the new government has agreed to reverse the reduction in the minimum wage .
We know , however , that recovery cannot happen without pain .
Ireland went down a similar road in the 1980s .
Many of the difficult conditions as laid out by the EU / IMF programme are necessary if we are to restore healthy public finances .
We must prune the tree in order to allow growth .
I welcome the Commission 's support for an interest rate reduction as stated by Commissioner Rehn .
This should come about as soon as possible and I urge the Commission to really look at this at an early date .
The Commissioner emphasised that all measures are weighed up against their effect on growth , competitiveness and the sustainability of public finances in the long run .
I accept that ; we cannot carry the entire burden we have been asked to carry at once .
The Irish people have taken their responsibilities in this matter ; in fact , they have taken other people 's responsibilities as well , because we were given no alternative .
What they have done is not just for Ireland but also for Europe and the eurozone in particular .
We do not need the straw to break the camel 's back .
Please give the Irish people the tools ; we will do the job ourselves , but please do not expect the Irish people to carry a burden that they are not capable of carrying .
So I ask the Commissioner to bear those comments in mind in particular in the days and weeks ahead .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , this memorandum requires an EUR 1 per hour reduction in the minimum wage in Ireland and a review , as we have heard , of the system of collective pay agreements which protect the low paid .
I do not believe that this interference can be justified .
The Treaty requires the Commission to promote social dialogue , not undermine it .
Article 152 requires respect for the autonomy of social partners , not this type of interference , and Article 153 expressly excludes EU action in the field of play .
The Commission cannot pick and choose the hierarchy of articles in this respect .
The memorandum goes on to insist on cuts in social welfare , the roll-back of key public services , and reductions in public sector employment and public sector pensions .
How can those demands be justified in relation to a Treaty that requires the Union to aim to eliminate inequalities , promote a high level of employment , guarantee adequate social protection and fight against social exclusion ?
The only honest answer to that is that these things cannot be reconciled , and the problem is that these things have now , as a result of the Annual Growth Survey , become the general rule .
The people will reject the idea of a Europe based only on austerity .
They will not tolerate the far-reaching implications for social policies with lower wages , lower employment protection , weak social standards , reduced public services and the imposition of higher retirement ages .
If we want to continue to swell the ranks of anti-Europeanism , then carry on , Commission .
If not , please stop this nonsense now .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the Commissioner is telling us that the Memorandum of Understanding was drawn up under Article 122 , part 2 .

I would like to ask the Commissioner what happens when one article of the Treaty is in direct contradiction with other articles in the Treaty ; as Stephen Hughes has asked , how do we decide on the hierarchy ?
It is in contradiction with Article 153 .
It is also in contradiction with Article 9 , the social clause , which I have quoted many times in this Chamber when speaking about the Irish austerity package , where it says that in defining and implementing all its policies and activities , the Union shall take into account requirements linked to the promotion of a high level of employment and the fight against social exclusion , etc .
And what about Article 28 in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , under which workers have the rights to negotiate and conclude collective agreements and , in the cases of conflicts of interest , to take collective action to defend their interests , including strike action ?
Many Irish workers would see that they are in that position at the moment .
How do we deal with the contradiction between the different articles in the Treaty ?
Another question for you , Commissioner : are you stating that the Memorandum of Understanding was entirely the responsibility of the Irish Government and that the Commission acquiesced or agreed ?
Finally , let us assume here you have the power to do all of this - and you are telling us you have ; why then was there no effort to reduce or eliminate bank bonuses ?
Why was there no effort to ensure that those at the top of the salary scale paid their fair share ?
Why is it that one euro was deducted from the minimum wage ?
I agree entirely with what Stephen Hughes has said : this fuels anti-European sentiment .
Citizens see what is happening .
They see how the Commission is working in this whole process , and what they see is that it is those on the minimum wage , those who are in collective agreements , are being hit with these austerity plans .
Finally my main question , Commissioner , is : who decides ?
Is it the Court of Justice ?
Who decides when articles of the Treaty are in conflict or when the Commission acts in such a way as to bring those articles into conflict with one another ?
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I understand the urgency of the Commission in addressing the economic crisis and the high levels of debt which are a threat for the stability of the euro .
I understand that conditions are imposed on countries that have to make use of the European Financial Stability Mechanism .
However , it seems to me that the Commission is being quite selective in the measures and conditions it deems permitted in this crisis .
On the one hand , nearly any measure seems legal when it comes to fiscal consolidation by cutting expenditure .
As soon as Ireland made use of the rescue package , minimum wages and pension levels were the first variables to be adjusted , despite the fact that these matters explicitly are not EU competences .
On the other hand , the Commission hides itself behind the lack of EU competence to leave the exceptionally low Irish corporation tax untouched , whereas increasing this could also substantially improve public revenues in Ireland .
Cutting expenditure is not , after all , the only way to achieve a balanced budget .
I understand that this crisis requires exceptional measures , but why is the Commission in such a hurry to adjust minimum wages , affecting workers who earn the least , while we have to wait and see about measures that make the banking and financial sector pay ?
I strongly get the feeling that the Commission is interpreting the EU 's competences in a very one-sided and , dare I say it , right-wing manner .
This blunt approach inspires Euro-scepticism .
It seems that the EU acts firmly in the field of employment and social policy only in times of crisis , and then does so by imposing cuts in social spending and wages .
The EU can only regain confidence if the Commission shows the same determination in setting proper minimum social standards and social guarantees for the heavy cuts imposed on people .
Yes , we do want economic governance , but we want balanced governance with both fiscal sustainability and social guarantees .
If not , the vulnerable will pay the price for a mess that they are not responsible for .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rescue packages were intended to protect EU Member States from insolvency .
However , they are overwhelming citizens with brutal austerity programmes and allowing the perpetrators to get off scot-free .
On top of that , the Commission is now interfering in national wage policy , too .
Mr Hahn , it is quite absurd and it brings tears to my eyes when I hear formal arguments like yours that this is not at all intended to be a socio-political measure .
Such a position is utterly unacceptable .
Wage policy is not the business of the EU .
This policy on the part of the Commission is at complete odds with the idea of this European Union .
The EU was never intended to be about competition in wages and social dumping .
This Commission policy talks about the inflexibility of wages , which is to be reduced .
It states that wages should reflect market conditions .
This is like a blind man describing an elephant .
People who write such things have no understanding of collective agreement systems .
They interfere in free collective bargaining and reduce the much talked-about autonomy of the social partners and the social dialogue to absurdity .
I would like to make it clear that this Parliament is called on to ensure that the autonomous collective agreement policy is retained , to protect the social dialogue and to prevent the further dismantling of social security .
We need measures to prevent a counterproductive austerity policy , not punitive measures .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , this goes beyond Ireland .
Only a month ago , I reminded the House that pensions were exclusively the competence of the Member States and here we go again using the same language of coordination and retirement-setting mechanisms .
Now pensions are almost always related to earnings , so do we see here an attempt to harmonise wages ?
I hope not , because the Treaties also say that wages are an exclusive competence of the Member States .
It is all very well to say that ' equal ' must mean equal pay , but should all workers doing the same job get the same pay across the EU ?
As an example , think ' climate ' : keeping a house warm near the Arctic Circle needs much more money than in Mediterranean countries .
Add in winter clothing , snow clearance and all the rest and it is obvious that to pay all workers the same would leave some with more spare cash than others .
Of course wages cannot be equal .
The Commission 's intentions in drawing up plans to encourage Member States to introduce an EU minimum wage policy and set retirement mechanisms are going against the Treaties .
I am not surprised : this is the EU at work .
A harmonised wage and pensions policy is not just a dream ; it is illegal .
Leave it , as the Treaties demand , to the competence of elected governments like mine at Westminster and like that in Ireland .
( DE ) Mr President , Ireland is a tragic historical lesson for us .
At first , this country was always celebrated as the ' showcase ' country and the model for new members of the Union , although at that time , very wrong policies were permitted and encouraged and these resulted in enormous bubbles in the property sector having to be dealt with , the banking sector being allowed to become a law unto itself and no attention being paid to preventing competitive dumping in the area of taxation .
Commissioner , you have the same nationality as me .
We know how many Austrian writers , for example , suddenly discovered that they are Irish , because they had to pay hardly any tax there .
What did the supposedly extremely pro-European forces do at that time ?
Absolutely nothing !
They said ' this country is a wonderful example ' .
All of that has now completely collapsed .
This bubble has now turned out to be exactly what many people said it was all along .
Once again we have a situation where - and I am not alone in thinking this - anti-European sentiment is being fanned by the fact that we are again allowing the wrong policies to be pursued , in this case by imposing this massive package on Ireland .
Commissioner , you say that the Member State is committing itself to this .
However , we know from our experience of World Bank and International Monetary Fund programmes - and what we are currently seeing in Ireland is not so very different from this - that in the end , these countries have no choice .
If we were to take a step back and say ' it is a shame that Ireland did not reject the Treaty of Lisbon the second time around ' , then we could come to a completely different way of thinking .
We would then see that , with this European construct , we are dealing with something that could be likened to a vehicle , the front of which consists of a Porsche while the back consists of a bicycle .
These two things do not go together .
They need to be much stronger .
If we want to prevent this Europe from breaking apart , we actually need something like a Constitution for Europe .
We then need clear benchmarks that actually apply to everyone .
We need economic governance .
This fragmentary approach - forwards , backwards , sidewards - will not work , and in the end , Commissioner , it is more likely to end in disaster than in what you , I and the vast majority of this House are working for , namely , a peaceful , functional and also united Europe .
( FR ) Mr President , for the record , with the crisis and the bursting of the housing and credit bubbles , the Irish State has had to intervene to support the banks .
The Irish public deficit , the accumulated budget balance of central and local administrations and , in particular , social security administrations , was estimated at 32 % of gross domestic product ( GDP ) in 2010 .
If the Irish Government , which is finding it difficult to refinance itself on the markets , wishes to access loans from the European Financial Stability Mechanism and the European Financial Stability Fund , it will have to meet requirements for social and fiscal change , even though these areas come under subsidiarity .
In our view , there is no contradiction here .
As a doctor , I would say that , in the case of fever , there is no point prescribing antipyretics indiscriminately without seeking to treat the cause .
As far as the allocation of these funds is concerned , this State should get its finances in order so as to correct its excessive deficit and past mistakes .
This austerity plan should improve GDP by 10 % over the next four years .
As with an individual , to whom a bank will make a personal loan conditional upon meeting the solvency condition without getting involved in their private lives and management , the European Union can lend to Ireland on the basis of consolidated solvency .
Without interfering in their private lives , the bank will encourage an individual to negotiate , for example , an increase in salary , or to borrow elsewhere .
Thus , by respecting subsidiarity , the European Union , on the basis of a Memorandum of Understanding drawn up with the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , considers that this solvency requires the reduction of the legal minimum wage and an adjustment of pensions , with fiscal measures nonetheless in the mix .
It is up to Ireland to choose whether or not to implement these measures .
It does not leave the door wide open for the European Union to interfere in areas falling within subsidiarity , making it possible , for example , to impose a European minimum wage , which would be a dangerous thing to do , but rather ensures the protection of the stability of the euro area through a mutual guarantee process .
Of course , it is necessary to help Ireland , like other countries in difficulty , which also protects us , but not at any price , especially that of seeing a State unable to pay off its loans , thus weakening its citizens and citizens throughout the European Union .
I should like to mention to all of you that if you make your speeches at a very fast pace , the interpreters have trouble keeping up with you .
As I am responsible for matters concerning multilingualism , I would like to point out that the Bureau of the European Parliament is currently studying a new system .
At the moment , the interpreters indicate to the President that they are unable to keep up , but the President then has the difficult task of interrupting you .
The system we are now investigating would mean that each of you , in your seat , would have a light to warn you when the interpreters cannot follow the speech , so that the President does not need to interrupt you and you would be informed of it directly instead .
Mr President , the Memorandum of Understanding in relation to labour market issues is very clearly based on a simplistic economic theory that lower wages will ' clear the market ' , in other words , end unemployment .
That is total and utter nonsense .
It is not supported by practice on the ground .
And I would draw the Commission 's attention to the Forfás review of labour cost competitiveness in Ireland , produced late last year , which says that firms generally prefer layoffs to pay cuts because they harm morale less .
If you want to look at why we have had more layoffs than wage cuts in Ireland , that is the basis of it .
I would appeal to the Commission to comply with European law and stop interfering in labour market issues in Ireland .
As you say , we have a long tradition of social partnership agreements in Ireland .
Indeed , they are the basis of the fact that there has been no violence on the streets in Ireland : it is because the social partners and the government have sat down and made arrangements to adjust the labour market and adjust conditions to ensure that we can have some hope of recovery from the current crisis .
That tradition has ensured progress in Ireland , but the programme generally is failing to do what it was intended to do , which was to assist the economy in Ireland to grow .
It is not growing .
In fact , it is in decline , and that programme has to be generally renegotiated .
I would suggest in particular that the issues relating to the labour market have to be removed .
As has already been stated , the Irish Government , of which my party is a member , has already declared that it will reverse the minimum wage cut as agreed in that programme .
You may be unhappy with that , but that is going to happen .
You can be certain as well that your attempt to interfere with the Registered Employment Agreements Act , which has been in place for more than 50 years , will not be interfered with , as you hope , because the current government is determined that social partnership will play its traditional role in ensuring that we have industrial peace and progress .
( PT ) Mr President , the tendency in the EU to increase pressure on the Member States is gathering great pace , under the pretext of the crisis , with a view to devaluing wages and increasing the exploitation of those who work , in order to ensure ever more profits and gains for the economic and financial groups , revealing all the antisocial cruelty of capitalism .
If the irrational criteria of the Stability Pact , with the proposals of so-called economic governance and the so-called competitiveness pact had not been passed , particularly the attempt to prevent wages from rising with inflation and increase the legal age for retirement , we would have even more serious attacks on labour and social rights .
What is already happening in this field in certain countries , such as Portugal , Greece or Ireland , and which is of the utmost seriousness , are salary cuts and pension freezes , even on the lowest pensions and those below the poverty line .
In the case of Portugal , a salary cut on the national minimum wage was already planned for the beginning of this year .
It was felt that EUR 500 was too much per month , and it was decided to cut this by EUR 15 , despite the fact that more than 13 % of female Portuguese workers receive only this amount , compared with 6 % of male workers .
This is a clear example of institutionalised discrimination and the effect of the so-called austerity measures that the Commission , together with the Council and the governments of our countries , is implementing , with the subsequent exacerbation of social inequality , discrimination , the devaluing of work and increased poverty , while the indulgence of financial speculation and tax havens continues .
We therefore express our solidarity with the young workers and teachers who are going to protest over the forthcoming weekends , including this Saturday , 12 March , and at the large national demonstration by the General Confederation of Portuguese Workers ( CGTP ) in Lisbon on 19 March .
This will continue the fight against these antisocial policies .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , in light of what you are telling us , could you please tell us here in this House how attitudes to the European Union have changed in Portugal ?
Has the percentage of people in favour of membership of the European Union fallen ?
How has the general feeling towards the EU changed ?
Portugal shows a great many parallels with Ireland - at first , there was the great euphoria in the 1970s with the prospect of accession , then the corresponding funding .
Are you also seeing similar property bubbles in Portugal to those that were recorded in Ireland ?
( PT ) Mr President , the issue is interesting in this regard : it is obvious that these EU policies are also sparking a major revolt in Portugal , and next weekend , therefore , young people and teachers will take to the streets to demonstrate against this policy .
On 19 March , the General Confederation of Portuguese Workers will hold a major demonstration , which is planned to take place in Lisbon , against these antisocial policies .
Of course , this is reflected in the behaviour of the Portuguese people because the country has already entered into a recession , and living conditions are worsening for the workers and the people , inequality is being exacerbated , and poverty is also on the increase .
The European Union , the Commission and the Council ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SV ) Mr President , by setting out requirements for lower wages , the Commission has undermined the negotiating right of the social partners and both directly and indirectly affected wage formation , which is explicitly excluded from the Commission 's sphere of competence .
This is nothing less than a frontal assault on the social partners ' influence and is contrary to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which includes the right to enter into collective agreements .
This is not an isolated incident restricted to Ireland , either , but is being repeated time and time again .
By talking about ' unit labour cost ' instead of wages , the Commission is attempting to circumvent the limits established by the Treaty .
The European Commission has quite simply redrawn the map .
It has drawn up a new map and a new set of regulations in which the Member States and the social partners now have their tasks taken away from them and , contrary to all regulations , find themselves dictated to .
This is what the dispute is about and it has only just begun .
By acting in this way , the EU is moving ever further away from a democratic basis and legitimacy , which , in other contexts , are usually the keywords when we discuss the future of the EU .
We hear that there are some troublemakers - including in this Parliament - who are already starting to fish in these troubled waters .
This is surely not what it is all about .
( NL ) Mr President , very few people in the Netherlands have any idea that we , here in Brussels , are discussing their wages and pensions .
We are currently witnessing what is happening in Ireland but , at the same time , I am also hearing all kinds of proposals being put forward to the European Council for the abolition of wage indexation and for the maximisation of wage increases , based on increases in labour productivity , etc .
Unfortunately , we seem to perpetually meet with a deafening silence when it comes to agreements on European standards for the minimum wage , nor have I heard any proposals intended to guarantee that workers can get work which pays or that they can get full-time jobs , instead of piecework or standby contracts .
I am concerned about the impact of the current discussions on ordinary people , but I am also concerned about the image of the European Union .
It really does look like we only pay attention to the interests of financial institutions , to speculators and to big business .
Commissioner , is the Commission going to take steps to change that image and is it going to ensure that it is viewed as an institution which also represents the interests of ordinary people ?

( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , you have given us a prescription that says two things : firstly , that we should abolish collective agreements and , secondly , that we should reduce the minimum wage still further .
This is the prescription which is being given consistently to every patient .
One of the patients is Greece .
You recently visited Greece , during an event organised by the socialist party .
You saw and felt the prevailing situation and my question to you is this : did you feel that the prescription for Greece was working ?
I was there and I am from the socialist party currently governing the country and doing what it can to get it out of the very difficult situation caused by right-wing governments and it has had to make concessions on the question of collective agreements and I am telling you that we have not yet seen results .
You say that you are doing all this for European citizens , for consumers , but , if consumers are paid lower wages , they will have nothing to spend and will not therefore help to boost growth .
You know better than I that it is a vicious circle , because you insist on giving us a prescription which does nothing except destroy the workers ' dignity , a prescription which results in a lack of decent and viable jobs .
I beg you to include social indicators alongside the economic indicators .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I sometimes have the feeling that you should try out all these solutions on the Commission itself so that you could see what impact you are actually having on Europe .
Following your speech , I am left with the impression that the Commission really does sit in an ivory tower .
The people of Europe - the workers , the low earners and the pensioners - are really picking up the bill , and you are interpreting legislation and competences however you please .
On 19 October last year , I received a response to a question that I had put to the Commission in which it was explicitly confirmed that minimum wages and wages in general are the responsibility of the Member States .
The response states this very emphatically .
Please read it .
It is not acceptable for you to give me that kind of answer when it is a good thing for employers and then simply change direction when you believe something is good for the other side .
That will make the people of Europe really very unhappy .
My fellow Member has just mentioned this .
You are chipping away at codetermination .
You are weakening the trade unions .
That is not the way out of the crisis and you are fully aware of that .
Those who caused the crisis must also be the ones to pay for it .
( Applause )
( LT ) Mr President , faced with the conditions of the economic crisis , countries are having financial difficulties implementing the commitments they have made .
There is little doubt that their capacity to overcome the crisis varies and there is a need to find ways of balancing the budget and reducing the budget deficit .
However , Commissioner , must we really do this at the expense of those who are worst off ?
Is it morally right for the European Commission to pressure governments into reducing the minimum wage , pensions or other social benefits ?
Commissioner , you gave your opinion on the Memorandum of Understanding with Ireland .
However , I would like to remind you that you signed a similar memorandum with Latvia , where you pressed the Latvian Government to reduce pensions that were already low .
Pensions in Latvia were reduced , but the Latvian Constitutional Court stated that the country 's fundamental law does not allow this and the pensions were reinstated .
Thus , when taking such decisions and signing such memoranda , it is necessary to thoroughly assess both the legal and social consequences .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Hahn , the proposals that are now on the table are like putting a large rucksack on the backs of all those who are already finding things difficult enough and telling them they have to run faster with it on .
How is that supposed to happen ?
The proposals for decentralised wage negotiations are unfair , unimaginative and they are a diversionary tactic , because it is so difficult to tax asset and financial speculation and the Heads of State or Government are not succeeding in getting genuine macro-economic coordination off the ground .
In this regard , we in Parliament have already set a very different benchmark this week with our vote on the financial transactions tax .
I would like to remind you all of the principle of the social market economy as laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
My conception of the social market economy is rather different - it would not include decentralised wage negotiations , quite the opposite , in fact .
Decentralised wage negotiation systems are contrary to a wage policy based on solidarity and rather than leading to the gap between rich and poor getting smaller , they will - on the contrary - result in it getting bigger .
In other words , we should do the opposite .
I would therefore like to expressly repeat what my colleague , Mrs Steinruck , said - we cannot repeat it often enough : we must take more action to tackle the cause of the crisis ; make those who caused the crisis pay to a greater extent ; and focus on them for the resolution of these problems , including by means of legislative measures .
( RO ) Mr President , in reference to the alignment of unit costs with labour and levels of productivity , I think that we ought to focus on the framework conditions and less on indicators .
It is not obvious that we can achieve this alignment .
Productivity depends primarily on factors such as accumulated capital stock , which is very different .
The clear disparity can be seen between Romania and Germany .
This is due to the difference in quality of economic policies over time .
Indeed , such discrepancies cannot be made up overnight .
My country has made efforts towards reforming pensions and social assistance .
I would therefore like to suggest including some provisions of this kind in the competitiveness pact .
I support the need for a correlation between the retirement age and demographic trends .
The impact which a coherent , realistic pensions policy has on public finances needs to be taken into consideration .
( RO ) Mr President , I understand very well the subsidiarity principle , but I believe that pensions have ceased to be a national concern as they are the subject today of an EU-level debate .
We are discussing pension systems which are unsustainable as a consequence of common challenges such as the financial crisis , as well as of an ageing population and declining birth rate .
The principle of intergenerational solidarity is at risk of becoming obsolete , with citizens being forced to contribute to private pensions .
However , what happens to those who no longer have enough time to contribute to such pensions ?
European citizens also depend on public pensions .
In Romania , the gross national minimum wage is approximately EUR 160 .
This is why I believe that investing in private pensions or saving is just pure fantasy .
I think that the European Commission needs to be more involved by proposing both a minimum EU salary and pension level .
A first step towards this could be to carry out a comparative pension system analysis .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , we are here to talk about salaries and proposals on the age of retirement .
These proposals are downright unfair , to say the very least .
They are unfair as they insist upon routes that have already been proven , more than once , to end in failure .
What is happening in Ireland , Greece , Portugal , Spain , Italy , and who knows in how many other countries as the list is endless , is different in each of these countries , but they have certain things in common .
One of the things that we have in common is an unprecedented transfer of the value of work to financial capital .
We cannot accept this .
The other thing that we have in common is that it is the workers , retired people and pensioners who are paying for this crisis , along with a generation of workers in unstable jobs who do not have any guarantees in the society in which they live .
I should therefore like to finish by saying , Mr President and Commissioner , that we cannot continue to condemn people to poverty .
I sincerely hope ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FI ) Mr President , a growing European trend at present is rightwing populism , whose core ingredient is opposition to the EU .
Where are these antiEU feelings coming from ?
They spring from the fact that a social Europe is becoming overshadowed by a ' market Europe ' .
All the Commission 's proposals today attack either the pay or the pension system .
The feeling is that pay flexibility might help in some way .
It will not : on the contrary , it will result in deflation .
It is very important that all legislation is bound by a permanent social clause , so that the idea of a social Europe will once again come to the fore .
It is important to realise that retirement ages will rise if there are improvements in working life , but they cannot be raised through legislation from above .
( LV ) Mr President , unfortunately , Ireland is not the only country , and Greece is not the only country either .
Latvia was perhaps the first to undergo all this hardship , which was caused by the activities of the banks .
The minimum wage has been reduced in Latvia , and it is lower than the subsistence level .
Pensions have been reduced , along with the minimum tax-free amount .
The people are protesting .
Over this period , Latvia has lost one fifth of its population ; one fifth has emigrated and is working abroad .
The International Monetary Fund , which is supposedly rescuing Latvia , set conditions that are draconian .
It permitted money to be used to save the banks , a little money to be left over for the next potential bank rescue , but did not permit ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to express my support for Mr De Rossa .
The recommendations made to Ireland by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) unfortunately reflect a tendency prevalent among our policy makers at the highest level , which is to make European workers pay for a crisis that is not of their making .
Another example is the Commission 's annual growth analysis , which recommends raising the legal retirement age by linking it to life expectancy .
Parliament recently expressed its disapproval on this subject in its report on the Green Paper on pensions .
A further example is the proposed competitiveness pact calling for the abolition of inflation indexation of wages , including in my own country , Belgium .
Faced with this situation , I welcome the involvement of the trade unions , yesterday in Hungary , for example , or in Brussels on 29 September .
It is time our Commissioners heeded the message of European workers if they do not wish to widen the gap between themselves and the citizens , who will believe less and less in the European project .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank everybody for their contributions .
I can promise you that we give serious consideration to each of them .
Let me first say a few words about the importance and relevance of social dialogue .
We fully recognise the importance of social dialogue and constructive industrial relations .
We have continuously engaged with the social partners , both at EU level and in individual countries .
For instance , Commissioner Rehn personally met with Ireland 's trade union leaders in early November , as did officials from the Commission , the ECB and the IMF when negotiating the programme in late November .
They will continue to engage on the next mission in April and on subsequent occasions .
By the way , contrary to some allegations , the Commission did not force Ireland to cut the minimum wage or social expenditure .
These measures were already presented by the former Irish Government itself in its national recovery plan , together with other fiscal and structural measures aiming at economic stability , growth and job creation .


The legal basis of the economic policy conditions is Article 3 ( 5 ) of Council Regulation ( EU ) No 407 / 2010 establishing a European financial stabilisation mechanism and Article 2 ( 2 ) of the Council Implementing Decision 2011 / 77 / EU on granting Union financial assistance to Ireland .
Once again , both are grounded in Article 122 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
The mere fact that the Memorandum of Understanding 's specific economic policy conditions touch upon various issues that are linked to social policy does not put into question the legal basis of the act .
There appears to be no contradiction with Article 152 or Article 153 ( 5 ) .
Article 152 is a general provision which does not exclude the possible need for specific measures with social consequences .
Moreover , that provision does not create subjective rights for the social partners .
Article 153 ( 5 ) is a limit as regards the content of the measures that can be adopted under Article 153 , i.e. social policy .
Since the MoU is not adopted on the basis of Article 153 , this limit does not apply .
The provisions of Title 10 , social policy , cannot be disregarded .
They have to be taken into account , but it does not mean that as a consequence of Article 153 ( 5 ) , no measures having an effect on pay can be adopted on the basis of Article 122 .
The measures adopted on the basis of Article 122 for Ireland do not regulate issues .
They provide for conditions linked to the granting of Union assistance .
This is explicitly allowed by Article 122 ( 2 ) .
Therefore , there is no legal problem as regards the principle of conferral .
More generally , the issue of economic policy conditions is not about EU competences in the field of social policy or wages .
The conditions included in the programme cover a wide range of policy areas , and for most of them , the competence lies with the Member State .
The economic policy conditions of the programme are Member State commitments agreed with the EU and the IMF on the measures that the Member States will undertake in exchange for EU / IMF financing .
As a final note , the Commission fully acknowledged that any financial assistance programme naturally has social consequences .
However , the main goal of the specific economic policy conditions attached to such a programme is to avoid much graver social consequences by setting the country back on the path of sustained growth and job creation .

Mr President , I would have to ask your assistance to identify when a Commissioner stands here in this Parliament and says , on the one hand , that Ireland is not being forced to reduce its minimum wage or to reduce its social protection and then goes on to say that the agreement is a conditionality ; that these are conditionalities for receiving aid - is that not a fundamental contradiction and a misleading ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Excuse me , Mr De Rossa , you know that I have great respect and fondness for you , but we cannot reopen the debate .
Your opinion should be respected , as should that of the Commissioner on the matter , and each of us has to deal with any contradictions that may arise .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
According to Eurostat , in January 2011 , the minimum monthly income varied between EUR 123 in Bulgaria , EUR 157 in Romania and EUR 1 758 in Luxembourg .
In 20 of the 27 Member States , the minimum income is set by law or by national inter-sector agreement .
In 11 Member States , the minimum income is between EUR 100 and 400 / month , in 5 Member States , it is between EUR 550 and 950 / month , and in 6 Member States , it is more than EUR 1 100 / month .
The development and consolidation of the internal market provide businesses with access to Europe 's 500 million plus consumers .
However , maintaining the disparity in minimum income levels between Member States is a barrier preventing both European companies from having access to European consumers and the latter from having access to high quality products and services .
I regard social dialogue as being particularly important in terms of ensuring social fairness and a decent standard of living for all European citizens .
We call on the Commission and Member States to guarantee equal pay for equal work in the internal labour market , the lifting of barriers preventing the free movement of workers and the examination of the possibility of providing a minimum salary agreed by law or based on collective negotiation , which will guarantee European citizens a decent standard of living .
Prevention of natural and man-made disasters ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the prevention of natural and man-made disasters by João Ferreira , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety - B7-0201 / 2011 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , two years has passed since the Commission launched a communication in February 2009 on a Community approach to the prevention of natural and man-made disasters .
The importance of this issue was outlined .
Since then , various disasters have hit Europe and have had severely negative consequences for the public , the land , the economy and the environment .
In general terms , the Commission 's communication followed a proper approach , albeit an inadequate one , as was considered by Parliament .
In addition , the Commission is delaying in implementing the commitments it assumed in this communication .
One example of this is its commitment to draw up a list of preventative measures to be funded by the European Union and implemented by the Member States .
Two years later , and where is this list ?
Is the Commission going to wait for the next multiannual financial framework before presenting it ?
Another two years from now ?
Meanwhile , in September of last year , Parliament adopted a report on this very matter .
This report puts forward a set of important recommendations .
It is important to say that this report was preceded by a much wider debate , not only here in Parliament , but also with a wide range of national , regional and local entities , operating in different phases of disaster management .
The report also gathered a lot of experience of these catastrophes with the people who were affected by disasters over the last year .
Here , I would like to mention a few of the specific points of the report , from the many that it contains .
A range of actions were defined as targets for special support to the Member States , with a view to remedying situations of risk in areas such as forest management , the protection and defence of the coastline , restoring and protecting river basins , the protection and remodelling of populated areas which are particularly vulnerable to certain types of catastrophes and the maintenance of farming activities in the areas affected by depopulation and which are at risk of natural disasters .
How has the Commission included , or how is it thinking of including , these areas in the list of measures to be drawn up ?
The report also proposes the creation of public agricultural insurance in Europe and the institution of a system of minimum compensation to farmers affected by disasters .
I notice that this is very different from the current possibility that the Member States will subsidise insurance internally , with the CAP Health Check .
What is proposed is insurance financed by Community funds on an equal footing as regards protection against disasters , for all farmers , whether they are from the Member States most in need , or whether they are from rich countries .
As we know , disasters are deeply unfair , and they almost always have the greatest effect on those who are least able to protect themselves , be they people or countries .
If there is one area in which the tangible expression of EU solidarity and the principle of cohesion must be ensured , it is in the protection of the public , the economy and the environment , in the face of disasters .
I would therefore like to ask here what the Commission is going to do to reduce the existing imbalances between the regions and the Member States in this area , in other words , helping to improve prevention in regions and Member States with a greater exposure to risk and lower economic capacity .
Another area covered in the report is strengthening early warning systems in the Member States and establishing connections between the various early warning systems .
Which steps have already been taken in this area ?
Which steps will they take next ?
Finally , it is worth recalling that following on from prevention , and bearing in mind the experience gained during recent disasters , it is becoming imperative to revise the regulations for the Solidarity Fund to allow for a more flexible and timely mobilisation of this instrument .
What has the Commission already done , or what is it going to do , for this review ?
I recall that a year ago , Madeira was struck by a major disaster which resulted in fatalities and high levels of material damage to strategic infrastructures and basic equipment .
It is now one year later , and Madeira has still not received a single cent of aid at all from the EU .
What will the Commission do to change this situation , when the regulation of the Solidarity Fund currently says that ' it should help to quickly restore normal living conditions , and it should act swiftly and efficiently to help , as quickly as possible , in mobilising emergency services ' ?
Where is this speed when , one year later , Madeira has still not received a single cent in aid from the EU ?
To conclude , Mr President , once again I urge the Commission to take the broad consensus that this report attracted , when it was voted upon and discussed , as a clear sign that these recommendations , the recommendations contained in this report , are to be put into practice .
Many of these recommendations were already contained in previous Parliament resolutions , but unfortunately nothing was done and the Commission bears particular responsibility for this delay .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank Parliament for the opportunity to exchange views on disaster prevention , and Mr Ferreira in particular for his continued interest in the subject .
The disasters of last year were a salutary reminder that the EU and its Member States need to step up work on disaster prevention .
We need to be ambitious .
We all know that investing in disaster prevention pays off .
At the same time , ensuring cost-effective and increased investment in disaster prevention is a challenge .
We are now assessing the effectiveness of existing EU financing instruments .
We are also developing a catalogue of prevention measures that would be considered by Member States for EU funding .
Our objective is to increase the impact of EU funding and to accelerate the implementation of Regional Fund support .
We are also looking at innovative financing instruments , such as insurance pooling to share risks .
Effective investments in disaster prevention will help to save lives , limit damages and , ultimately , save money .
Actions are also under way to improve our knowledge of disasters .
We have worked with the European Environment Agency on a report assessing the frequency of disasters in Europe and their impact on humans , the economies and ecosystems .
We also need clear and transparent assessments of the risks we face .
On 21 December last year , we issued a guidance paper on national risk assessment and mapping to encourage Member States in fostering a comprehensive risk-management culture .
Developing fully-fledged risk management policies will require the involvement of all actors .
The increased frequency and intensity of disasters in Europe should also provide further incentives for Member States to invest in preparedness and build up their capacity .
Besides the prevention elements , it is equally important that Member States , and Europe as a whole , are able to provide the best possible response .
In October last year , we outlined our policy proposal for a European disaster-response capacity .
Our objective is to improve the efficiency , the coherence and the visibility of the EU 's response to disasters .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , solidarity is the right word to start with .
When disasters happen - be they man-made or natural - we must stand together in Europe .
That is central to European integration .
The second keyword that we must mention here is speed .
It is important to provide help quickly , because rapid assistance is the most effective form of assistance .
Thirdly , however , I must point out that it is , first and foremost , the Member States that are responsible for protecting the population , where possible , from such disasters .
We must examine how we can use European resources and also the funds that are available to us in a more efficient and more effective way .
However , I should point out that many Member States call for European resources in order to conceal the fact that they are taking inadequate measures themselves .
What can we do at EU level ?
We have two major expense items : firstly , the European Regional Development Fund for which Commissioner Hahn is responsible , and secondly , the Agricultural Fund , in which regard we could make better use of the funds that are already available .
Prevention is key . That is to say , very many disasters , flooding in particular , could be prevented by means of proper spatial planning .
We already have a Floods Directive , in connection with which it was clear that we could actually achieve a great deal with our existing resources if we took the right measures - such as mapping , risk assessment and , as a third measure , the creation of preventative action plans .
I would like the Commission , in addition to the prevention measures that it has drawn up , to look , in particular , at the areas of droughts and water shortages .
In these areas , we still lack an instrument like the Floods Directive , and we could do a great deal here .
With regard to the catalogue of prevention measures itself , I have to say that mainstreaming is surely crucial in this regard ; in other words , that we try to take these aspects into account in other policy areas .
Under the supervision of the Commission , the Member States must also draw up risk maps for all areas .
Mr President , this is a recurring debate in Parliament .
Unfortunately , natural or man-made disasters are becoming increasingly frequent and devastating .
Although responsibility for disaster prevention lies primarily with the Member States , the European Union can make an important contribution .
There are certain Community instruments to support this disaster prevention activity .
However , it is important that those instruments are evaluated so that we can better identify the gaps .
Moreover , the funding mechanisms also need to be improved .
It has already been mentioned here , but I should like to reiterate that in the case of Madeira , there has not yet been any promise of aid , and it is clear that the victims of this catastrophe cannot remain waiting forever .
The Commission was also asked several times to draw up Community guidelines for risk mapping .
I should also like to highlight the importance of carrying out a complete inventory of the sources of information because it is only possible to proceed in an appropriate way if there is accurate information .
Some of the suggestions and proposals presented in the Ferreira report were contained in my report , which was adopted by Parliament in 2006 , and the Commission has not yet given a response to many of these proposals .
I should therefore like to ask the Commissioner whether he can report on the work done so far in connection with the creation of the European Drought Observatory , and also about the directive on forest fires .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , summers are hotter and storms are more severe .
Rainfall is more erratic and we have more droughts causing life-threatening fires across our continent .
Hardly a country has escaped a natural disaster in the last few years and this is not counting the man-made catastrophes such as Chernobyl and , more recently , the toxic dam in Hungary .
Citizens look to their elected representatives to ensure the planning for their protection is efficient and reliable and in place .
We have had many promises and reports from the Commission , yet little concrete action has been forthcoming .
We have been promised progress in setting up a network of competent national services in Member States .
A map of assets , that is readily available and ready to use when disaster strikes , was promised in 2009 .
National authorities should now be requested to put core equipment on standby , available for rapid European assistance when needed .
In my own region , we have in Bracknell the world-renowned medium-range weather forecasting centre .
Its information assists mariners , aircraft and emergency planners from a range of real-time sources around the world , but we need more than these sorts of facilities .
We need to know where the trained emergency service teams are .
We need to know where the emergency food supplies , the tents and the blankets are .
We need to know where the facilities are that will save the lives of citizens of our Union when they need them .
The Commission must come forward with these plans now .
Tomorrow 's disaster may be just around the corner .
Mr President , I should like to begin by saying that I completely support what my fellow Member has said .
The prevention of natural and man-made disasters is of enormous and increasing importance , and the Commission is systematically presenting us with a number of aims for procedure and timing .
However , there is a very complicated problem , which I have already mentioned .
The Solidarity Fund is the instrument which normally responds to these situations , but it does so after a very , very long period , from nine months to a year , and this is after a disaster .
As has already been mentioned , and I shall continue to repeat this as we shall continue to repeat this for as long as it takes , in the case of Madeira , there was a massive disaster there a year ago , and it has still not received any aid .
I should therefore like to stress this question anew : is it not time for the Commission to review the procedure for its own fund and funding model ?
How can we maintain a fund to deal with increasingly drastic exceptional situations ?
We do not know where it will happen , but we know that it will happen , and climate change is there to prove it .
Therefore , the exception can never apply to a situation that occurs on a regular basis .
Mr President , there is much room for improvement regarding current mechanisms for preventing natural and man-made disasters .
Whereas in the case of preventive measures taken against natural disasters , we must try especially to improve systems for monitoring natural phenomena - be they changes in the weather or tectonic shifts - and then to improve the mathematical models for evaluating and forecasting changes , their consequences and the related warning mechanisms or subsequent evacuation , in the area of man-made disasters , we can work much more effectively .
As we are aware of the risks of different human activities , especially commercial activities that threaten the environment , we know how to reduce in a preventive manner the risk of a possible disaster arising from the performance of any kind of risk-prone activity through good regulatory measures .
A preventative regulatory framework , however , just like systems for supervision , inspection , sanctions and repression , must be comprehensive and must be implemented with complete thoroughness and emphasis .
In the interests of protecting the health and lives of our citizens , we must therefore work systematically to improve these mechanisms for protecting against disasters .
( FI ) Mr President , we can endorse what has been said here .
Disasters have just continued to increase in number .
The EU could really do a lot about this : exchange of information , support and solidarity .
Here , of course , one gains added value , which is only to be expected of the Union as far as these issues are concerned .
I myself , however , would like to take advantage of this opportunity and ask the Commissioner a question .
Three to four years ago , there was a huge forest fire in Russia , resulting in massive smoke damage in my own country , Finland .
Many people actually suffered serious health problems caused by this smoke .
At the time , the European Parliament here decided to call on the Commission to negotiate an agreement with Russia on how the EU could come to its assistance in such cases and provide the necessary help , which Russia then needed but which it did not agree to accept .
I would like to know if the Commission has made any headway in this matter and implemented measures .
Disasters are not merely confined to the EU : they also occur beyond our borders , and they often have an impact on the EU 's Member States .
I would like to know what progress has been made with Russia on this .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over the past 15 years , the number of natural and man-made disasters has increased significantly and we see phenomena that are more severe and more frequent in almost all European Union countries with serious consequences for the economy , infrastructure and ecosystems .
We need an urgent EU approach to develop preventive policies and to identify and adapt the relevant financial instruments .
The European Union Solidarity Fund and national funds are no longer able to cope with frequent disasters .
I would ask the Commissioner who is present when will it be possible to provide data and a map of areas at risk , as announced in his communication of 23 February 2009 ?
I regret , finally , that the Soil Directive for the improvement of land management has been blocked for some time in the Council .
( RO ) Mr President , after the ecological disaster in Hungary last October , I drew the European Commission 's attention on more than one occasion to the issue of disaster prevention in the mining industry .
In the case of the mining sector , accidents can often have a cross-border impact .
This is all the more reason why the European Union has a duty to ensure that every possible measure is taken to reduce the risk of accidents and to improve the speed and efficiency of the response when these accidents , nevertheless , occur .
I received confirmation from the Commission , in response to my questions , that the waste discharged into the environment from the accident in Hungary , including into the Danube , was actually toxic , even though this had initially been denied by the authorities .
This is a perfectly clear example of regulations which are not being applied , a situation which must change as quickly as possible .
It is the European Commission 's duty to take urgent action in the wake of the resolution adopted last year by Parliament , calling for a ban on the use of cyanide-based technologies in mining as they pose huge cross-border threats to ecosystems .
( RO ) Mr President , the report on the Community approach to the prevention of natural and man-made disasters , approved in September 2010 , contains a few important references targeted directly at agriculture .
The report makes particular mention of the fact that agricultural production is vulnerable to climate phenomena such as drought , frost , hail , forest fires , floods , landslides and others .
The report also contains a number of important suggestions aimed at mitigating the impact of these problems .
The author has already mentioned the idea of providing some assurances for agriculture .
I would like to highlight the importance of tackling these challenges effectively , especially in the context of a future common agricultural policy whose aim is for agriculture to play both a role in food production and a major role in environmental protection .
( HU ) Mr President , last October , Hungary received expert assistance and material resources to deal with the damage caused by the red sludge disaster , yet no substantive assistance was provided .
It was extremely difficult to explain to people why humanitarian assistance can be provided to citizens of countries outside of the EU , but not to EU Member States .
It is obvious that the ' polluter pays ' principle must be applied in the event of industrial disasters , but in most of these cases , these companies do not have enough money .
The Commission promised to make environmental liability insurance mandatory for all companies engaged in hazardous activities .
At the same time , I propose that - with adequate regulation - the Solidarity Fund should be opened up to the partial alleviation of industrial catastrophes , I emphasise , partial ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , the concept of disaster prevention , particularly where our Hungarian friends are concerned , clearly deserves a great deal of attention because something went wrong when dealing with the toxic sludge disaster in Hungary last October .
In its report , the Commission found there to be clear failings on the part of the local authorities , which failed to classify the hazardous wastewater and made major errors in connection with construction work on the reservoir .
The Commission also found that the European Waste Catalogue - the Mining Waste Directives - had not been transposed into Hungarian law .
It is therefore important for the individual Member States to incorporate European standards into their legal standards in a binding manner .
In addition to disaster prevention , the proper application of these European standards is also important , as is the exchange of best practice and helping the Member States to help themselves .
Particularly during this Year of Volunteering , it is important and right for the Member States to go some way towards modelling themselves on the example of those Member States that have nationwide voluntary fire brigades , rescue services , etc .
( RO ) Mr President , one of the biggest challenges currently facing the European Union is the increase in the severity and repercussions of natural disasters .
The statistics indicate that , in the last 20 years , 953 disasters have occurred in Europe , causing almost 90 000 deaths and economic losses amounting to USD 269 billion .
To be able to counter the effects caused by these phenomena , a risk chart is required , along with a coherent plan for managing environmental factors .
The preservation and extension of forested areas , as well as green belts in urban environments , must be a priority for all of us .
It is vital for us to give the importance that is due to the activities of informing and educating the general public with the aim of preventing the repercussions of disasters .
The International Day for Natural Disaster Reduction is a good example of this .
I also think that all the instruments need to be made more effective ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) Mr President , the concerns raised here with regard to preventing and responding to disasters is a matter of great sensitivity and of the utmost importance for our people , who cannot and should not be made to wait .
We are talking about very sensitive situations that deal with the safety of people and their property , and that often touch us all because of the loss of lives , the destruction of families , and the devastation of whole livelihoods .
However , all our demonstrations matter little when compared with the tragedies , which , through the media , affect us all , and make us aware that we cannot fall behind with the work we should be doing to avoid , minimise or , better assist these situations .
Commissioner , my fellow Members have highlighted this matter very well .
This is a case where the EU can better show the public that it is there , to help them prevent disasters and , above all , to offer its support when they most need it and are at their most fragile , if they do occur .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Hahn , we are very well aware of the factors that have led to an increase in the number of disasters in recent years : we know about climate change , the explosive industrialisation in developing countries and the growing world population , among other things .
However , it is also the case that many disasters are simply caused by man , and in this regard , we have to say that the ' polluter pays ' principle should be applied .
To always immediately call for help from the Union is the wrong way to go .
However , European solidarity is indeed called for , of course , where disasters genuinely occur as a result of force majeure , when genuine natural disasters happen .
In this regard , there is no doubt that our European solidarity should start with prevention - for example , in connection with protective structures to prevent avalanches , flood defences , mapping and monitoring systems .
In addition , we really should have something like a European ' disaster service ' that can be deployed if assistance is needed very quickly in order to avoid the severest of consequences .
Mr President , there is much talk about buzz words here today , but the key buzz word is the first word up on the board : prevention .
As the old adage says , ' prevention is better than cure ' and certainly we have to try and prevent natural disasters based on recent trends , to get out some kind of a forecast and to put preventive actions in place .
We also need some type of a trans-European insurance mechanism , because otherwise , affected areas will not be able to afford insurance .
For instance , in my own area , in the town of Clonmel , insurance has gone up sixfold because of the risk of flooding .
Finally , I want to ask how many countries can actually say that they have complied with the Commission 's recommendations , especially in relation to the Floods Directive ?
I know it has not been applied properly in my country .
Countries have to take responsibility just the same as the Commission .
By working together , we can at least alleviate the difficulties .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , we all draw one certain conclusion from the massive , catastrophic forest fires which , nearly every summer , hit the Member States in southern Europe and of which Greece has terrifying and traumatising experience : the key word in dealing promptly and efficiently with natural and man-made disasters in Europe is ' solidarity ' .
Moreover , the Treaty of Lisbon has introduced a solidarity clause for the provision of assistance to Member States suffering the consequences of natural disasters .
We need to prepare for the proper and effective application of this clause .
Otherwise , it will be as if we are ignoring the 70 % of European citizens who stand to benefit from assistance for which the European Union has made provision if their country faces a natural disaster .
It is important not to let budgetary pressures affect policy and funding for citizens in relation to disaster prevention .
It is also important ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank everyone for their wide-ranging contributions to the debate .
Wherever a direct appeal has been made to the competence of my colleague , Mrs Georgieva , we will provide you with written answers , for example , with regard to the status of talks and negotiations with Russia on the question of information and monitoring .
However , I would like to take this opportunity - since the European Solidarity Fund falls within my remit - to tell you that this Fund is an instrument that was created seven or eight years ago and that is not financed from the budget .
Whenever a disaster occurs , a very complex procedure has to be followed - firstly , there is an assessment and then there is also the codecision of the European Parliament and the Council - which can result in delays .
In the specific case of Madeira , I can tell you that within the next 14 days , we will get a signature and payment .
The delay was also caused by the fact that the Member State was very late in providing a lot of the necessary information .
This also needs to be taken into account .
At the end of the day , we also need to be able to demonstrate , and it must also be possible to verify , what the funds have actually been used for .
Nevertheless , the structure of the Solidarity Fund should also continue to be developed .
Discussions to this effect are also ongoing within the Commission .
The issue of drought assessment is - quite frankly - relatively difficult to incorporate .
The situation is different with regard to technological disasters , for example .
These issues need to be reassessed in the light of the experience we have gained in recent years .
As regards the funds provided in the area of the structural funds for example , a total of EUR 7.5 billion is available Europe-wide in the current financial period for risk prevention and corresponding environmental protection measures .
Of this , around 20 % has already been allocated to specific projects .
As MEPs for an electoral district or Land , you know as well as I do that administrative problems often arise between regions and Member States because it is not clear who is responsible for what .
In practice , that often results in delays in the implementation of projects .
Overcoming these problems would be an important achievement , because it is in the interests of the people and the regions for us to actually use the money that has been made available and not to founder on account of administrative or bureaucratic problems or to allow these problems to cause delays .
Finally , I would like to say that we actually intend to put forward a legislative proposal at the end of the year for how we can take a more focused approach with regard to the way we monitor and respond to disasters throughout Europe .
I would like to thank you once again for your commitment and persistence on this matter and I would like to ask you also to continue - and I will finish by saying this - to pay such a high level of attention to implementation and to utilising the financial resources that are , in principle , available in the Member States .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
In its communication of 23 February 2009 entitled ' A Community approach on the prevention of natural and man-made disasters ' , the Commission , amongst other things , undertook the task of correlating available and existing information sources on preventive measures and catastrophes .
I would like to take this opportunity to note that the way the New Zealand Government handled the notification of those who are deaf and hard of hearing during its most recent catastrophe is an inspiring example that must be put into practice .
At the end of 2010 , the government of New Zealand published several resource materials , as well as a DVD , which prepared the affected players , the authorities and the population using sign language for a potential catastrophe .
This practice saved lives as well as property .
According to local civil organisations and the World Federation of the Deaf ( www.wfdeaf.org ) , the government of Queensland and the Australian Communications and Media Authority ( ACMA ) should be proud - in spite of the tragedies which , regrettably , still occurred - of the success achieved by their excellent preparation and cooperation , and particularly of providing live and immediate communication that reached the deaf .
In light of this , I hope that the Commission will review the good practice of this non-EU Member State and popularise and promote its implementation in Member States , as well as within the scope of the application of EU resources .
Volcanic ash crisis ( debate )
The next item is the debate :
on the oral question to the Commission on the volcanic ash crisis , by Marian-Jean Marinescu and Mathieu Grosch , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) - B7-0015 / 2011 ) ;
on the oral question to the Commission on the volcanic ash crisis , by Saïd El Khadraoui , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament - B7-0204 / 2011 ) ;
on the oral question to the Commission on the volcanic ash crisis , by Gesine Meissner , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe - B7-0202 / 2011 ) ; and
on the oral question to the Commission on the volcanic ash crisis , by Roberts Zīle , on behalf of the Group of European Conservatives and Reformists - B7-0203 / 2011 ) .
Mr President , the volcanic eruption last April resulted in the closure of many sectors of European air space .
The crisis that ensued affected more than 10 million travellers and had serious economic repercussions .
The resolution of the volcanic ash crisis left a lot to be desired due to the lack of coordination between institutions , the lack of specifications and flexibility , not to mention failure to make optimum use of the technical resources .
I said it then and I continue to maintain that it is of paramount importance for the necessary measures to be taken so that we can ensure that a new volcanic eruption will not have the same consequences .
Responsibility for flight safety , which includes avoiding areas contaminated by ash , must lie with the operator and crew .
Operators must be supplied with accurate data so that they can implement the best solutions .
Pilots are trained to cope with exceptional air conditions and have the experience required to evaluate the risk and make decisions about redirecting the flight .
The following elements are required to make this process operate as efficiently as possible : supervision and forecasting must be improved and more money must be invested in equipment on the ground and in the air .
The technical structure must be able to supply accurate data in real time and constant forecasts , which can be provided by current technology .
The use of several centres for collecting and supplying this information will improve the risk evaluation and relevant flight scheduling .
The role of crisis management institutions must be clarified to ensure that operators receive this information which they need for making decisions .
The regulatory body must be responsible for supervision , while Volcanic Ash Advisory Centres are responsible for notifying air navigation service providers about eruptions and high-risk areas .
Service providers must inform air crews about the areas at high risk of ash contamination .
The parties involved must be trained in effective crisis management using simulation exercises .
I think that it is an absolute requirement for EASA to draw up the specifications required to clarify responsibilities and control at operational level .
Achieving the Single European Sky and implementing SESAR would facilitate enormously the decision-making process and would reduce significantly the impact in the event of a crisis .
I believe that these are the key points which need to be resolved so that we can ensure that we are prepared to manage such a situation successfully in the future .
author . - Mr President , I welcome the opportunity that this oral question gives us to revisit the problems experienced by travellers and the wider aviation industry during last year 's Icelandic volcano crisis .
What became clear last year was that Member States and the EU as a whole had no plan for such an eventuality , the data used was incomplete , the meteorologists could not or , indeed , would not help , and everybody perfected the art of blaming someone else and adopted a policy of risk aversion rather than one of risk management .
To be frank , Mr President , Member States bottled it last year .
But , Mr President , that was then .
What about the future ?
Do we have a comprehensive plan to cover the next volcanic eruption ?
Should this happen , will Member States coordinate at EU level in future ?
Crucially , will they involve the aviation industry and , particularly , airlines before they issue their advice ?
We have to avoid the mistakes made last year which gave us the nonsense of one country closing its airspace whilst a neighbouring country kept theirs open , leading to chaos , confusion and huge economic consequences .
Finally Mr President , the Icelandic volcano highlighted one major thing : it has strengthened the argument for a Single European Sky better than any politician could have done .
Our role now is to develop and deliver this as a matter of urgency , even though , as usual , the Member States are back to their old habits of dragging their feet on this much-needed project .
Mr President , we have just spoken about natural disasters in the previous agenda item .
In this case , it was a force of nature that brought air traffic to a complete standstill .
Eyjafjallajökull - everyone probably knows of this volcano now - erupted last year and brought a large proportion of air traffic to a complete standstill .
Incidentally , I just noticed once again during the previous speech that we have an excellent chair of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , because what he said is very similar to what I wanted to say .
I will now try to change my speech somewhat .
It was indeed chaos - Mr Simpson has already said that .
As Europeans , with high-tech capabilities and with so much already coordinated , we were , in fact , helpless when it came to dealing with this disaster and finding solutions to it .
We realised that there were too few agreements in place .
We then set up a task force .
The questions that concerned us with regard to this issue were whether the task force actually has any valid results already that could be discussed and has it published any studies ?
I do not know of any at least .
Have all of the international experts on such volcanic eruptions actually been consulted ?
After all , as we already discussed here in plenary last year , there are other parts of the world where volcanic eruptions are much more frequent than in Europe and they somehow manage to have up-to-date data and to coordinate the whole situation .
There is also something else that causes me concern .
On 4 May , it was also mentioned in the Council of transport ministers that we need a linked-up European transport system .
That can , of course , help in such cases .
How far have we come in terms of being able to respond better in the event of a further volcanic eruption ?
We cannot predict this , of course .
It will just happen .
I have one further question : do we know exactly what technology we would need to be able to deal with this situation better ?
In Germany , we now have appropriate devices at all weather stations that collect the data and are able to pass on this up-to-date data very quickly to the people responsible at the airlines and also to pilots so that they can decide whether or not it is safe to fly .
One further point which has not been mentioned yet but which I think is important in this context is the following : this ash crisis , and the subsequent problems it posed for the air transport industry , affected 10 million passengers and , of course , also many companies .
Some passengers were stranded and were unable to continue their journeys .
The question therefore arises as to how things stand with regard to passengers ' rights .
We have rights for air passengers , but I have the impression that , in this case , they have not always been fully utilised .
Perhaps we should also revise these passenger rights once more .
There are a lot of questions here .
Mr Hahn , I do not know whether you will be able to answer them now , as transport is not actually your area .
Otherwise , I am sure that the questions I raised in addition to the written question can be answered later .
You will notice that this subject is of great concern to us .
After all , the air transport industry is very important , and we therefore need a Single European Sky .
Mr President , I should not so much like to repeat what Members have said , but why are we , in fact , asking this question ?
Nearly a year has gone by since these events , and it is possible that they will simply be forgotten .
Nevertheless , we wanted to ensure that this issue was still important to the Commission and we await the Commissioner 's action on these promised issues as a lesson from last year 's volcanic eruption .
In effect , it proved that the aviation market is possibly the European Union 's domestic market to an extent unlike no other mode of transport across Europe .
That , in turn , means that taking decisions , as well as their preparation , possibly requires a process that differs from that required for other modes of transport .
It is a question of the absence of these data and the non-participation of the operators in the decision-making process , as well as of the fact that the decision is taken at Member State level .
In principle , of course , this has its basis in law .
However , even though I belong to a political group that always supports the principle of subsidiarity , on this occasion , I think that , taking into account the actual situation last year , we ought to consider on the basis of this example whether decisions should not be taken at European level to a greater extent .
Passengers are also concerned that different airlines behave differently towards passengers , and to always obtain compensation from these airlines through the courts is not the easiest thing .
Clearly , we should not have a situation where different airlines can emerge from this crisis in different ways , with different costs .
Finally , the third point I should like to stress is the lesson that can be drawn from this crisis , namely , that in the European Union , various ' islands ' exist , as it were , that are not connected by different modes of transport to other European Union Member States .
This means that when planning the TEN-T map this year and the TEN-T budget for the next financial perspective , as well as the cohesion policy budget , we should allow for investment in other modes of transport , so that we can connect these ' islands ' to the rest of the European Union . Thank you .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Eyjafjallajökull eruption in Iceland in April 2010 had an enormous impact which required the EU to act urgently .
The Commission therefore proposed immediate actions to coordinate the EU 's position and to strengthen the regulatory framework .
This makes Europe a stronger partner at a global level .
The Commission is actively engaged in practical work to refine the existing volcanic ash avoidance methodologies in aviation .
For example , the Commission has launched a specific call under the Seventh Framework Programme called ' Technology support for crisis coordination for the air transport system following major disrupting events ' .
In parallel , the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) is preparing rules for air-worthiness requirements and risk assessment for safe flight in airspace with volcanic contaminants .
From an operational perspective , an approach has been developed in close cooperation with the EASA .
This approach reflects practices in other parts of the world .
The guiding principles are as follows : first , the airline is responsible for the safety of its operations .
Before operating in airspace contaminated by volcanic ash , the airline must produce a safety risk assessment and have it accepted by its supervising authority .
This process must be repeated when important changes occur .
Second , the airline must show that the information sources it uses in its safety risk assessment are correct .
It also has to show its own competence and capability to interpret such data correctly .
Before starting operations , the airline must obtain from the manufacturers specific information regarding the susceptibility of the aircraft to the effects of airborne ash and the impact of such ash on its airworthiness .
This must be reflected in the safety risk assessment .
In dealing with disruptive events such as this , a key element is collaborative decision making between Member States and industry .
To ensure comprehensive and coordinated actions , the Commission , together with Eurocontrol , established a European Aviation Crisis Coordination Cell , following the Council of Transport Ministers meeting of 4 May 2010 .
Since its creation , the cell has met on several occasions to develop its structures and procedures .
To test and verify its timely functionality , this cell will be part of a volcano exercise planned for 13 and 14 April 2011 under the auspices of the UN 's aviation body , the ICAO .
The volcanic ash crisis highlighted the crucial importance of the Single European Sky .
The Commission has therefore accelerated its implementation via , for example , the adoption of the SES Performance Scheme and the associated EU-wide performance targets , the adoption of implementing rules for network management functions , the designation of the network manager , the adoption of implementing rules and guidance material for the functional airspace blocks , the nomination of the former MEP , Mr Georg Jarzembowski , as the functional airspace blocks coordinator and the expected finalisation by April 2011 of the extension of the EASA 's competence for safety regulation in the field of air traffic management .
Let me therefore conclude by saying that the Commission is continuing to work on these very complex and technical issues .
The Commission is working together with EASA , ICAO , Member States and industry to ensure the safety of European airspace .


Mr President , Mr Hahn , I naturally consider your response to be the response of the Commission , and I also do not expect you to go into the specific questions put forward by the Committee on Transport and Tourism today .
One thing was clear : more than 100 000 flights were cancelled and 300 airports and more than 10 million passengers were affected .
We must learn lessons from such an event .
That is also the reason for the question that we are raising today , because there was a very quick call for coordination and this was clearly not forthcoming .
It is not possible to improvise coordinated action in the space of 24 hours .
These are the questions that we want answers to today , and it is not only Parliament that wants these answers ; the citizens of Europe want them , too .
The first thing we want to know is has the information relating to both the effects and the location of such phenomena improved or not ?
Secondly , what role will EU bodies play in this regard in future and what powers of decision will they have ?
Will we continue to have 27 simultaneously existing decisions , or does the Commission already have other proposals , and to what extent will the airlines be involved here ?
This question has come up very often .
The Crisis Committee is supposed to meet - it does meet and will also carry out tests .
It would be extremely important for this Parliament and therefore also for European citizens to be informed of the results of these tests .
When it comes to coordination , it is important for this to be established outside the EU , too .
We also need to agree on structures at international level , as the airspace and also certain disasters know no boundaries in this context .
Another important factor as far as we are concerned is the passengers .
We talk about 10 million passengers , but these 10 million passengers were not only tourists who had to or were happy to extend their holidays ; there were also people who had to get home or had to get somewhere urgently .
In this case , we cannot simply refer to passengers ' rights ; rather , we are under obligation to work in a coordinated way and to provide alternatives and greater use of other modes of transport .
For example , we need a more rapid allocation of rail routes when this is necessary .
This is also not possible to improvise in the space of 24 hours .
These are questions that we want to raise on behalf of citizens and passengers , too .
It is not just a question of explaining their rights .
Last but not least - and you mentioned this - the airspace blocks , or what are referred to as FABs : the proposal is to have seven instead of 27 .
That could work .
However , I would simply venture to predict today that we will not manage to do this by 2012 , because the Member States do not want it .
In this regard , we must also send a very clear outward signal that a reduction in the number of airspace blocks is absolutely necessary .
It can work , too .
Mr Hahn , I invite you to come to Maastricht - it is not very far for you to come .
There , cooperation between three or four countries in respect of the upper layer of the airspace is already in place .
That is where all of the problems that the countries bring up are solved .
Go there , suggest it to the Commission , and use it as a model for Europe , for the seven FABs .
We will then be able to regulate this within twelve months .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , as I am not a member of the Transport Committee , some Members might wonder why I am so keen to speak on this very issue .
But I was , like others , a victim of the ash cloud .
I was travelling to Baku and could only get back with great difficulties .
This concerns all European citizens .
It was an opportunity for Europe to show its added value - and we failed .
I think European citizens understood that the EU was not yet prepared for taking a single action , but we have to make sure that we are ready to take a single action in the next similar case .
Therefore , I think that the need for the Single European Sky project is imperative .
We all agree on that .
Although I am not a member of the Transport Committee , I would like to mention that not only a Single European Sky is needed , but also a single European infrastructure connected to this .
Therefore , here in this plenary session , I would like to draw attention to the need for Galileo and for GMES - as they are potentially a great European infrastructure if we can build them - to deliver on that purpose .
This is why we are working to get the budget lines for those issues , but we have to explain better to European citizens why these projects are needed .
This is why I wanted to take the floor to make the point that , alongside European policies , European infrastructure in this field is necessary .
Mr President , Commissioner , a little less than a year ago , three hundred airports were closed in Europe in 23 out of the 27 countries of the Union .
That caused considerable financial losses and , above all , as previous speakers have pointed out , more than 10 million people , not all of whom were on tourist trips , had to postpone their journeys and find other means of transport .
This was a result of the havoc wrought by a wholly natural event , which placed us in an important context in relation to nature , and which caused unprecedented paralysis in the skies above Europe .
It is , of course , difficult to predict a volcanic eruption and , even more so , the formation of a volcanic ash cloud - more difficult , of course , than predicting a snow episode .
However , the crisis caused by this cloud highlights all the shortcomings and deficiencies of air traffic management in the Union as well as the weakness and absence of a number of management tools .
On the basis of these three factors , I would like to put forward three proposals for recovery : firstly , regarding imperative comodality ; secondly , concerning the need for the Community method to respond to such challenges ; thirdly , and naturally at the heart of our concerns , relating to the rights of passengers , which are central to our concerns .
As regards the first element , the crisis has highlighted the fact that it was absolutely crucial to strengthen comodality in European transport , since the cloud highlighted the limits not only of aviation systems at European level but , more especially , of rail travel , since countless travellers were unable to find an alternative .
As demonstrated in the studies that have been carried out over the last year , one can image that , with more comodality , the scale of the crisis would not have been so huge and the paralysis would have been somewhat less .
As regards the second element , as in the financial crisis and in the debates we are having on the Community method compared with intergovernmental operations , here , in the area of transport , intergovernmental operations or a fragmented response from 27 Member States are not what will resolve the difficulties we have encountered and which may return , but rather a genuinely Community method .
That would require strengthening the competences of Eurocontrol in a Community system and , of course , as has been pointed out , completing the Single European Sky as a matter of urgency .
Thirdly , there are the passengers , who are at the heart and the centre of our concerns ...
( The President interrupted the speaker )
As I said in my introduction , you will have gathered that what I left until last was the crucial issue .
Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank the Commission - something I do not often do - for very consistently placing the focus on safety , even in the face of protests from some airlines , which tried to make light of the problem because such problems have a financial impact .
However , safety must remain the guiding principle for the future , too .
A few improvements that we can achieve at European level are necessary , however .
For example , how about improving our common measuring systems ?
Do we now have strategies in place for how and with what division of labour such pollution incidents can be measured so that we can issue halfway reliable statements more quickly ?
I know that this is extremely difficult to do , particularly on account of meteorological conditions , but I would like to know whether any progress has been made here with regard to coordination , so that we are at least taking measurements and evaluating them according to the same criteria .
Overall , this crisis caused by the volcanic ash has shown how vulnerable our highly equipped air transport system now is - that is something that is obvious to all of us already at our airports .
Under normal operating conditions , two or three delays already have a whole series of consequences , making use of the service under normal operating conditions more and more difficult , let alone if there is the additional problem of external weather events or something like a volcanic ash crisis ; the situation then becomes one of utter chaos .
We have no error-tolerant system , and in this area , we also need to make improvements , as a system is only as good as its ability to respond in an error-tolerant manner in relevant cases .
It has also become apparent that we are facing a serious shortcoming , namely , the general lack of cooperation between rail , road and air transport .
Precisely because we have insufficient cooperation , it was hardly possible to take appropriate compensatory measures on the ground .
With regard to the Single Sky , the necessity of which has become apparent here - as coordinated measures would , in any case , have been better - I would say that , as long as each Member State is convinced that it is the only one that is truly capable of controlling its own airspace efficiently and that all of the others are absolutely incapable of doing so - and I am talking here about our airspace in Central Europe - we will not make any progress in this regard .
This egotism damages European cooperation and , ultimately , also the European idea .
We need to be clear about that .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , it has been said in the debate but I will reiterate that we are all aware of the huge extent of the disruption caused by the volcanic ash cloud .
As has been mentioned , over 100 000 flights were cancelled , tens of millions of business and holiday passengers were not able to travel as planned , goods and cargo were delayed or not transported at all , businesses were affected and our European carriers and airports suffered catastrophic financial losses .
All in all , it cost the European airlines more than EUR 2 billion .
Institutions across Europe and in Member States who were responsible for dealing with such issues were absolutely paralysed and , quite frankly , if it had not been so serious , it would have been practically laughable .
In all this chaos , one thing was clear .
Air transport is enormously important for the European economy and as individuals , we depend on a thriving and efficient air transport industry where safety for crew and passengers is the first prerogative .
As such , I am delighted to support this oral question , not least because during our previous plenary debate on this issue , I called for the European Union to look at international best practice on dealing with volcanic ash and , more particularly , highlighted America , which has always applied a more measured approach in this regard .
I certainly welcomed the fact that the Commission , in its assessment of the crisis , accepted that Europe needed to revise procedures through the International Civil Aviation Organisation .
International best practice tells us that responsibility for dealing with potential hazards related to volcanic ash must be transferred to the airline operators as part of their safety management systems .
The role of the authorities is to audit the airline safety management system to ensure that it meets the required safety standards .
This is the procedure applied by the US and other countries which have managed to deal with volcanic eruptions without major disruptions to air traffic .
Clear and decisive joined-up leadership is essential and we need the European Aviation Safety Agency to ensure that EU Member States adapt their current procedures to guarantee that airline operators will take responsibility and be supported in making such decisions in future .
Lastly , the crisis in April and May last year made it absolutely clear that as a priority , we need to push for the full implementation of the Single European Sky and SESAR .
Both European industry and the taxpayer have already invested huge sums of money in these projects and , as European lawmakers , we must continue to push forward well balanced , cost-effective and structural reforms .
I welcome the comments by the Commissioner today .
Let us hope that we move forward now in a positive way .
Mr President , since we are again discussing today the crisis caused by volcanic ash , it would seem that this topic is still relevant and that questions remain unanswered .
We understand that volcanoes do not follow any rules and we cannot exclude unforeseen circumstances .
All of this is about the survival of the aviation industry , but aircraft are hampered not just by volcanoes , but also by storms , snow and similar phenomena .
Understandably , it is impossible to eliminate , stop or predict everything that may happen in aviation .
Clearly , aircraft safety , people 's lives and their mobility must rank among our most important considerations .
I am pleased that a comprehensive programme is being pursued by implementing the Single Sky initiative in order to modernise air traffic management .
I agree with my fellow Member who said just now that a common infrastructure also needs to be established .
However , while I am on the subject , I would like to say that today , we should consider and discuss the development of alternative transport .
We need and must achieve greater progress in this area .
This crisis had a particular impact on the European Union 's eastern Member States , which remained separated from part of Western Europe and , unlike the other European Union Member States , did not have sufficient opportunity to choose alternative modes of transport .
We now know that we urgently need to establish a alternative secondary mobility system , trans-European networks , rail networks , an alternative to air transport , such as has wisely been done with regard to electricity and telecommunications networks .
Therefore , given the financial perspectives , more ambitious goals need to be set when reviewing the trans-European networks .
Land transport and , above all , railways should be able to replace air transport more smoothly if the latter is withdrawn .
The time has come to consider specific alternatives and to implement these as quickly as possible .
Mr President , like other Members here , I am not a member of the Committee on Transport and Tourism but I come from Northern Ireland , an island on the edge of Europe .
You can , therefore , imagine how vitally important good air and sea connections are , not only for our economy , but also for personal travel .
I have been dealing over the last number of months , indeed even this week , with residual cases from individual constituents who have been affected by this particular crisis .
At the time of the volcanic ash crisis , the costs were estimated to be in excess of GBP 200 million a day in UK flights alone .
Therefore , in order to avoid this , we must have much greater cooperation and much more cognisance of best practice so that we have a plan in place to prevent future disruptions and such a horrendous impact on the economy .
As I have said , I have had a lot of complaints from individual constituents , most of which centred on the airlines , their treatment of these individuals and their failure to recognise their duty of care .
I would ask the Commission to look at this as well .
( FI ) Mr President , we , of course , know about the sad stories that were heard when the ash cloud formed .
Many people were unable to get to the funerals of their relatives , their children 's weddings or similar occasions .
They were very personal , regrettable incidents , not to speak of the financial cost incurred through the suffering of 10 million people .
As you see , nothing actually worked .
We were unable to reply that the EU had a solution to these situations , and here , the Chair of the Committee on Transport and Tourism correctly said that this risk could not have been anticipated , it could not have been controlled , and the whole thing was more like complete chaos .
Now , the Commission should give the public the answers it wants as quickly as possible : the answers to whether we have technical solutions or whether the airlines will discover them .
If there are any , what might they be ?
What will the rights of passengers be in the future , if the same situation arises , where people cannot fly or get home ?
When will there be an effective common European airspace ?
The answer people want , obviously , is as soon as possible , so that this cannot continue for much longer .
What is the alternative plan ?
What means of transport are to be used ?
This time , people were at a loss .
Others ordered taxis from Spain to Finland , paying thousands of euro in fares .
This situation cannot be repeated in the future : there should be a plan in place for how people can be better served as regards these alternative arrangements .
In this connection , I wish to raise another issue mentioned here , and another natural upheaval : snow .
Tens of thousands of people in December were stranded at airports in Europe when it snowed .
In my own country , Finland , there is continual heavy snow and there are harsh frosts , but things work .
We therefore have to get European airports to work properly too .
This is not too difficult and we cannot just give up : matters should be dealt with so as to guarantee citizen 's access to justice .
( RO ) Mr President , the Icelandic volcano eruption , as well as the huge volumes of snow which fell last year , seriously disrupted European air traffic , with significant economic and social consequences .
With the aim of avoiding such situations in the future , I would like to ask the Commission what main new regulations it has in mind for improving the legislative framework for the rights of passengers travelling by air .
In spite of the Volcanic Ash Advisory Centres in London and Toulouse , which are part of an international network of nine such centres set up by the ICAO , and the specialist London centre producing volcanic ash cloud risk charts , we also need to improve the European infrastructure by introducing a system for measuring the concentration of volcanic ash clouds in real time .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1070 / 2009 on improving the performance of the European aviation system requires Member States to take the necessary measures to guarantee implementation of the functional airspace blocks by 4 December 2012 .
I wish to ask the Commission whether the implementation of the Single European Sky will comply with the specified timetable .
The European Union also needs to provide comodality and a system for booking and issuing tickets for European routes involving several modes of transport .
The European Union requires a high-speed railway system which will link all of Europe 's capitals and cities .
Mr President , the volcanic ash crisis last year prompted the cancellation of close to 100 000 flights , resulting in absolute chaos for passengers .
It is the effect that this crisis had on passengers that I wish to draw the Commission 's attention to today .
Over 10 million people were affected and the cancellations resulted in significant economic costs for thousands of passengers .
While airports have signs and leaflets informing travellers of their rights , this is often of little use when faced with cancellations or major travel disruptions such as that caused by the ash cloud .
Under EU legislation , passengers have a right to information and assistance from their airline .
However , in reality , the majority of passengers whose travel has been disrupted will spend a lot of time and money chasing down information , seeking alternative tickets or compensation with airlines .
This is an issue that the Commission needs be more effective on .
The biggest frustration that passengers face in situations like this is trying to get information , trying to get in contact with the airlines .
Although they are aware of their rights , this is of little help to them if they are stranded in an airport or on hold to an airline .
While I appreciate that , at the time of the ash crisis , airlines were under unprecedented pressure to deal with thousands of passengers - and I must admit that some did admirably - in general , it is very difficult for people to get information and assistance when it is needed .
The travel chaos as a result of the bad weather in December 2010 further demonstrates this .
Passengers require up-to-date information but they need to be able to reach the airlines in order to exercise their rights .
Airlines , airport customer services and information need to be more accessible to passengers whose travel has been disrupted .
It is not enough to inform European Union citizens of their passenger rights ; they must be assisted in exercising them in times of travel chaos .
( DE ) Mr President , this was a natural disaster which had terrible consequences for many people .
However , if we compare it with the floods and the simultaneous hurricane in Australia or with the earthquake in Christchurch in New Zealand , we all escaped unharmed .
Safety had absolute priority , and rightly so .
Commissioner Kallas made the right decision in agreement with the EU transport ministers in the Member States .
I cannot understand the criticism directed at the airlines .
They clearly suffered a loss - a figure of 2 billion was mentioned .
However , it is wrong to lay the responsibility as to whether or not flights go ahead at the feet of the airlines .
That decision must be made at a political level .
Safety must be given top priority .
Imagine if an aeroplane had crashed as a result of the volcanic ash .
We would have had a completely different debate , namely , how irresponsible it was to even allow one aeroplane to take off .
We need a plan B , as has quite rightly been said , and the rail system is the alternative .
As a result of their exemption from fuel tax , airlines receive EUR 30 billion per year from European taxpayers .
This money must be invested in the rail system , at least in parts of it , so that we have an alternative in the event of this sort of disaster .
Safety first - that is what people are calling for , and rightly so .
It must also be the case in the future , too .
( PL ) Mr President , this situation showed that Europe was not , in fact , prepared for this crisis .
Despite what we are hearing in this Chamber , the experts say that the reaction on our part was excessive and some flights could certainly have been allowed .
However , this nonetheless shows the undoubted scale of the paralysis in which we found ourselves .
Of course , the previous speakers who spoke about a certain alternative in the form of developing the rail network are right .
That is obvious .
In the field of aviation , the answer to this problem is definitely better coordination and strengthening of the role of the European Aviation Safety Agency .
In addition , it is good that in November , the European Parliament adopted a suitable regulation on this matter .
It was a step in the right direction .
( HU ) Mr President , the volcanic eruption forces us to rethink transportation priorities .
The time has come to begin favouring rail in medium-distance transport up to 1 500 km , for which subsidies , taxes , and other regulatory mechanisms could be used as needed .
An important consideration is that significant internal market demand is noticeable in connection with the modernisation of railroad tracks as well as the manufacturing of rolling stock , both of which could create numerous jobs .
In view of check-in and airport transfer times , aeroplanes - in comparison with high-speed trains - provide a zero minimal time benefit while causing considerable carbon dioxide and noise pollution .
Even though we cannot prevent volcanic eruptions , we can improve the technology used to predict them and how we evaluate the resulting situation .
However , a genuine solution can only be provided by transforming transport , energy and industrial policy , because volcanic eruptions cause either no disruption , or only local disruption , to rail transport .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as many of us have said just now , the eruption of the Icelandic volcano last April was a painful illustration of the fragmentation and ineffectiveness of the European sky .
Each of us in this Chamber was directly affected .
Five million of our citizens were stranded with no real alternative form of transport available .
One year after that exceptional event , new European measures have so far failed to materialise .
Commissioner , you said that a first crisis exercise , linked to volcanic ash , is scheduled for 13 and 14 April under the coordination of Eurocontrol , the International Civil Aviation Organisation ( ICAO ) and the International Air Transport Association ( IATA ) , but it is essential that the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) exercises real leadership to coordinate safety measures at European level .
It is certain that the information provided by the Visual Approach Charts ( VAC ) of London and Toulouse must be refined using more modern technologies .
As we saw last April , however , the data may be contradictory and may lead each Member State to take decisions concerning the closure of their air space that are motivated less by information than by emotion .
In this context , the role of the EASA is vital in proposing a harmonised interpretation of the data , as well as in ensuring the centralisation and proper dissemination of the information .
Beyond the information provided by the VACs , the EASA must put in place a mechanism for collecting the available data in close cooperation with the Member States , the airlines and their pilots .
This centralisation of information and the coordination of all those involved will prevent the chaos and the inconsistencies we witnessed last year .
So I expect the Commission , together with the EASA , to be able to submit specific proposals in the very near future , which will be integrated fully in the implementation of the Single European Sky .
Mr President , the volcanic ash cloud crisis caused huge disruption during last April and into May .
As Mrs Foster said , many of us realised how dependent we are on modern air travel .
Certainly when you come from where I come from , where it is impossible to get to your work unless you use the aeroplane , then that really brings it home to you .
Everybody who travelled during that time probably has stories to tell , and some people were very badly affected .
In addition , the economic losses airlines and other businesses suffered as a result of grounded flights and stranded passengers were substantial .
People have said that this could happen again .
I think this is what we have got to be prepared for , because there did seem to be an awful lot of indecision .
Let me be very honest : as someone who flies every week , when I am up there at 39 000 feet , I want , above all , to be safe and secure , so I do not ever argue about security .
We have got to make sure that the safety of the passengers is paramount .
I think that is the overlying situation that we should support .
( PL ) Mr President , I will say it again : 100 000 cancelled flights , 10 million passengers who did not reach their destination , EUR 2 billion of losses to the airlines .
I do not recall a similar paralysis of air traffic in Europe ever happening before .
The European Commission , under pressure from public opinion and the aviation industry , announced quick and decisive action as early as April last year .
Unfortunately , the volcanic ash has settled , and the Commission 's ambitions have fallen with it .
To date , a European crisis management plan for similar situations has not been drafted .
It has also not been possible as yet to agree on a common position between safety experts , aircraft manufacturers , airlines and market regulators .
It is , therefore , necessary to ask the following questions today : what has been done about this over the last year ?
If a similar volcanic eruption occurred today , would we react differently than a year ago ?
When will we be presented with specific measures ?
We are conducting a sustained dialogue on the Single European Sky , on body and liquid scanners , and on procedures for natural disasters such as a volcanic eruption or a severe attack of winter .
Meanwhile , air traffic over Europe continues to increase year-on-year .
The time for discussions is ending .
The European sky needs immediate and good solutions for the future , and I strongly encourage the Commission to complete this work . Thank you very much .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the volcanic ash of last year showed us in an impressive way where our weaknesses lie .
The question therefore arises as to how we should deal with such situations in the future .
It is , of course , first and foremost a question of the safety of those people who board an aeroplane .
Of course , we must also keep in mind how we intend to deal with the financial losses .
My question to the Commission is therefore - Mr Hahn , perhaps you could also pass this on to Mr Kallas - what , in specific terms , are we planning ?
I would argue that it is particularly important for us to take over the coordination when it comes to test flights and limit values .
That is very important in order for us to know which aeroplanes can take off and when .
I have another comment , Commissioner : it is extremely important - and this has already been referred to many times - to establish the Single European Sky .
What does the Commission intend to do in terms of exerting pressure on the Member States to actually fulfil their obligation in this regard ?
After all , they have put their signatures to it .
Another important point , which has already been made several times today , is what happens now with regard to passengers ' rights in air transport .
We have Regulation ( EC ) No 2061 from 2004 .
What does the Commission intend to do in this regard ?
We are aware of the problem of the financial losses suffered by the various airlines .
I would also like to point out once again that we need alternatives to air transport , and by that I mean the rail system .
I am also one of those who believe that we must link the large cities - Europe 's capital cities - together .
In this case , too , the answer is that we need more involvement from Europe , not less .
I would be pleased if the Commission would give its attention to these issues .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank Mr Marinescu for pressing so strongly for this debate .

Almost one year on from the event , we are gathered here to discuss this delicate issue , which caused extensive damage to passengers and businesses involved in both the air sector and , lest we forget , in other industries , too .
I therefore consider it necessary to adopt a two-pronged approach .
On the one hand , enhance coordination between the authorities and stakeholders , finally addressing the reform of Eurocontrol , which is not , of course , a body reporting directly to the European institutions , but which was , in any case , crucial in the management and lack of effective management of this crisis .
The inadequacy of purely mathematical models , which led the authorities of individual countries to an almost total shutdown of the airspace even when there was no need , has been demonstrated .
In the absence of a model tested in the field and more advanced technologies , an excess of caution led to very heavy damage and inconvenience .
In addition , we must make decisive progress towards achieving the Single European Sky , developing all the functional airspace blocks ( FABs ) more quickly to reduce fragmentation in the management of airspace and to ensure their more effective management .
On the other hand , it is necessary to guarantee the rights of travellers .
In this regard , I hope that the Commission can submit its revision of the directive on package travel as soon as possible to clarify the framework of guarantees and liability in extraordinary situations and also any changes to the regulation on passengers ' rights when extraordinary situations are protracted .
It would also be necessary - other fellow Members have said the same - to launch an emergency plan to provide alternative mobility , alternative means of transport if a similar situation should arise again .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Members who spoke earlier to highlight all the shortcomings of European air transport integration in connection with the use of air space , ground structures and trade networks .
I would also like to emphasise , more specifically , the non airspace-related aspects that the volcano crisis revealed ; that is to say ; the lack of alternative networks to air transport , in particular , rail networks , as mentioned this morning , and , above all , the lack of integrated information systems to enable passengers to quickly find information relating to available alternative forms of transport .
This accident must prompt us to work towards developing alternative , efficient and competitive modes of transport .
In this regard , the review of the first rail package as well as the revival of infrastructure policies through trans-European transport networks should move in this direction .
In addition , I call upon the Commission to give serious consideration to establishing a single information and reservation interface for all interconnected modes of transport .
( PL ) Mr President , Europe was not prepared for such chaos , and the institutions responsible for crisis management were not up to the task .
As a result of the air traffic embargo , the airlines lost USD 400 million every day .
To lost ticket sales should be added the cost of accommodation , meals and transport for passengers who were stranded at airports .
Seismic and volcanic activity are not a novelty to the world , and other volcanic eruptions are possible in the future .
Unfortunately , there is no suitable medicine for such a situation .
At such times , the European Union should concentrate on ensuring its citizens alternative means of transport to flying .
A good solution , as part of the TEN-T network being set up in the Union , will be the creation of a common network of railway connections and concentrating on improving high-speed rail transport .
This would certainly be effective in helping resolve problems of this kind . Thank you .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Hahn , I am not a member of the Committee on Transport and Tourism either , but I believe that it is important for all of us to learn lessons from the ash crisis .
As has already been said today , ' safety first ' must , in future , be the guiding concept when it comes to finding a solution .
We need to develop the railways and we need to develop a European rail network .
However , we also need a form of overall coordination for passenger and freight transport , irrespective of whether it is by air , rail or road , in the event of earthquakes , ash clouds , floods or similar disasters .
National contact points , like those we are now setting up in the health sector for cross-border patient care , would seem an almost obvious solution to this - national contact points to which people of all generations can turn .
The fact is that I can also see a certain intergenerational inequality at the moment in air transport .
It is almost impossible these days to obtain information without the Internet .
We should work together to resolve this issue , too .
Mr President , as many colleagues have stated , the volcanic ash crisis caused significant air traffic disruption and economic damage in 2010 , damage that is still unquantifiable .
Over 10 million passengers were directly affected as 100 000 flights were cancelled across Europe .
I come from Ireland , and Irish air passengers faced extreme difficulties due to this ash cloud , as Ireland does not have land crossings to mainland Europe .
I had to take sea crossings and trains , taxis and cars to get here to Strasbourg , which took me over 24 hours without sleep .
Of course , that is a small price to pay ; we have to ensure that safety is paramount .
The situation did , however , highlight the overwhelming need for a common policy .
I welcome the recent initiatives by Commissioner Kallas to implement the Single European Sky and to establish functional air space .
I also welcome the statement here today by Commission Hahn and I fully support these measures , as volcanic ash clouds recognise no political or geographical boundaries .

( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as my fellow Member , Mr Marinescu , has already pointed out , the volcanic ash crisis demonstrated that Europe was neither strategically nor technologically prepared for this situation .
I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to the fact that this also had a strong effect on the dissemination of , and access to , information .
Due to the communications chaos , the negative effects of the crisis were felt by disadvantaged groups such as families with small children and persons with disabilities , who were unable to react appropriately .
I ask the Commission whether , after April 2010 , and in a similar crisis situation , every travelling citizen will have access to adequate information in order to appropriately exercise their right to information .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the honourable Members for their understanding , knowing that I am not familiar with this issue .
Members , you are right that my colleague , Vice-President Siim Kallas , is doing an excellent job and you will receive written answers to your specific questions where necessary .
Having said that , I would like to thank you for an interesting debate , particularly as , like you , I was personally affected by events in various ways .
Therefore , I would like to conclude by stating the following .
Last year 's volcanic ash crisis clearly highlighted the need for us to work together to find solutions to avoid a repeat of the airspace closures we witnessed .
That being said - and as was the case in April last year - actions taken in this regard cannot diminish the levels of safety that the aviation industry is renowned for around the world .
Crisis situations are not new to the European Union and the EU response to this crisis was timely and efficient .
It showed the importance of centralised European action in a widespread crisis situation .
Looking specifically at the Eyjafjallajökull event , the concept , aims and objectives of the Single European Sky initiative have once again been highlighted .
As recognised by the Council of Ministers , there is a need to accelerate its implementation to derive all the benefits of its application .
From the Commission perspective , the focus remains on ensuring a harmonised approach and application of agreed measures to future crisis situations .
This will be of benefit to all citizens in Europe .
It is our intention to revise air passenger rights in 2012 .
Last but not least , the participation of the industry is essential in order to facilitate a coordinated decision-making process .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - The closure of large sectors of European air space in April and May last year due to the volcanic eruption in Iceland caused severe traffic disruption and economic damage and affected 10 million passengers directly .
I believe the primary responsibility for the safety of flights rests with the operators .
Therefore , they must be provided with accurate data .
Pilots are trained to manage extraordinary flight conditions , the commercial airlines ' safety manuals are reviewed , overseen and confirmed by regulatory authorities , and airlines have the necessary experience of operating over volcanic areas , as is shown by their safety record .
The airline operator ( the pilot ) should therefore be responsible for assessing the risk and ensuring the safety of flights by , for example , choosing routes or deciding if rerouting is necessary , taking into account all the information available ( provision of more information and improved technical equipment on board aircraft ) .
I hope the Commission will liaise with the appropriate authorities to ensure that in the future , they are allowed to get on with their job .
A debate was held in the European Parliament today on the volcanic ash crisis .
The volcanic eruption in Iceland last year resulted in serious disruptions to air traffic over Europe .
It caused major economic losses and directly affected 10 million passengers .
It certainly is not in the interest of the Union to resist the forces of nature , but better prediction of the possibility of a similar crisis occurring in the future would definitely allow economic losses to be reduced and would result in greater convenience for the citizens of Europe .
During the debate , there was discussion of matters relating to progress in the implementation of investments in technological equipment and data transfer systems for the provision of real-time weather forecasts .
Questions were put to the European Commission concerning transparency of collaborative decision-making processes and better coordination of responses .
Consideration was also given to the consequences of an increase in air traffic in the future and what measures should be taken to make the European Aviation Safety Agency responsible for carrying out operational changes .
in writing . - ( PT ) The number of natural disasters has been increasing in both intensity and frequency .
The recent case of the volcanic ash cloud recorded in Iceland in April and May of last year seriously affected the whole of European airspace , during which time 75 % of the airport network was inactive , and led to considerable economic losses and affected around 10 million passengers .

In order to prevent further disruptions to air traffic , there is an urgent need to think of crisis management measures .
This means that there needs to be an investment in technological equipment on land and in the air to provide accurate information in real time .
In addition , it is vital to define the role and function of the various institutions in crisis management so that there is concerted coordination , to avoid greater losses to the different players .
This event shows that it is crucial to develop the integration of European airspace through the Single European Sky initiative .
The continual growth of air traffic , the fragmentation of European airspace and unforeseen events such as the volcanic ash cloud show that the EU should coordinate and harmonise its air procedures so as to bring added value to the European air sector .
( The sitting was suspended at 11 : 35 and resumed at 12 : 00 )

Statement by the President
Colleagues , ladies and gentlemen , dear guests , tomorrow , on 11 March , we will be marking the European Day for the Victims of Terrorism for the seventh time .
The day is dedicated to more than 5 000 victims of terrorism in Europe .
Terrorists declare war against civilians .
They strike in places where ordinary people should feel safe in their countries .
It is shameful , deceitful and cowardly .
That is why terrorism can never be justified .
We Europeans are strong and united .
No terrorist or criminal organisation is able to weaken our faith in the values which underpin our united Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , please rise to observe a minute 's silence for the victims of terrorism .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Establishing European statutes for mutual societies , associations and foundations ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
Heavy goods vehicle collisions ( written declaration )
To begin with , I am going to read you two written declarations .
The first has been submitted by Mr Tarabella , Mrs Bastos , Mr Canfin , Mrs Vergiat and Mrs Weber on establishing European statutes for mutual societies , associations and foundations .
It has been signed by the majority of Parliament 's component Members .
Therefore , in accordance with Rule 123 , it will be forwarded to its addressees and published in the Texts Adopted of this sitting , together with the names of the signatories .
The second written declaration has been submitted by Mrs Hall , Mrs Ayala Sender , Mrs Durant , Mr Koch and Mrs Wils on heavy goods vehicle collisions .
It has been signed by the majority of Parliament 's component Members .
Therefore , in accordance with Rule 123 , it will be forwarded to its addressees and published in the Texts Adopted of this sitting , together with the names of the signatories .
Mr President , in view of what we have just been speaking about , I would like to say that security in this building has been stepped up and I wish to extend our thanks to the men and women who protect us .
I would like your reassurance that the investigation into Brussels security breaches , some involving firearms , is being vigorously pursued .
These breaches have put our staff , our guests and ourselves at serious risk .
May I also have your assurance that senior management will be held accountable where appropriate , and that these soldiers will not be sacrificed in order to protect the generals ?
( Applause )
I would like to assure you that this matter is being kept under constant review with a view to strengthening the security of our House .

( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in connection with the signing of Written Declaration 84 / 2010 , I wish , of course , to thank all my co-signatories : Mrs Bastos of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) ; Mr Canfin of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance ; Mrs Vergiat of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ; and Mrs Weber of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
Together , we were able to collect a majority of signatures .
Thank you to the social economy actors who took action and who made it possible for this Parliament to send a clear signal to the Commission to finally recognise a single European statute for mutuals , associations and foundations .
( Applause )
1 .
Media law in Hungary (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , before the planned vote on the resolution on media law in Hungary , I would like to draw the attention of fellow Members to the latest developments in the situation and to put forward a concrete proposal .
Four days ago , the Hungarian Parliament adopted the amendments - all the amendments - requested by the European Commission despite the negative vote , by the way , of Hungarian Socialist and Green Members .
Commissioner Kroes was present during the vote and she announced that the amended version of the law was consistent with European law and , in particular , with the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Yet the resolution of the left-wing groups , which will be put to the vote at midday , completely ignores these facts .
The text is virtually the same as that of three weeks ago and makes no mention of the vote of the Hungarian Parliament .
My question is this : is this Parliament living in the real , or an imaginary , world ?
Is this resolution directed against the Hungarian Government or against the European Commission , which no longer has any problem with the law ?
( Applause )
In particular , I would ask the Chair of the Liberal Group : do you , or do you not have confidence in Commissioner Kroes ?
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) thinks that this Parliament would lose its credibility if it adopted texts that do not correspond to reality .
Must we become a theatre for settling national political scores ?
( Applause )
Given these conditions , the PPE Group withdraws its own resolution and calls on the other groups to do the same .
The credibility of Parliament is at stake .
Ladies and gentlemen , the proposal is completely clear .
As I understand it , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has withdrawn its resolution .
We have , therefore , only one resolution , which has been submitted by several of the political groups .
I would like to ask the representatives of the political groups to comment on this .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Daul talked about reality .
Well , it is reality that the Hungarian Government or the Hungarian Parliament has amended the law , and that is a good thing , because I can remember the debate in this Chamber when some people said - including you , Mr Daul - that nothing needed to be amended ; everything was fine .
Suddenly , it now needs to be amended .
( Applause from the left )
However , it is also reality - and you can read this , too - that both the media freedom representative of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) and the representative of the Council of Europe say that these amendments are inadequate .
That is the reality , Mr Daul .
That is the reality .
( Applause from the left )
In our group 's meeting yesterday evening , which I chaired , we discussed the law and the amendments and - like the OSCE and the Council of Europe - we came to the conclusion that these amendments are inadequate .
Whatever decision is made today - whether you win , Mr Daul , or whether we win - we will not give up the fight for freedom of the media , Mr Lange .
If you do so , that is your business .
( Applause from the left )
Freedom of the media is an inviolable element of democracy .
We want democracy and we want freedom of the media .
We therefore ask you to vote accordingly today .
We know that there are also some Members in your group who agree with us .
We must fight for freedom of the media - in Hungary and elsewhere , too .
( Applause from the left )
Ladies and gentlemen , fellow Members , as I understand it , the four political groups are not withdrawing their declaration .
We could end the debate here and proceed to the vote , but I understand that the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe in the European Parliament also wants to make a statement .
Please take the floor .
Mr President , we have been addressed specifically here .
Of course , we have confidence in Commissioner Kroes 's work .
Her examination of the secondary law was exemplary .
We wish the Commissioner examining the primary law had done her work in the same way , as this is where the problem lies .
( Applause from the left )
The reality of the situation includes those things just mentioned by Mr Swoboda , namely that , in the opinion of both the Council of Europe and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) , the amendments are inadequate .
Hungary 's Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Public Administration and Justice , Mr Navracsics , has himself admitted that this was not a significant amendment of the media law .
I could mention the protection of journalistic sources , which still remains unregulated , or the composition and powers of the media authority .
All of these are matters that still need to be discussed .
I would therefore like to state , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , that we will not withdraw the motion for a resolution , but rather request that the vote take place .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are going to take a vote on the resolution of the four political groups .
2 .
Southern Neighbourhood , and Libya in particular , including humanitarian aspects (
( PT ) Mr President , there is a new supervening element that is not reflected in the resolution , and I call upon Parliament to join me in expressing our indignation and concern .
This concerns what happened to the team of BBC journalists who were illegally detained and tortured , and also subjected to mock executions , and who saw many other Libyans detained in prison in totally inhumane conditions .
This also shows that journalists are not being allowed to carry out their work freely in Libya .
This is an important matter , and I call upon Parliament to join us in expressing our indignation and concern , which we must convey to the Council .
Mrs Gomes , do you have a specific amendment in mind ?
We can only give consideration to a specific amendment , not a general appeal .
( PT ) Mr President , the information I have is that the Liberal Group should like to propose the oral amendment , which has been agreed , but if this is not the case , I will be more than happy to pass it on .
All right , I understand .
It is a general comment . Thank you .
( PL ) Mr President , with respect , we heard you say that the resolution has been adopted , but I did not see the result , at least not on my screen or on the one in the seat in front of me .
I think we should also be given the results , by which I mean the particular result of this vote .
Here is the result : 316 people voted in favour , 264 voted against and 33 people abstained .
Mr President , I would like to remind the House of the double standards which we are applying .
In the case of the Hungarian media law , an event which took place on Monday was not reflected in our resolution .
Now we are trying to include something which happened only yesterday .
This is a clear double standard which this House is applying , which is deplorable and unacceptable .
Mr President , I do this in the name of all the Group leaders and also of most of the coordinators because yesterday , after the debate , there was a general feeling that there is a need to strengthen paragraph 11 .
The oral amendment I am presenting is the following : ' Calls on the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to establish relations with the Interim Transitional National Council and to start the process of making them official , so as to encourage transition towards democracy , ensuring the involvement of a wide spectrum of representatives of the Libyan society and empower women and minorities in the transitional process , and to support it in the liberated area so as to relieve the population and to meet its basic humanitarian needs , including medical assistance ' .
That is the oral amendment in the name of the seven Group leaders and also of all the coordinators , with whom it has been agreed .
3 .
EU approach towards Iran (
Mr President , at the initiative of the Group of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , and with the approval and consent of the other groups , I propose that the following oral amendment be inserted after paragraph 6 :
' Strongly condemns the illegal detention of Iranian opposition leaders , Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karoubi , together with their wives , by Iranian security forces and calls for their immediate and unconditional release ; points out that the detention was carried out in violation of Iranian law ; condemns the attitude of the Iranian authorities to the opposition exercising its legitimate right to protest and declares its solidarity with the Iranian people in their democratic aspirations ; deplores the hypocrisy of the Iranian Government , which used excessive force , intimidation and arbitrary arrests against peaceful demonstrators demonstrating in solidarity with the Egyptian people on 14 February 2011 , whilst claiming to support freedom in Egypt ' ;
( SV ) The oral amendment concerns the deletion of a single word , and that is the word ' and ' .
I will read the text in English and then I will explain why :
' whereas there has been a remarkable deepening of relations between Iran and Turkey ; ' the next word ' and ' is deleted and the recital continues ' whereas Iran is using its state and non-state allies Syria , Hezbollah and Hamas , and also the Muslim Brotherhood , to destabilise the region ' .
( SV ) We want to delete the word ' and ' in the middle because we do not want to link relations between Turkey and Iran with Iran 's relations with Hezbollah and Hamas .
4 .
16th session of the United Nations Human Rights Council ( Geneva , 28 February - 25 March 2011 ) (
Chair of the Subcommittee on Human Rights . - Mr President , I have some very good human rights news .
Sakharov Prize candidate , Haitham al-Maleh , an 80-year old Syrian human rights lawyer , was pardoned and released two days ago .
This is a wonderful example of how the European Parliament can strengthen human rights .
Now that he is free again , Haitham al-Maleh is full of vigour in his aim to help release the thousands of political prisoners in Syria .
( Loud applause )
Thank you for telling us this news .
It is sure to give us a great boost in our work .
- Before the vote on paragraph 8 :
( FR ) Mr President , I would simply like to point out that , when you put paragraph 8 of the original text to the vote , the French translation indicated that it was paragraph 19 .
So there was a misunderstanding over the voting instructions .
We will look into it .
Thank you for your comment .


Madam President , I simply would like to take the opportunity to say thank you to the 400 colleagues from across this House who signed Written Declaration 81 ; I would also like to say thank you to my staff for all their hard work and to the Written Declaration services for their support , but most of all , I would like to thank the campaigners whose dedication made this possible .
I am proud to be a member of a Parliament where it is possible for ordinary citizens to come and to make their case and where MEPs listen and are persuaded .
That is democracy at its best and it shows that the European Parliament is not remote from its people .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
We now come to the explanations of vote .
Oral explanations of vote
( SK ) Madam President , I voted in favour of the resolution jointly submitted by the Group of European Socialists mainly for the reason that little has changed in terms of the importance and topicality of the resolution , even though certain changes have occurred in Hungary between the drafting of the resolution and today 's vote on it .
In the first place , I would like to stress our disappointment over the fact that the Commission decided from the outset to focus on just three areas in relation to the controversial Hungarian media law .
We are insistent that , after the Hungarian Government and Parliament had dealt with these three areas in a relatively acceptable way , the Commission should have continued by closely monitoring the compliance of the Hungarian media law with European legislation - specifically , the Charter of Fundamental Rights in particular .
We would also like to call on the Hungarian authorities , in future amendments to the law , to engage to a greater degree with the parties involved , including civil society , because that is the only way a law can be drawn up in a truly democratic country .
In this way , the contributions and recommendations will surely be stimulating , whether ours - those of the European Parliament , the Commission , or the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe - or those of the Council of Europe 's Commissioner for Human Rights .
( FI ) Madam President , surely all those in this House who endorse the principles of the European Union think that freedom of the media is very important .
This freedom , of course , entails responsibility .
I nevertheless voted against this proposal .
The information which I have received regarding this matter and which has been gone through here shows that the Commission made requests to Hungary , Hungary responded to them and it amended its media laws accordingly .
In my opinion , that ought to have been enough .
In this respect , I am of the opinion that this should not be made a political issue in this way , where the left are seemingly against the right , or whatever the situation is : the same standards must apply to everyone in this matter .
If the Commission accepted this amendment by Hungary , then I accept it too .
It is my view that this is a matter of basic principles and so I am afraid that I voted against this report by my own group , or its idea , because I believe that what Hungary has done is exactly what the Commission asked it to do .
Madam President , before pronouncing on media freedom in Hungary , we might care to look at what we do as a Parliament .
We might like to think about the hundreds of thousands of euro in public subsidies that we give to the European Union of Journalists ; we might like to think of the tens of thousands of euro that we spend every week flying local reporters , in particular , out to Brussels and Strasbourg in order to show them a good time ; and we might like to think of the way in which dozens of accredited correspondents in Brussels are getting second incomes as advisers on media issues or editors or writers on EU-funded free sheets .
If I were a Hungarian , I would have serious questions about not just the media law , but the creeping autocratic tendencies of the government ; but I am not a Hungarian , it is not my business .
I am , however , a Member of this House , and I think the way in which we use taxpayers ' money in this nakedly propagandist way is something that ought to offend our basic principles of decency , fairness and democracy .
We should cantilever the great tree trunk out of our own eye , before we start worrying about the speck in that of Hungary .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of this important resolution .
It is essential that the European Union make every effort within its powers to end the emergency , in coordination with the United Nations Security Council , as quickly as possible .
Expressing a clear condemnation , proposing a no-fly zone , establishing an arms embargo and other sanctions , providing humanitarian aid , evacuating European citizens , ensuring assistance to civilian populations affected are , however , all ex post measures that merely seek to stem the disaster .
The European Union , however , must play a stronger political role on the international stage and be able to address major challenges .
After facing the emergency , I think we should stop and reflect to see how the EU can work in future to prevent future situations where weak democracies break down and develop into humanitarian disasters .
Madam President , I voted , of course , for this resolution .
But I think it is urgent that the European Council , which is meeting tomorrow , acts as soon and as decisively as possible , firstly , to establish a no-fly zone over Libya to prevent its government from continuing to kill its citizens and , secondly , to establish relations with the Interim National Council .
We added this call to our resolution .
But , all in all , I think a passage in the resolution needs to be stressed : that the revolutionary changes in North Africa have made it clear that the EU 's positive impact and long-term credibility in that region will depend on its ability to conduct a cohesive common foreign policy that is value-based and will clearly side with the new democratic forces .
Madam President , I voted in favour of the resolution .
I would like to stress that the Partnership for Democracy and Shared Prosperity with the Southern Mediterranean , recently launched by the Commission , is a remarkable first step in the right direction .
The EU was largely absent at the beginning of the North African crisis and the transition to democracy , but now it seems to have started to be more active and more effective in this area .
( FI ) Madam President , the Libyan people must have the right before anyone else to decide the future of their own country .
As the notions of true democracy and freedom come from the people , they cannot be forced from outside .
Tomorrow 's extraordinary summit of the European Council must reach agreement on the EU 's role in the region .
The EU should do all it can to support the wave of democracy in the Arab world .
No time should be lost : we need to move from words to deeds .
The EU must be consistent in its policy and acknowledge its responsibility in the area now and in the long term .
If the attacks on the civilian population continue , and that seems to be the case , the EU must negotiate a UN mandate and action to create a nofly zone over Libya to avoid a human catastrophe .
We also need to retain the option of military intervention in this situation .
( PL ) Madam President , we are witnessing the end of one of the last long regimes of post-war history .
However , Muammar al-Gaddafi has not been able to bring himself to make an honourable resignation , and in order to maintain his dictatorial rule , has declared war on his own people .
By turning his guns on the citizens , he has questioned the foundations on which modern civilisation is based .
He has committed a crime against humanity .
We face , therefore , the obligation to support the Libyan people in their fight for freedom , democracy and fundamental human rights .
We have to take action in cooperation with the UN to restore stability in Libya and to punish those guilty of crimes , including Colonel Gaddafi .
Particularly urgent is the need to ensure humanitarian aid to civilians and to give shelter to Libyan refugees .
As long as 25 years ago , President Reagan 's administration tried to bring an end to Gaddafi 's rule .
We must , today , take all measures permissible under international law to remove him from office , so I support Parliament 's resolution .
( FI ) Madam President , I voted in favour of this resolution , although I think it contains certain worrying features .
Firstly , I want to say that my group met with representatives of the Libyan opposition forces this week and they said that they did not want any armed intervention by the West .
This they made quite clear .
I think that the EU should not be a flag waver in this affair , but should act together with the UN and the Arab countries .
Despite that , this resolution talks about humanitarian intervention , which all too often sadly means armed intervention .
Parliament is actually adopting a position in favour of intervention , albeit with the use of fine rhetoric .
My other concern is this nofly zone , which I am afraid will result in the bombing of Libya .
I think that this should be a UNled mission , with the whole Arab world , Africa and the EU acting together .
Madam President , those calling for military intervention - and a no-fly zone is , of course , a form of military intervention , requiring as it does a willingness to strike at air facilities on the ground - should remember three points .
First , as we have heard , the Libyan opposition does not want foreign intervention .
There are posters up all over Benghazi saying so .
Second , the Gaddafi regime does want foreign intervention : it would justify the dictator 's argument that he is defending his country against foreign invaders .
Third , we cannot afford it .
The first ship in the area after the humanitarian crisis began was HMS Cumberland from our own country , which was in the area because she was on her way to be scrapped !
And our Navy still has more reach than those of most of the other Member States .
There might have been an argument for some direct strike against the Gaddafi regime in the 1980s when it was plainly engaged in international terrorism .
It is striking that those who are now demanding some form of intervention were not in favour of such action when it would have been justifiable under the norms of international law .
There is something disgusting about the spectacle of all these European leaders fawning and slobbering over this appalling regime .
We have made quite enough problems for ourselves by our interventions to date .
I think we have done quite enough .
( SK ) Madam President , I welcome the resolution , and I have therefore supported it .
It is not enough , however , to adopt a resolution .
Last week in Egypt , four thousand Muslims attacked a Coptic village not far from Cairo .
They burned two churches and prevented fire-fighters from entering the village .
The army did not want to interfere at first .
When they did finally intervene , Muslim representatives sent them away , saying that everything was in order .
The 12 000 Christians living in the village were placed under a curfew .
There was a time when Europe knew who was good , who was bad and why .
Thanks to the support of those good people , leaders such as Havel , Walesa and Čarnogurský were prepared for the fall of communism .
Today , however , EU politicians are shaking hands with dictators and turning a blind eye to the persecution of Christians .
They do not think in terms of good and evil , because pragmatism does not recognise such categories .
Until this changes , we may do more harm than good to North Africa .
Madam President , I voted in favour of this report because it clearly distinguishes between the two main dossiers on Iran : human rights abuses by the current government and the Iranian nuclear programme .
The report supports the Council 's double-track approach to the nuclear issue : sanctions on the one hand , but an offer of dialogue on the other .
It is indispensable to denounce the extremely serious human rights violations occurring in Iran today .
The perpetrators , who belong mainly to state institutions , are acting with impunity .
At the same time , we should avoid irresponsible calls for an international armed intervention against the current tyranny .
An armed attack against Iran in the name of human rights would be considered by all Iranians , regardless of their political positions , as an attack against the country and an additional violation of their fundamental rights .
The only winner in such an eventuality would be Mr Ahmadinejad .
Madam President , having voted in favour of this resolution , I think it is now time to apply the same approach to the Tehran regime as we have been applying to Libya and Colonel Gaddafi .
In other words , cherishing hopes for confidence-building is not a realistic option any more .
We should support more opposition in Iran .
I am especially worried about the Ashraf opposition camp , which has been under siege and under pressure since July 2009 .
The humanitarian situation there is intolerable .
Parliament adopted a resolution in April 2009 and a written declaration last November on the subject of that camp , and I would advise Baroness Ashton to take this serious message to the European Council tomorrow .
( PL ) Madam President , Iran , under the government of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , is a cause of grave anxiety due to the nuclear ambitions of its rulers .
The continued refusal to cooperate with the International Atomic Energy Agency and the related absence of monitoring of the Iranian nuclear programme make it necessary to consider taking emphatic action with respect to Iran .
In view of the fact that it is an authoritarian regime , we have to reckon with the possibility of its posing a threat to other countries , in particular , neighbouring ones .
Particular fears are aroused by the anti-Israel rhetoric which the President of Iran has been expressing for quite some time .
I consider the position of the Iranian authorities on this matter to be unacceptable and I condemn it categorically .
In voting for the resolution , I express my opposition to Iran 's aggressive foreign policy , and also demand the release of political prisoners , a cessation of the persecution of human rights defenders and a commencement of cooperation with international organisations , including UN bodies .
I also support the diplomatic efforts of Turkey and Brazil in pursuit of a resolution of the nuclear question .
Madam President , the Iranian revolution of 1979 will one day be seen as an epochal event on a par with the French revolution of 1789 or the Russian revolution of 1917 .
Like them , it immediately spilled out from behind its borders and sought to replicate itself around the world ; like them , it disregarded all established norms of international law , of national sovereignty , of territorial jurisdiction .
What was the signature act of the revolution ?
It was the siege of the US Embassy .
Now stop and ponder for a moment how extraordinary that was , given the precedent of relations between countries .
Even in the Second World War , when mutually opposed ideologies fought to extirpate each other , diplomats were peaceably evacuated through neutral countries .
If the United States were to invade Cuba tomorrow , one assumes that there would be a peaceable exchange of diplomatic personnel .
What the Iranians were signalling was that their rules did not match ours ; they no longer cared about the idea of state sovereignty and they have carried on as they started , sponsoring their militias from the Silk Road Khanates to the Balkans , even as far afield as Buenos Aires .
We would be in a stronger position to condemn such a regime if we in the European Union gave a little more regard to the principle of national sovereignty and the principle of national self-determination .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wished to explain why I abstained from the final vote on the report on Iran because , while I agree with all the criticism against the lack of respect for human rights in Iran , especially with regard to the death penalty , the persecution of sexual minorities , and the lack of respect for freedom of teaching in schools and universities , I am nevertheless convinced that much of the news and information this report refers to comes directly from the US propaganda mill and I cannot trust it
Finally , as a Liberal Democrat , while I am , of course , convinced that Iran has every right to pursue the development of nuclear research for peaceful purposes , neither would I deny its right to have nuclear weapons in a region where the only power that has them and is allowed to have them is a racist , colonialist state like Israel .
( FI ) Madam President , regarding this UN human rights resolution , I wish to say that it is very important that we in the European Union stand up for human rights until the end .
Unfortunately , this human rights resolution was not wellbalanced .
When you read it , and especially point 19 , you get the feeling that one state , Israel , is being condemned far too much and that people are trying to lay the blame here on that country .
We are all aware of the situation in the Middle East at present .
Countries there are witnessing uprisings , in which thousands of innocent people have lost their lives .
In this respect , this should have been a resolution on human rights , not on the Middle East .
If the aim had been to find a balance here , instead of attempting to blame Israel in this biased way , mention could perhaps have been made of Gilad Shalit , the Israeli soldier who has been deprived of human rights for 1 720 days as a prisoner of the Palestinian Arabs or Hamas .
When we produce these human rights declarations , we must aim for a balanced , fair approach .
That is the only way that they can be taken forward sustainably and which will enable us , furthermore , to retain credibility as guardians of human rights both in Europe and further afield .
( GA ) Madam President , I was delighted that the motions for a resolution on human rights were adopted , and it was right for the European Union to do so .
But I have a short explanation to make .
Madam President , regarding Amendment 2 , paragraph 8 , my Irish colleagues and I in our group voted in favour because we consider sanitation and , above all , clean water , to be a fundamental human right , and from my own experience of working in Africa on a voluntary basis , I saw the difference access to fresh water makes to the lives of people .
So I feel that , by accepting it as a fundamental human right , this may create the urgency to ensure that all citizens of the world have access , above all , to clean fresh water .
( GA ) Therefore , I was delighted that it was adopted - that is what I had to say .
Written explanations of vote
This motion for a resolution has been adopted in view of the worrying state of media law in Hungary , which calls into question the requirement of balanced coverage for all providers of audiovisual media , respect for proportionality and the fundamental rights of expression and information .
This means that the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) and Parliament share legitimate concerns about the fact that this legislation contradicts international standards on freedom of expression , the abolition of political and financial independence for public media services , or the scope of regulation .
These concerns are even more worrying given the warning issued by the Council of Europe 's Commissioner for Human Rights .
Based on these findings , the recommendations of this motion should be adopted , as they concern revising legislation on media based on observations by the Commission , the OSCE and the Council of Europe , and should urge the Commission to draw up a draft directive on the freedom and pluralism of the media by the end of the year in order to address the EU 's inadequate legislative framework , and thus avoid similar situations in future .
Media pluralism and freedom is one of the EU 's fundamental principles , guaranteeing the freedom to express opinions and to receive and communicate information without control , interference or pressure from public authorities .
International organisations have expressed concern over the Hungarian media law , and having conducted an investigation , the European Commission concluded that it is incompatible with the Audiovisual Media Services Directive and the acquis communautaire in general .
I agree with the proposal made in the resolution that the Hungarian authorities must review the media law further on the basis of the comments made by the European Commission , the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) and the Council of Europe 's Commissioner for Human Rights , the Committee of Ministers and Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe , ensuring this law 's conformity with EU law and European values , as well as standards on media freedom , pluralism and independence .
The Hungarian Government has done a good job of dealing with all the brouhaha surrounding this controversial law in such a way that it has made it clear that freedom of the press and media pluralism have been and remain fundamental pillars in Hungary .
The European Commission has done some fine work here .
Moreover , the Commission will , rightly , continue to monitor this issue , not only in Hungary , but in all Member States of the European Union .
The initiative , announced by Commissioner Kroes , to bring together different stakeholders to form a group of experts , who will then be tasked with tackling the media pluralism situation in Europe , is an important step forward .
This group will assist the Commission in outlining new steps for the media landscape .
We have been tasked with guaranteeing media pluralism and freedom of the press in Europe .
I therefore assume that the European Parliament will actively contribute to this .
Democracy is by no means a matter of fact .
It evolves , progresses and , unfortunately , also regresses over time .
Yet , at this level , the Hungarian measures on the media are a serious step backward .
The agreement of all the European progressives made it possible , initially , for the issue to be put at the top of the European political agenda , which is a good thing .
It is now a question of being precise and firm on the points that continue to pose a problem .
The independence of media governance and freedom of expression are not negotiable .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , because the Hungarian media law should be suspended and reviewed on the basis of the comments and proposals from the Commission , the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) and the Council of Europe , in order to ensure that it is fully in conformity with EU law and European values and standards on media freedom , pluralism and independent media governance .
Furthermore , the European Parliament recalls that the Copenhagen criteria for EU membership , as established in 1993 at the Copenhagen European Council , relating to freedom of the press and freedom of expression should be upheld by all EU Member States and enforced through relevant EU legislation .
Thus , the European Parliament calls on the Hungarian authorities to restore the independence of media governance and halt state interference with freedom of expression and balanced coverage .
Moreover , I believe that over-regulation of the media is counterproductive , jeopardising effective pluralism in the public sphere .
In addition , Parliament calls on the Commission to propose a legislative initiative on media freedom , pluralism and independent governance before the end of the year with a view to defining at least the minimum essential standards and in order to ensure , guarantee and promote an adequate level of media pluralism and independent media governance in the EU Member States .
Media pluralism and freedom definitely constitute an important pillar of democratic rule of law .
The media law in Hungary does deserve criticism , but we have seen that the Hungarian Government was targeted and attacked in a hasty and unfounded manner and this should not have happened , especially at the start of the Hungarian Presidency of the European Union .
However , I am pleased that the Hungarian Parliament has recently approved amendments to its controversial media law to address points proposed by the European Union , and in doing so , took the wind from the sails of those ideologists inciting tensions .
The key requirement that ' balanced coverage ' would not apply to websites , blogs , debates and foreign newsletters was met .
The European Commission should now continually monitor the application of the law .
Credit should be given to the constructive dialogue that took place between Hungary and the EU and which resulted in the legislative amendments being approved .
The foreign media and journalists working in Hungary are no longer threatened by large penalties for violating Hungarian media law , but there are ' other legal consequences ' .
However , Hungarian media owners are still subject to penalties , including those which have formally transferred their headquarters to other countries in the EU in order to avoid the media law in Hungary .
Although we may disagree with this amendment , it is fully within the competency of the Hungarian Parliament and EU representatives should respect it .
The freedom of expression of each individual , the free movement of information and the freedom and pluralism of the media are the cornerstones of European integration and its core values .
The development and implementation of a regulatory framework for the media should respect the democratic standards for the organisation and governance of communication systems .
I call upon the Hungarian authorities to restore independent governance of the media and to put an end to state interference in freedom of expression .
Excessive regulation of the media is counterproductive , as it harms real pluralism in the public domain .
I call upon the Hungarian authorities to involve all interested parties in reforming media law , including the opposition parties and civil society , so that they can participate in a meaningful way in the reform of this legislation , which regulates such a fundamental aspect for the functioning of a democratic society .
The freedom and pluralism of the media are fundamental rights which ensure the freedom to express opinions and to receive and communicate information without any kind of interference or pressure from the public authorities .
The European Commission , as the guardian of the Treaties , expressed its concern and requested information from Hungary on a possible violation of this right , namely , the fact that Hungarian media law may not comply with the directive on audiovisual media services .
I was pleased to learn that on 7 March , the Hungarian Parliament adopted the amendments that had been agreed between its government and the Commission , although I cannot understand why the socialists and Hungarian green party voted against it .
Given the statements by Commissioner Kroes , it seems that there is no longer any doubt that Hungary has followed the Commission 's recommendations , and that the altered version of the law in question respects European legislation .
Freedom of the press can brook no compromise ; this is the message that Parliament wished to convey not only to Budapest but also to the European Commission .
The European Parliament adopted a resolution calling on the Hungarian Government to suspend and to carry out an ' urgent re-examination ' of the controversial Hungarian media law package , even though it was recently amended under pressure from its European partners .
However , there is still concern , especially as regards the Media Council , the body responsible for supervising the media , which is composed entirely of individuals who are aligned with the party of Mr Orban .
In reality , this supervisory body is the perfect instrument for censoring the media .
For this reason , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , guarantor of the freedom of expression of citizens in the EU and around the world , has called for an end to state interference , in order to restore independence to the media .
I voted for this resolution as I think that the European Union must be prompt in preventing and combating any possible attacks against the fundamental values of democracy , with the freedom of expression being one of them .
I believe that it is essential for Hungary and other Member States , like Romania , to reconsider their attitude to the press , in line with the democratic principles set out in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and in the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights .
I voted in favour of the resolution on media law in Hungary , as the freedom of the press is one of the fundamental values of the EU .
I believe that the Commission should pursue a detailed examination of whether the Hungarian media law conforms to European legislation , particularly with the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I believe that it does not make any sense for Parliament to deliver an opinion on this issue at a time when all guarantees of freedom of expression have been given , including by the Hungarian Prime Minister , Mr Orbán .
Moreover , this is a question of principle , so I shall refrain from appraising political , legislative and jurisdictional acts that lie strictly within the competence of the legislative , executive and judicial authorities of a Member State other than my own .
Freedom of expression and information , including the freedom to express opinions and the freedom to receive and communicate information without interference or pressure , are social values which many have fought for over the years , including in Portugal .
The Communists have been , and are now , in the front line of this fight .
Unfortunately , there are still reasons to continue with it in various EU countries .
The pluralism and freedom of the media continue to provoke concern in various Member States .
It is often forgotten that some of the contributing factors for this are the way in which the ownership of media bodies is concentrated in a handful of large business groups , the attack on the rights of media professionals and the existence of increasingly precarious working relationships .
Added to this , there is interference by the political powers that still exist in many countries , and which is a cause for concern .
Freedom of expression and information , with the resulting pluralism of the media , including the freedom to express opinions and to receive and communicate information without any kind of interference or pressure from the public authorities , has been achieved by civilisation .
Unfortunately , however , in various countries in the EU , we often see attacks on these fundamental rights .
The pluralism and freedom of the media continue to provoke concern in various Member States , particularly in Hungary , Italy , Bulgaria , Romania , Estonia , and others .
Even in Portugal , several cases have been reported of attacks on media pluralism , which do nothing to dignify democracy .
However , we disagree that there is a policy of permanent political interference by the EU in the governance of each country , as stated in certain paragraphs .
We voted on the resolution on media law in Hungary in view of this , taking its positive and negative aspects into account .
I am convinced that a very broad majority in the European Parliament will uphold the fundamental rights of the media .
These rights are now being called for in a resolution , although the amendments to this law which were adopted this week in the Hungarian Parliament have not been taken into account .
I would therefore have liked all resolutions that were drawn up before this vote in Budapest to be withdrawn in order for them first to be updated and only then to be debated and put to the vote .
Consequently , the vote in the European Parliament no longer had anything to do with freedom of the press , which should have absolutely priority , but was simply a trial of strength between the groups .
I fully endorse the adoption of this resolution from the European left criticising the inadequacy of the amendments made by Hungary to its media law , while the right welcomes them .
Though Mrs Kroes also seems satisfied with these changes , the European Parliament considers that the Commission only focused on a few technical aspects to the detriment of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Also , not only is our resolution addressed to Hungary but notes that , unfortunately , freedom and pluralism of the media can be undermined in countries with conservative governments .
In this sense , the Members of the European Parliament have demonstrated that they are mindful that fundamental rights and liberties , which are the very principles of the democracies and of the European Union , must be respected .
I voted in favour of this document , because the Hungarian authorities must restore the independence of media governance and halt state interference with freedom of expression and balanced coverage .
Over-regulation of the media is counterproductive , jeopardising effective pluralism in the public sphere .
in writing . - The ECR wholeheartedly supports a free and plural media across the European Union and stresses the importance of freedom of information for all European citizens .
However , given the constantly changing situation surrounding the Hungarian media law and a lack of opportunity to meet the Commission following the new amendments to this law which were adopted this week , we feel that now is not the appropriate time to have another resolution on the issue .
For this reason , the ECR Group has abstained .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution because I believe the Hungarian media law should be suspended as a matter of urgency and reviewed on the basis of the Commission 's , the OSCE 's and the Council of Europe 's comments and proposals , in order to ensure that it is fully in conformity with EU law and European values and standards on media freedom , pluralism and independent media governance .
I support the amendment of the provisions in the Hungarian press law regarded by the European Commission as less democratic , and I welcome the amendments made to the regulatory act by the government in Budapest .
However , I did not vote for the resolution signed by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left because I feel that the measures being proposed are excessive if we consider similar laws in other Member States , but which have not been sanctioned publicly .
A free press is irrefutably a measure of the degree of democracy in a society .
In the European Union it is well known that freedom of expression is virtually unrestricted .
However , we must not confuse this fundamental right with the freedom to utter any information without consequence or responsibility and without having conclusive proof .
This is precisely why clear laws are required , which will set the boundaries within which any journalistic activity needs to operate .
The Hungarian press law was drafted in this context , in the wake of the European directive in this area .
I also believe that we need to discuss the topic of the Hungarian press law on a fully informed basis , given that we can be misled by biased interests and political disputes .
This motion for a resolution is inappropriate in both timing and form , as everyone knows that following the initial criticism made about media law in Hungary and the recommendations made by the Commission , the Hungarian Government has revised its position and altered everything about the law that was the target of criticism by the Commission .
Therefore , the law voted upon by the Hungarian Parliament on 7 March was a version that complied perfectly with European legislation .
That is why I do not understand the Left 's insistence on voting on this motion , so I voted against it .
I voted in favour of resolution because I believe that the new media law in Hungary does not give sufficient guarantee of freedom of expression and pluralism , and is therefore counterproductive for the establishment of real pluralism in the public sphere .
The Hungarian Government should provide an effective guarantee of freedom and pluralism in the media , and should therefore revoke the law , or modify it substantially , based on the observations and proposals of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) , the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe , the Council of the European Union and the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights , and by means of an open , transparent debate in which all stakeholders , non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) and citizens can participate .
Freedom of expression and , hence , freedom of the press , are some of the most important fundamental rights .
We must work tirelessly to preserve them , even when the expression of certain opinions troubles us .
This freedom is also our freedom and it is a guarantee of the free exercise of our mandate .
Transparency is not possible without a free media .
There is a great temptation to seek to control information and journalists , including in our Western democracies .
Free and professional information is always preferable to ' rumour ' , which often replaces the press when the latter is muzzled .
Modern means of mass communication play an absolutely critical role in democratic life and are fundamental to providing universal access to knowledge , entertainment and social life .
Therefore , what I call the ' just state ' must assume responsibility for supporting the development of a free media both domestically and internationally , promoting the pluralism of information and the richness of cultural creation , and facilitating access for all to this content .
in writing . - It is known that according to commentaries and proposals from the European Commission , the OSCE , and the European Council , the media law in Hungary should be revised as soon as possible in order to ensure its correspondence to EU legislation and European virtues and standards which relate to the freedom of media information , pluralism and the independence of the mass media .
The new law is blamed because it implies that there would be only one person appointed responsible for the management of the national mass media and telecommunications .
The new legislation undermines the pluralism and freedom of the mass media and removes its political and financial independence .
All causes which lead to such a negative result should be examined .
Possibly the permissiveness of governments ruling some of the EU Member States gave the government of Hungary an illusion that commonly adopted rules can be cynically breached .
For instance , the Latvian Government still has not implemented the European Parliament 's resolution of 11 March 2004 .
And what has happened as a result ?
Nothing so far .
Possibly the Hungarian Government was inspired by Latvian ' independence ' .
I voted ' for ' in the hope that the ice has broken up .
The attacks of the European left on the law on press freedom recently adopted in Hungary should be read within the context of the piece of theatre whereby tools made available by our institutions are often used in an improper and instrumental manner to support international or domestic political and media disinformation campaigns .
In this case , such attacks are completely misplaced , because the debate has been opened and also closed : the Hungarian Government has readily accepted the comments made by the European Commission , and Prime Minister Orban said , back at the start of January 2011 , that the media law would be amended in accordance with those comments .
Attacking the country that chairs the European Union at a time when it should be supported in the performance of its duties has the effect of weakening the Union as a whole and depriving it of its authority .
The constant refrain of the lack of press freedom is old news , as are the continuous and anachronistic references to the Italian situation , in which , paradoxically , the major newspapers are controlled by left-leaning media groups and information runs freely , sometimes too freely , on the web .
Following the amendments adopted by the Hungarian Parliament last week , the Hungarian law is now completely in line with EU legislation and provisions on fundamental rights , as the European Commission has also agreed .
As such , the joint motion for a resolution is now redundant , which is why I voted against it .
As I had the chance to say when I took part in the debate on the priorities of the Hungarian Presidency , these are aspects of Hungary 's internal affairs which may be regulated , as before , as part of a healthy , normal relationship between the Commission and the Hungarian Government and Parliament .
As an advocate of freedom , particularly freedom of expression and of the press , I can only be delighted with the results .
in writing . - This law has effectively been designed with the intention of restricting media activities in Hungary and limiting critical scrutiny of the government , as part of wider restrictions on pluralism in Hungary .
This is in direct conflict with the core principles of the EU , as set out in the Treaties and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Commission and the Council must continue to push for the complete overhaul or withdrawal of the law on this basis .
Parliament has made it clear that the Commission should not simply roll over and give in to the Hungarian Government on this crucial issue .
The Hungarian media law must also be seen as just the latest attempt to limit media freedom in Europe .
It highlights the urgent need for the Commission to come forward with robust legislative proposals for upholding this core EU value .
I voted against this resolution because I believe that the political groups of the left who sit in this Chamber have exploited a national political issue , which in any case has already been resolved , as evidenced by the recent agreement between the Hungarian Government and the European Commission .
I believe that such national issues should not be brought into question in this House as they are the direct responsibility of individual Member States .
On the substance of the matter , it is right and proper to protect the freedom and pluralism of information as a core value of all European Union countries , but freedom of the media must not contradict public morals and , above all , must not invade anyone 's privacy .
The news industry should be more aware of the consequences that an unbalanced use of its power and influence can have on the life and liberty of citizens .
This is because all too often , personal freedom has been quashed in the name of press freedom .
in writing . - I am very pleased that this resolution was passed highlighting the European Parliament 's commitment to freedom of expression and the independence of the media throughout Member States .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution .
Although Hungary and the European Commission have reached an agreement on the points put forward by the Commission , I support the call made by my fellow Members for a thorough examination of the text of the law .
The improvements achieved by the Commission are remarkably selective and the concerns expressed by Parliament and by various international organisations , such as the OSCE and the Council of Europe , have been largely disregarded .
The concern about the appointment , composition and powers of the media authority , in particular , is perfectly understandable .
Freedom of the press is too important a part of our democracy for it to be subjected to legally restrictive interpretations .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted against this resolution tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
The motion 's authors are not as concerned about freedom of the media in Europe as they are of disparaging a civic government that was elected by an overwhelming majority of its country 's people and which has the difficult task of rebuilding a country that suffered badly as a result of mismanagement by the previous socialist government .
Even the European Commission was unable to find any serious violations of the freedom of the media in the Hungarian law , which , incidentally , has already been amended .
Europe 's left is very quick to see the speck of sawdust in the eye of non-socialist governments , but stupidly pays no attention to the plank in the eyes of socialist governments .
It is difficult to understand the position of the German Liberals , who , with this resolution , are calling for regulation of the media landscape at European level , whereas the German and European media representatives consider this proposal , in particular , to be a restriction of media freedom and an infringement of subsidiarity .
I am in favour of this motion for a resolution , as I believe that Gaddafi 's regime should be destroyed immediately , given the way that he is repressing the Libyan population in their political protests and as a way of preventing more deaths .
I recall that the international community has shown complete unanimity in the UN Security Council on the imposition of sanctions on this regime .
I strongly support UN Security Council Resolution 1970 / 2011 and the measures to be taken by the Security Council , including the embargo , banning equipment that is being used for domestic repression and freezing the funds of people involved in human rights abuses , calling attention to the need to implement the EU-Africa Resolution , which allows the freezing of goods that have been acquired illegally .
A gesture like this is needed from the European financial institutions and the Member States as part of the ban on mercenary activity .
Swift and effective humanitarian action is needed from the EU and the UN .
I should like to finish by saying that the events in Libya , Egypt and Tunisia require a paradigm shift of European foreign policy as regards the southern Mediterranean countries , and I would like to show my solidarity with the Libyans .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
The massive protests in numerous Arab countries have shown that undemocratic and authoritarian regimes cannot guarantee credible stability and that democratic values are central to economic and political partnerships .
The EU has a vital interest in a democratic , stable , prosperous and peaceful North Africa , but recent events in Libya , Egypt and Tunisia have highlighted the urgent need for a revision of the EU 's external policy towards the Mediterranean region .
The EU must revise its democracy and human rights support policy so as to create an implementation mechanism for the human rights clause in all agreements with third countries .
I agree that the European Neighbourhood Policy review must prioritise criteria relating to the independence of the judiciary , respect for fundamental freedoms , pluralism , freedom of the press and the fight against corruption .
I voted for this resolution , which is a step in the right direction as regards the reaction of the European Union to the revolution , which is degenerating into civil war , in Libya .
Revolutions are a dream that becomes reality , but civil war is a nightmare .
With the opponents losing ground under fire from Gaddafi 's troops and mercenaries , and the Colonel sending emissaries to European capitals in an attempt to save his regime , we need to show the Libyan people that we stand by them .
We have heard the appeal that the Interim Transitional National Council made on 5 March .
It is our duty to support this alternative and to protect the Libyan people against the forces of the regime .
With no direct military presence on Libyan soil , a no-fly zone should be considered .
But the decision rests with the UN .
However , this option could only be envisaged with the explicit consent of the Arab League .
At a political and diplomatic level , we have to ensure that Colonel Gaddafi is isolated and help the Libyan people to finally regain their freedom .
The dramatic developments in Libya and North Africa continue to encroach on the borders of Europe : the humanitarian crisis in Libya , in fact , could turn into a wave of migration unprecedented in history .
According to recent estimates , the political turmoil in North Africa could lead some 300 000 refugees to end up on the southern shores of the Union .
I agree with and support , therefore , the appeal launched by six EU Mediterranean Member States for the creation of a Solidarity Fund to help alleviate the effects posed by immigration .
I support the creation of a common European asylum system and the fair distribution of costs relating to immigration between Member States .
Furthermore , in order to limit mass immigration to Europe , I call for consideration to be given to the sending of humanitarian aid to affected populations , both to support the process of democratisation and economic growth in the region .
I therefore urge the Commission to prepare an emergency plan that also considers how we can deal with even the worst-case scenario in which a massive number of immigrants decide to head north to the shores of Europe .
In my view , such an emergency plan must be supported by the principle of solidarity between EU Member States .
The recent protests in several Arab countries show that regimes that are non-democratic and authoritarian cannot ensure credible stability , and that democratic values have a key role in economic and political partnerships .
I should like to call for close engagement with the work of the task force created to coordinate the EU response to the crisis in Libya and the rest of the Mediterranean region .
The Union for the Mediterranean needs to adapt to the new times and circumstances , and to reflect and act upon the recent events , with the aim of submitting proposals on a better way of promoting democracy and human rights in their Member States and in the region , which includes Libya , and on possible reforms to make its own role stronger and more coherent and effective .
I voted in favour of the resolution on ' Southern Neighbourhood , and Libya in particular , including humanitarian aspects ' , because I believe that Colonel Gaddafi should abandon power immediately so as to allow a peaceful political transition and prevent any more spilling of blood .
I vehemently condemn the violations of human rights in Libya and , in particular , the violent repression of pro-democracy demonstrators , journalists and advocates of human rights , and I should like to express my solidarity with the Libyan people .
On the very day of voting for this resolution , it is still not clear how the revolutions , which have been attempting to overthrow authoritarian regimes , which have long remained in power all over the Mediterranean , will develop .
In the case of Libya , the news about the successes and failures of the rebels and the forces that are still supporting Gaddafi 's dictatorial regime are contradictory , and they appear to be facing a real civil war .
Nevertheless , there are many sources denouncing unprecedented brutal violence and repression led by the Libyan regime , and the large number of victims that this has allegedly caused .
The United Nations itself has rightly condemned the atrocities that have been committed .
Today , it is clear that the rebels do not want to live under regimes that do not respect their rights and which do not ensure a modicum of respect for the rules of democracy and the rule of law .
The European Union cannot alienate itself from what is happening .
First , it should demand an end to the violence , persevere in its condemnation and sanctions imposed on those responsible , support those who are fighting for our common values and seek to show solidarity , as well as follow more closely and better understand the aspirations , wishes and tendencies of the movements which yearn for change .
This resolution is worrying and unacceptable .
This is particularly true in the context of the most recent events in Libya , which show the urgency of a peaceful and political solution like never before , without external interference .
In the face of the dangerous and severe build-up of actions , which , instead of helping to reduce tension , are aimed at preparation for acts of aggression by the US and NATO against Libya , the majority of Parliament is endorsing acts of interference , aggression and occupation in Libya .
Any aggression against this country , regardless of pretexts and mandates , would have serious consequences for a people that is already living in a situation of deep tension and insecurity .
It would be deeply damaging to all those in Libya who are continuing to fight for their rights , democracy , sovereignty and peace , and would introduce serious elements of instability and conflict into the region .
Any military attack on Libya , which would be inseparable from the aims of controlling the Libyans ' natural resources , will be directed not only against the Libyan people , but against all the people in the region who have arisen and are continuing to fight for their social and political rights , for freedom , democracy and the real sovereignty and independence of their countries .
We should like to express our deep concern about the most recent events in Libya , but we advocate a peaceful and political solution , without external interference .
Unfortunately , the resolution by Parliament now advocates military intervention , since you cannot have a no-fly zone without military intervention .
This resolution , therefore , instead of contributing to a peaceful solution , seems to be aimed at preparing for acts of aggression by the USA , NATO and perhaps the EU against Libya .
We would thus like to express our firm opposition to any external military intervention in this country .
Any aggression against Libya , regardless of pretexts and mandates , would have serious consequences for a people who are already living in a situation of deep tension and insecurity ; it would be deeply damaging to all those in Libya who are continuing to fight for their rights , democracy , sovereignty and peace , and would introduce serious elements of instability and conflict into the region .
Any military attack on Libya by the USA and its allies , which would be inseparable from their aims of controlling the Libyans ' natural resources , would be directed not only against the Libyan people , but against all the people in the region who have arisen and are continuing to fight for their social and political rights , for freedom , democracy and the real sovereignty and independence of their countries .
We are supporting these struggles .
We therefore voted against this resolution .
This resolution , adopted by a large majority and to which I contributed , shows that the European Parliament is not remaining silent on the situation in Libya .
Quite the contrary , through its position , it is calling on the European Union , the Member States , and Baroness Ashton to support its proposals .
It pledges its support for the Libyan people and advocates , among other things , recognising the Interim Transitional National Council of Libya and supporting the establishment of a no-fly zone in accordance with a United Nations mandate and in coordination with the Arab League and the African Union .
It also condemns in the strongest possible terms the human rights violations in Libya by the regime and calls on Colonel Gaddafi to stand down immediately .
My only regret is the issue of the refugees and migrants , which , I believe , has not been adequately taken into consideration and presented as a common challenge for these countries and for the European Union .
I voted in favour of this document , because the EU must become involved in and support the Southern Neighbourhood , with specific reference to the development of the rule of law , good governance and the constitutional and electoral prerequisites for stable , pluralistic and peaceful democracy in the region .
The Union for the Mediterranean must adapt to the new era and circumstances and reflect and act on recent events , in order to put forward proposals on how best to promote democracy and human rights in its Member States and in the region , including Libya , and on possible reforms , in order to make its own role stronger , more coherent and more effective .
I endorsed the resolution on the Southern Neighbourhood , which devotes particular attention to the situation in Libya .
In Libya , people who are fighting for their country 's freedom are being killed .
We should be helping them .
Our resolution does help them , because it unequivocally condemns the dictator and supports those who want to make fundamental changes in Libya .
We do not know when or how the civil war will end .
We would like it to end quickly and for it to end in victory for the pro-democracy forces .
The European Union should make contact with the Interim Transitional National Council without delay and begin the process for its official recognition .
It should also encourage Libyans to make changes and to move towards democracy .
Thank you very much .
in writing . - I welcome the push for democracy in Libya and in neighbouring countries .
I call for full respect of human rights in the region .
However , I abstained on this resolution because of its call for a no-fly zone .
To enforce a no-fly zone , we would have to bomb anti-aircraft missile sites , with a threat to civilian life .
We would also allow the regime to claim that the West was attacking Libya , rather than attempting to defend the people of Libya .
The negotiations necessitated by the developing situation [ in Libya ] should be carried out in a sensitive and proper manner .
Additional and appropriate measures could then be taken based on a thorough analysis of the situation .
These measures could provide the possibility for a direct solution and for support in the social sector and other areas .
The aim should be to find a solution which will have a clear , and well-founded long-term vision , which will help preserve the sovereignty of this country , and which will rightly be tolerant of its traditions .
The possible establishment of a much-discussed no-fly zone is one of the steps which , as has been said , should be carried out primarily with a view to protecting civilians .
In this context , I consider it important that the mandate is clearly accepted by as many countries as possible and , in particular , that it should be in compliance with the mandate of the UN Security Council .
When preparing motions for a resolution , the wealth of natural resources in this country should not be the only influencing factor .
I voted for the text and the proposed measures concerning airspace in order to help the people in action against the tyrant who is bombing them .
My vote was cast within the following strict framework : all acts of war , such as the creation of a no-fly zone , can only be decided by the UN and the UN alone .
This action must be placed under the authority of the military command of the UN and the UN alone .
All decisions must be taken in consultation with the organisations of the African Union and the Arab League .
I am totally against the US idea of preventive bombing and against NATO intervention .
Any other development would necessitate a different text and different provisions .
What is happening in Libya is completely unacceptable , and the international community has to take more concrete measures that mean automatic suspensions for all types of attacks on civilians .
A civil war in Libya seems worryingly imminent and must be avoided at all costs .
The EU has to take a leading role in this process and help to find solutions that avoid exacerbating the conflict that is currently occurring in this country .
I voted against the European Parliament joint resolution on Libya because it calls for the establishment of a no-fly zone over the country , which is the first step toward military intervention .
We cannot in any way endorse the military solution for the Libyan crisis or for any other crisis .
We were highly critical of the military interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan and must not make the same mistake now .
The examples of those two countries should teach us that violence only begets more violence , which , in the end , has devastating consequences for civilians .
In the case of Libya , I condemn the violence that Gaddafi is using against his people , and I sympathise with the people 's protest movements .
However , I believe that the solution in Libya must come from a cessation of violence and through diplomatic channels .
The Libyan revolution was launched in the name of freedom , dignity and democracy by young people driven by a sense of statehood .
One can only support this wonderful , awe-inspiring aspiration and firmly condemn those who attempt to suppress it by force , without hesitating to kill and wound thousands of civilians .
I very much hope that the UN , in coordination with the Arab League and the African Union , will give a mandate to establish a no-fly zone over Libya in order to protect the population against possible attacks .
I also hope that the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , Baroness Ashton , will establish relations with the Interim Transitional National Council as soon as possible for it to be recognised as a legitimate interlocutor pending democratic elections .
Over the last few weeks , we have witnessed the spectacular and promising upheaval of the geopolitical framework of this extremely sensitive region .
I am convinced that an unprecedented perspective is opening up , which is creating the necessary conditions for the peaceful settlement of the conflict between Israel and Palestine .
We must seize this opportunity to rid the Middle East of a conflict that has already caused too much pain , tragedy , resentment and misunderstanding .
in writing . - I am ' overjoyed ' by the number of loud statements and expressions of condemnation !
Where were you before ?
Was Gaddafi born yesterday ?
There was no terror in Libya ?
Today , the cynicism of some EU leaders causes a sensation of disgust !
Until recently , all the leaders of the largest EU Member States were cuddling up to the Libyan leader and ingratiating themselves with him .
And today they are ready to crucify Gaddafi !
It is better not to intrude in the internal affairs of another country , is it not ?
Let the Libyans solve their problems themselves , otherwise we might see get a full-scale rebellion in Arab countries !
I abstained .
In the fight to retain power , Gaddafi is using heavier and heavier artillery ( such as the bombing of rebels ) and is not afraid of a high death toll .
These measures have been condemned in the strongest possible terms by the outside world , and the European Parliament is calling for a no-fly zone , in order to stop Gaddafi 's bombers from attacking civilians , recognition of the Interim Transitional National Council and the pro-democracy movement as legitimate representatives of the Libyan people and the breaking off of all relations with Gaddafi .
It remains to be seen whether the Heads of State or Government will comply with this call .
On account of the possible resettlement and distribution of migrants in Europe , I abstained from the vote .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of this joint resolution concerning the current situation in Libya .
Too many abuses and serious violations have been perpetrated by the Gaddafi regime against the population and I think it is our duty to adopt a common strong European stance .
The measures proposed in the resolution adopted are a step in the right direction , starting from the desired closure of airspace over Libya , namely , the creation of a no-fly zone to prevent the regime from attacking the civilian population from the sky .
I feel that it should be an obligation for the international community , and the European Union in the first instance , to establish relations with the Interim Transitional National Council of the insurgents in order to help initiate a process of democratisation in the country .
The time has come for Europe to stand firm in asserting its voice to end this dramatic situation , which could also have severe repercussions throughout the EU , beginning with a massive wave of migration to Italy , in particular , and Europe in general .
The severity of the situation currently being faced by the people of Libya , who are the victims of violent repression by the Gaddafi regime , which has caused countless deaths , injuries and refugees , requires determined and concerted action by the international community , and the EU should assume a leading role and adopt a firm stance in condemning those responsible for the atrocities committed , in the adoption and implementation of sanctions and appropriate measures , and also in supporting the legitimate democratic aspirations of this people .
in writing . - I see paragraphs 10 and 11 ( as amended ) as being especially important in this text :
' 10 . Stresses that the EU and its Member States must uphold the responsibility to protect , in order to save Libyan civilians from large-scale armed attacks ; thus , no option foreseen in the UN Charter is to be ruled out ; Calls on the HR / VP and the Member States to stand ready for a decision in the UNSC on further measures , including the possibility of a no-fly zone aimed at preventing the regime from targeting the population ; Underlines that any measures enacted by the EU and its Member States should be in compliance with a UN mandate and seek coordination with the Arab League and the African Union , encouraging both organisations to steer international efforts ;
11 . Calls on the HR / VP to establish relations with the Interim Transitional National Council and to start the process to make them official so as to encourage transition towards democracy , ensuring the involvement of a wide spectrum of representatives of Libyan society and to empower women and minorities in the transitional process , and to support it in the liberated area so as to relieve the population and to meet its basic humanitarian needs , including medical assistance ' .
With this resolution , the European Parliament is calling on EU governments to recognise the Interim Transitional National Council as the official authority of the Libyan opposition .
The resolution approved urges the EU to prepare for the possible establishment of a no-fly zone to prevent Colonel Gaddafi from striking out at the population and to assist the repatriation of those fleeing violence .
I also believe it a strategically important option for the European Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , Baroness Ashton , to establish contact with representatives of the rebel Interim Transitional National Council in order to speed up the process of official recognition of that body .
It is time that Colonel Gaddafi gave up power and put an end to the systematic violation of human rights which is operating in his country .
On paragraph 15 : with regard to Article 80 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , it remains the case that I - like the Austrian Government - advocate solidarity on a voluntary basis .
It should be up to the Member States - according to the capacities of each one - to decide how far this solidarity can extend .
I voted for the resolution of the European Parliament on Libya , which is a clear message of political support for the Libyan revolution .
First and foremost , the European Parliament expressed its solidarity with the Libyan people and condemned the human rights violations and the violent repression being perpetrated by the Gaddafi regime .
The no-fly zone is envisaged in paragraph 10 of the resolution and places it within the framework of the UN to prevent the regime from targeting the civilian population in coordination with the Arab League and the African Union .
However , this paragraph may be subject to various interpretations .
To some , it is simply about preventing the planes of Muammar al-Gaddafi from firing on the civilian population .
This interpretation may give it a preventive role going as far as to prevent said planes from assassinating the Libyan population .
To others , it is the first step towards possible military intervention .
I abstained on this ambiguous paragraph .
I therefore welcome the adoption of this resolution although I regret that it does not acknowledge the past errors of the Union in its relations with Libya , including on the subject of immigration .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution .
As an immediate neighbour and being under an obligation to comply with the principles of international law , which also include the right of peoples to self-determination , it is essential that we provide assistance to the people of North Africa .
The method for doing so should , however , be chosen carefully : the request by the Libyan Interim Transitional National Council to refrain from direct military intervention must be respected also so as not to make the humanitarian situation of civilians even worse .
I am in favour of this report as I believe that the government of Iran should respect the legitimate requests of its people for fundamental freedoms and the improvement of economic and social conditions , along with the desire for cooperation on the part of Iran with the international community .
The approach to be adopted by the EU should treat the issue of human rights as a fundamental factor , on the one hand , and , on the other , recognise the stabilising role of Iran in the region on condition that it normalises relations with its neighbours and other international players , gives up its nuclear programme and improves human and democratic conditions .
I also agree with the Council 's position of a dual approach to the nuclear question : sanctions on the one hand , but offering dialogue on the other .
As a final note , I should say that the EU should not be simplistic by putting the issue to Iran with reference only to its nuclear programme , but should also take account of human rights issues and the stabilising potential of the country in the region .
Mr President , the painful parts of the Iranian issue are the massive violation of human rights , especially the use of the death penalty as a method of punishment .
Whereas , on 12 May 2010 , the EU called once again on Iran to introduce a moratorium on the death penalty , in accordance with United Nations General Assembly resolutions 62 / 149 and 63 / 168 , Iran continues to hold the world record for executions of children and women and on the basis of sexual orientation .
The controversial nuclear programme also raises serious concern due to a lack of transparency and non-cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency and a failure to comply with obligations under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty .
A further problem relates to telecommunications and the Internet , which are constantly being interrupted to the detriment of the international obligation to defend freedom of information .
I therefore support this report and hope to see an improvement in the situation very shortly .
The Islamic Republic of Iran ( hereinafter referred to as Iran ) is facing an array of governance challenges , from power struggles between competing factions within the country 's ruling elites to a crippling social and economic malaise , a problematic regional security environment and rising popular discontent at home .
The policies pursued by the Iranian regime do not respond to the justifiable demands of Iranian citizens .
Popular discontent with the Iranian Government as a result of the grave socio-economic situation , combined with a lack of freedom and of basic respect for human dignity within the country , represent the main challenges to the regime 's survival .
Furthermore , there continues to be a high number of human rights violations in the country .
According to annual reports on the death penalty in Iran , the number of executions in 2009 was the highest for the past 10 years , making Iran the country with the highest number of executions per capita in the world .
I agree with the report 's call for Iran to abolish definitively the death penalty for crimes committed before the age of 18 and to amend its legislation , which violates the international human rights conventions that Iran has ratified , including the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , and call upon Iran to issue official statistics concerning the application of the death penalty .
I voted for this report , because I think that Iran should put an end to all forms of discrimination , a situation which particularly affects women .
Human rights and fundamental rights continue to be violated with impunity in Iran .
The Iranian authorities should put an end to all forms of torture or any other kind of cruel and inhumane treatment once and for all , in law and in practice .
Iran has a long and rich history , and a special identity that should be taken into account at a time when concerns are growing about the recent political and social developments in that country .
Without relinquishing European values and the priority given to democracy and human rights , I believe that channels of dialogue should not be closed with Tehran , and that there should thus be an attempt to motivate the changes that this country so badly needs .
I note with concern the recent attacks on members of the opposition and I hope that the Iranian regime understands how counterproductive this attitude is , and how likely it is to isolate them internationally .
Once again , we should like to state that we do not share but rather condemn a restrictive and basic view of human rights .
The EU often acts in a hypocritical way towards them in order to hide very different objectives .
If this were not the case , many of the considerations and criticisms made here would extend to other countries in the region , such as Israel or Saudi Arabia , and the same criteria would apply to them that are now being applied to Iran .
It is important to note that the existence of peace and security in the region is incompatible with the continued occupation of the Palestinian territories by Israel and the policy of aid which is granted to it by the USA and NATO , along with the complicity of the EU .
The resolution neglects to mention this .
The violation of human rights is a reprehensible act in Iran or in any other country in the world .
In this report , the majority of Parliament resorts to its habitual hypocrisy , using an alleged human rights defence to mask the fact that its aim is to protect the strategic economic interests of the major powers , particularly its oil , rather than the freedom of the Iranian people .
Invoking this freedom is a mere pretext .
If the objective were effectively respect for human rights and the security of the region , it would be necessary to unmask this situation in other countries in the area such as Israel and Saudi Arabia , and to apply the same criteria to those countries .
In addition , the report conceals the threat to peace and security in the region which arises from the continued occupation of the Palestinian territories by Israel and the policy of aid granted to it by the USA and NATO .
We are against interference in the domestic matters of any country , whether they are against national sovereignty or against international law .
We are therefore against the manipulation or use of certain forces or Iranian opposition parties and against campaigns that seek to preserve the interest of the EU and its allies , rather than the interests of the Iranian people .
Mr Belder 's report stresses in a pragmatic manner all the things that the EU should be concerned about with regard to Iran .
Uncontrolled nuclear testing , a lack of fundamental freedoms , a climate hostile to foreign investment , government abuses and the divide between leaders and civil society .
I think these are sufficient reasons to vote in favour of the EU 's adopting a pragmatic attitude towards a major player in the regional setting of the Middle East and to support Mr Belder 's report .
I voted in favour of this document because democratic change cannot be imposed from outside or even by military means but has to be achieved through a peaceful democratic process .
As you know , the proliferation risks in connection with the Iranian nuclear programme remain a source of serious concern to the European Union and to the international community , as expressed very clearly in many United Nations Security Council resolutions .
The stabilising influence which Iran could potentially regain would be beneficial to the entire region , provided that it normalises its international relations , in particular , with its neighbours , dispels once and for all the concerns regarding the real aims of its nuclear programme and guarantees respect for human rights and democracy .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which condemns the human rights situation in Iran and calls for measures to be taken to prevent Iran becoming a nuclear power .
I am concerned that the resolution recognises ' Iran 's right to enrich uranium ' which is of course correct under the rules of the IAEA , but , given the continuing impasse in the negotiations , is contrary to the UN Security Council resolutions .
President Ahmadinejad 's regime continues to trample on the fundamental rights of the Iranian people with impunity , while the government itself is shaken by a number of uncertainties .
On the one hand , the population has hopes of democratic change while , on the other , the Iranian Government and Parliament are disturbed by the presence of factions within the elites competing for power .
Undoubtedly , however , democratic change cannot be imposed from the outside , but it should be the result of a democratic and peaceful process , finally conceding to calls for welfare and freedom from recent mass Iranian movements .
The nuclear question is also still an issue .
From our side , the EU should work for a diplomatic solution , based on an approach that combines pressure with ordinary dialogue .
It would be advisable , for example , for the European Council to contribute to the freezing of assets of individuals linked to Iran 's nuclear and weapons programmes .
In the future , relations between the EU and Iran should , however , focus on analysing the numerous human rights violations .
The Union should , in short , use all means at its disposal to draw up a univocal European Union position and let the Iranians know we are thinking about their future .
Their human rights are our rights too .
Iran 's past and cultural history have to be considered as we approach its current political and social development .
The constant violations of human rights in Iran are a cause for concern , but they cannot prevent a dialogue with it with the aim of putting an end to such incidents ; we must be proactive in seeking solutions which will bring them to an end .
The recent attacks on members of the opposition are worrying , and it is necessary to make the Iranian regime see that such behaviour only leads to greater international isolation .
Iran 's government has been facing serious challenges recently , creating growing levels of public discontent .
Security forces responded with brute force and summarily arrested peaceful protesters ; courts launched show trials en masse against students , scientists , women 's rights activists , lawyers , journalists and members of the clergy .
Numerous Iranians were executed for political reasons and untold numbers remain in prison .
Iran is one of the three countries worldwide with the highest number of executions .
We must do everything in our power to eliminate negative discrimination and social repression in Iran as soon as possible , thus ensuring that the country can take its first steps towards democratic change .
However , this cannot be achieved from the outside or even by military means ; it must be a peaceful and democratic process , which is why I support this proposal with my vote .
Despite the fact that this report has been improved slightly after a number of amendments , I voted against it because it advocates a policy of sanctions that , in my opinion , will not improve the situation of the Iranian people ; in fact , quite the opposite .
In my opinion , the European Parliament report should diffuse the tension rather than increase it , because if diplomatic channels are exhausted , it will aggravate the already complicated situation for the people of Iran .
In my opinion , the threats issued to Iran by the international community are not the best way to find a reasonable compromise in the dispute over the nuclear programme .
That is why I voted against this report .
I supported this resolution because , beyond the nuclear issue , the rapporteur did not shy away from addressing the internal situation of the country , the aspirations of the people for more democracy , and the human rights situation .
We have a duty not to disappoint a young population , a population aspiring to live in a democracy and to respect each other 's ideas .
We have to support a people who aim to shape a rule of law in order to offer future generations a destiny founded on tolerance , freedom , justice and prosperity .
We have to denounce the rapes , murders , summary executions , arbitrary arrests and harassment as unacceptable .
Any violation of human rights is unacceptable .
Yet , since the re-election of President Ahmadinejad in June 2009 , we have seen an increase in such violations .
Iran has the highest rate of executions per head of population in the world .
The country is second to China as regards application of the death penalty by stoning in terms of the number of executions , and first on a per capita basis .
It is time that Iran fulfilled its obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , which it ratified of its own free will .
Iran , as a signatory to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons , has , for a long time , arrogantly ignored its commitments , in particular , by concealing its nuclear operations .
If Iran wants to maintain good relations with the EU and other democratic states , it must unequivocally remove all doubts as to the purpose of its nuclear programme .
I also consider the consolidation of relations between Iran and Turkey , which assures the Union that it recognises shared values in an effort to obtain EU membership , while at the same time displaying open sympathy for the Iranian regime , to be a matter of concern for the EU .
I would like to say that Iran holds the world record for the number of juveniles executed , and the number of executions per capita .
The show trials of political opponents , and the exceptionally cruel punishment of stoning , which is used legally in Iran today , as well as other forms of cruel and inhumane torture , treatment and punishment , are characteristic of a regime which deserves robust moral condemnation .
Apart from what has already been mentioned , the EU 's priorities must include steadfast insistence on the declaration of a moratorium on executions until the death penalty is abolished , a call for an end to impunity over human rights violations and , of course , no more destabilisation of the region .
in writing . - It is hilarious and , at the same time , very sad to talk about respect for rights and freedoms in a country which is ruled by a person who threatens to massacre the United States , Europe and Israel .
There is no sense in negotiating with him about human rights and values and freedoms .
Such people understand only power .
It is necessary to stop being ceremonious and to start transferring from word to deeds .
Complete isolation , severe sanctions , and a clear and consecutive position will yield a result .
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad is a danger for global society .
The lack of transparency in the Iranian Government and the limited cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency over the nuclear programme are certainly far from reassuring .
The deterioration in the situation of fundamental human rights and its ability to destabilise the region through Hezbollah and Hamas are elements that add to the concerns that Iran is spreading throughout the world .
Electoral fraud , violent repression of demonstrations and executions , which amounted to 680 in 2010 ( twice as many as in the previous year ) and the arrest of opposition leaders leave no doubts over the use of power and violence by the regime .
The EU sanctions of 26 July 2010 , in line with those of the UN , were proper and necessary .
The Union must pay greater attention to Iran 's nuclear policy in order to monitor developments in the field of conflict .
The EU should support international diplomacy for the protection of human rights .
The twin-track approach keeps the door open to dialogue , but it takes at least two to have a dialogue , and in the absence of goodwill on the part of Iran , sanctions should be strengthened and more targeted .
We cannot accept that executions continue to rise to such an extent and that Iran 's nuclear policy is beyond the control of the international community .
I voted for the report by Mr Belder .
We have been asking for a change of regime in Iran for far too long .
Human rights are constantly being violated by the brains behind the current regime , whether we are talking about the disgraceful conditions in which the residents of the Ashraf opposition camp are kept , the constant violation of women 's rights , discrimination against homosexuals , the censorship of artists , etc .
At European level , what we can do is apply effective sanctions against the leaders of the regime .
However , applying sanctions is not enough .
The people in the country who are struggling to defend their human rights must be encouraged .
Should the European Union not support all defenders of human rights in Iran ?
The current push for democracy in North Africa should be extended to Iran .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report which outlines the severe situation which is being experienced in Iran , denouncing the practices of repression and the systematic violations of human rights perpetrated by the Iranian authorities and highlighting the need to earnestly seek a diplomatic solution to the nuclear issue .
In particular , I should like to join in expressing solidarity with the Iranian people , who have been legitimately calling for democratic change in the country following the presidential elections in 2009 .
in writing . - This is the first report on Iran in Parliament since the Gahler Report in 2001 .
Since all negotiations on agreements between the EU and Iran have been on hold for years , the only way for Parliament to express a more in-depth position on this country is via an own-initiative report , which was initiated through a Green proposal .
The EFD was given the task .
4 political groups ( Greens , S & D , ALDE and GUE ) formulated joint amendments to the draft which were , to a large degree adopted , albeit by a slight majority .
Important issues are : EU contacts with Iran ( paragraph 32 ) where , as regards the background of the controversy over whether the EP 's Iran delegation should be allowed to travel to Iran , the text now calls - contrary to the wishes of the rapporteur - for contacts with a broad range of actors , without making a direct reference to the delegation ; sanctions ( paragraph 42 ) , where the text calls for targeted sanctions on the main human rights offenders - so far , there are only sanctions on persons linked to the nuclear dossier ; and the opening of an EU embassy in Tehran - in parallel with almost all Member States that have a representation in the country .
I support the text of this report because it highlights the main aspects that make Iran one of the most dangerous countries in the international arena , both in humanitarian and political terms .
The country is now devastated by the arbitrary use of violence by security forces , who responded with a ruthless crackdown on peaceful demonstrations by arresting thousands of demonstrators .
This gratuitous use of violence caused a progressive deterioration of the basic human rights of the Iranian people , who are continuously subjected to a punitive system contrary to any convention on the civil and political rights of man .
As if that were not enough , the death penalty by stoning is still in force in this country , with an increasing number of executions , not to mention the fact that we still have no evidence that the nuclear installations in the country are being used for exclusively peaceful purposes .
We are in favour of this report because it deals with the Iranian issue with the necessary toughness and severity , highlighting the contrasts in the country and the unacceptability that this situation should continue .
The Iranian regime constantly applies repression against anyone who dares to rebel against absolutism , usually by applying the death penalty .
In fact , it is the country holding the record for the highest number of child and per capita executions in the world .
We also note that often , the death penalty is carried out by stoning for crimes as minor as allegations of adultery and apostasy .
The report also highlights the repression of Christians and the Baha 'i community .
Iran continues to lose international credibility because of its political rhetoric and aggressive support for Islamic fundamentalism .
I also want to stress the continuing acts of psychological and physical violence to which the dissident refugees in Camp Ashraf are continually subjected by the Iranian Government .
in writing . - I am pleased that Mr Belder was able to bring this report to the House and successfully push through elements concerning human rights in Iran , in particular , the strong condemnation of the detention of Iranian opposition leaders Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karoubi , together with their wives .
However , I do not agree that Iran has a ' right to enrich uranium ' , which is allowed under IAEA rules but , given the continuing impasse over negotiations , is contrary to UN Security Council resolutions .
in writing . - I supported this report as I strongly believe that the Iranian Government should respond positively to the Iranian people 's demands for basic freedoms and improved social and economic conditions .
Through this report , the European Parliament condemns the use of the death penalty as well as numerous other abuses of human rights .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Belder on the EU 's approach towards Iran .
I share the concerns of the majority of Europeans with regard to Iran 's nuclear programme and the assurances of the Iranian regime that it will only be used for civilian purposes .
That notwithstanding , I am of the opinion that , in its cooperation with third countries in the energy sector , the European Union should only make use of sustainable , green and safe energy sources - in keeping with its climate protection targets .
I also support the opinion of my fellow Member that the EU should devise a broader strategy towards Iran which goes beyond the nuclear issue and also addresses the human rights situation and other important matters .
I voted for the report by Mr Belder because , despite the numerous problems related to Iran 's domestic and foreign policy such as , for example , the possible use of nuclear weapons , the lack of transparency in certain government decisions , and , in some cases , the failure to respect fundamental human rights , I believe that a policy based exclusively on sanctions cannot bring great benefits .
I therefore believe it is important for the European Union to preserve and , where possible , maintain forms of dialogue with the government in Tehran .
I am unconditionally voting for this joint resolution , which highlights the importance of the issues discussed with regard to the rights of people belonging to minorities , and to promoting the defence of human rights and fundamental freedoms , as well as of the rights of the child , while at the same time combating terrorism .
I should like to draw attention to the conclusions , and I agree that the EU must enhance its practice of speaking with a single voice as this would increase its visibility and influence as a global player , and the delegations in Geneva and New York need to increase the coherence , visibility and credibility of EU action in the United Nations Human Rights Council ( UNHRC ) .
I agree with the resolution , which indicates that Member States should encourage the UNHRC to give equal attention to discrimination based on all the principles including gender , race , age , sexual orientation , religion or belief .
I also agree with the review , which highlights the need for the UNHRC to be more active as a mechanism for early warning and prevention , to uphold special procedures and safeguard the independence of the post of High Commissioner for Human Rights , and to maintain the necessary financing in order to preserve its regional offices .
The European Union and its Member States are committed to guaranteeing respect for human rights in their own policies .
It is therefore very important for the EU to be able to assume a strong and influential position in international organisations , in particular , within the United Nations Human Rights Council , ensuring effective and consistent implementation of human rights policy internationally .
I agree that the UNHRC 's work and mandate must be reviewed , allowing the Council 's methods of work to be assessed and enhanced , so that it is possible to react to human rights violations as efficiently and systematically as possible .
On several occasions , the UNHRC has been unable to address serious human rights situations in an urgent and timely manner because of the absence of adequate instruments .
The UNHRC should therefore be better equipped to address both chronic and emergency situations , through the expansion of the human rights toolbox , by using panels not just during but also in-between sessions .
In turn , the EU must make the UNHRC a priority and coordinate better among the Member States , which would allow the EU to better use its influence within the wider UN system and would facilitate coordination and decision making in the area of human rights .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , because the European Union and its Member States should guarantee respect for human rights in their own policies , and the European Union 's position in the United Nations Human Rights Council ( UNHRC ) should be stronger and more effective .
Priorities for the Session of the United Nations Human Rights Council and the 2011 review are necessary , because only then can we assess how the Human Rights Council has implemented its mandate and determine the methods of work that must be enhanced so that the UNHRC is more efficient and responds to human rights violations promptly .
The European Parliament regrets the fact that on several occasions , the UNHRC has been unable to address serious human rights situations in an urgent and timely manner because of the absence of adequate instruments , and actively seeks the creation of dedicated UNHRC mechanisms to respond promptly to the human rights crises in , for example , the Middle East , Iran and Belarus .
Furthermore , it is very important for the UNHRC to be better equipped to address both chronic and emergency situations , perhaps through the expansion of the human rights toolbox , by using panels not just during but also in-between sessions .
Parliament also calls on EU Member States to actively engage in the 2011 review of the UNHRC to strengthen compliance with its mandate .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I believe that the agenda of the 16th regular session of the Human Rights Council lays down important issues which are of particular relevance .
I wish to highlight the importance of the agenda , which includes reports on the ' rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic , religious and linguistic minorities ' and on the ' promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism ' , as well as extensive meetings on the rights of the child .
The 16th session of the United Nations Human Rights Council will take place during a particularly turbulent historical period , which undermines its very composition , given that some of its members are far from complying with the provisions of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights and promoting and protecting human rights , in accordance with its mission .
The European Union must actively participate in this session and do all it can to ensure that its universalistic view of human rights based on personal dignity becomes increasingly widespread and effectively implemented in every country in the world .
The designation of a European high representative for human rights may contribute to the greater visibility of the Union 's positions and the insistence by the Member States of the Council on the ' one message , but with many voices ' strategy , and has the potential to raise increasing support for European positions .
The European Parliament has long had a policy of double standards concerning human rights .
It is also well known that it has a narrow and self-serving conception of the declaration adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948 : the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Once again , in this report , the selective way in which various countries are mentioned is clear .
Countries with which the EU maintains economic and diplomatic relations , and to which it attributes strategic importance , have been left out because of the strategic interests they serve , despite their serious violations of human rights .
Examples of these countries include Israel , Columbia and Morocco , to name but three , on different continents .
For our part , we do not have a restrictive view of human rights .
We take the entire content of the declaration seriously , which we feel , most importantly , inspired our political intervention .
Finally , we object to the idea of the European Union having a permanent seat on the United Nations General Assembly for the simple reason that it would not make sense in light of the spirit and principles of the organisation , contained in the United Nations Charter .
The UN is , and must continue to be , an organisation of independent and sovereign states .
The selectiveness surrounding the countries criticised in this report and the self-serving nature of this debate is clear .
The hypocritical use of this report is obvious , as the countries with which the EU has good economic and diplomatic relations and those which are of strategic importance are not criticised , despite their violations of human rights , including , for example , Columbia and Honduras .
There is no call for an end to Morocco 's occupation of the Western Sahara or Israel 's occupation of Palestine .
Moreover , we cannot support the idea of the European Union having a permanent seat on the United Nations General Assembly because the UN is an organisation made up of sovereign and independent states and the European Union is not a state according to the UN Charter .
The defence of human rights , including the fact that they are indivisible and cannot be ranked , and that they are a prerequisite for respecting the rights of people and for genuine social justice , peace , freedom and democracy , form the framework of our political action .
You can count on us to defend human rights , but do not count on us for exercises in hypocrisy .
I voted in favour of this document , because the United Nations Human Rights Council is a unique platform specialising in universal human rights and a specific forum dealing with human rights within the UN system , and it is also entrusted with the important task and responsibility of strengthening the promotion , protection and respect of human rights around the globe .
I would like to underline the importance of the 16th Session of the UNHRC and particularly the UNHRC review process , which provides for a unique opportunity to assess how the Council has implemented its mandate and presents an occasion for the Council to enhance its methods of work in order to respond more efficiently and systematically to human rights violations .
I welcome the fact that on the agenda of the 16th regular session are , among others , reports on the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic , religious and linguistic minorities , and on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism , as well as extensive meetings on the rights of the child .
The 16th Session of the UN Human Rights Council offers a unique opportunity to evaluate the way in which the Council has fulfilled its mandate and , at the same time , a chance to improve the Council 's working methods with the aim of ensuring a more effective and systematic response to situations involving the violation of human rights .
I think that it is vital to set up , as part of the EU Council , a human rights working group which will include experts in human rights from all 27 EU Member States , based in Brussels .
It would also be extremely useful to appoint a special high-level EU representative for human rights .
I hope that the EEAS , in particular , the EU delegations in Geneva and New York , will , in the future , improve the coherence , raise the profile and boost the credibility of the EU 's actions within the UN Human Rights Council by developing the EU 's ability to interact and cooperate at an inter-regional level .
I have just voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on the priorities of the 16th Session of the UN Human Rights Council .
Our resolution is particularly significant because we have today remembered the suppression of peaceful protests against the violent occupation of Tibet 52 years ago .
The Dalai Lama announced his withdrawal from political life yesterday - this represents an historic loss .
There are few people who are held in such high esteem by their own people and the world at large and who , at the same time , are so well liked as His Holiness .
By withdrawing from political life , the Dalai Lama is in no way relinquishing his responsibility .
He has stated that he continues to be committed to his spiritual role in relation to the concerns of the Tibetan people .
His Holiness will transfer the political powers laid down in the Tibetan constitution to the freely elected government-in-exile .
In this way , he will once again strengthen the democracy of the exiled Tibetan people , who are spread across all of the continents of the world .
On 20 March , a new prime minister and a new parliament will be elected .
I will witness the elections in Switzerland as an observer .
We Europeans must help to further strengthen democracy and human rights for the Tibetan people .
in writing . - I welcome this resolution , which emphasises the interdependence of civil , political , economic , social and cultural rights and points out that access to water is a human right .
I particularly welcome the adoption of Amendment 19 calling for a follow-up to the Goldstone report .
In the midst of these difficult times that we are facing , especially in the North African regions , the 16th session of the UN Human Rights Council is of paramount importance .
The European Union will therefore have to play a truly active role in this session and take every step to ensure its universalistic view of human rights based on respect for human dignity is followed by every country in the world .
It is also important for the EU that a European high representative for human rights be appointed in order for its view on defending human rights to be increasingly widespread .
Unfortunately I could not vote in favour of this European Parliament resolution on the priorities of the 16th Session of the UN Human Rights Council , because it lays down a number of points with which I disagree .
The resolution calls for coordination with the United States in the area of human rights , it welcomes the appointment of Morocco as a co-facilitator in the Human Rights Council of the United Nations , and encourages the EU to maintain ' common positions ' with regard to certain countries .
It also insists on the virtues of the EU financial instruments , which are merely an example of the way in which the EU manipulates such an important issue as human rights , by funding those groups that guarantee European interests in third countries .
In my opinion , these are reasons enough to not vote for this resolution , and I therefore abstained .
The unrest in Maghreb gives us a very stark reminder that it is not easy to defend human rights and that this often conflicts with economic and / or military interests .
Similarly , measures are taken in the name of combating terrorism that are not compatible with human rights .
In this regard , the EU also needs to take a look at its own behaviour - for example , in the case of the illegal CIA overflights .
Despite these shortcomings , it remains important for the EU in particular to devote itself to the protection of human rights .
Protection of the rights of minorities , particularly the improvement of the situation for Christians and other religious minorities in Muslim countries , must be a particular concern of the European Union , with Christians in particular being subjected to severe persecution and being the main victims of religious violence .
In view of this , I voted in favour .
I voted in favour of this resolution because the United Nations Human Rights Council plays a very important role throughout the world in addressing issues relating to human rights .
The review process is an excellent opportunity to assess how the Council has implemented its mandate .
I agree with the proposal that the EU must speak with one voice in relation to issues being dealt with .
Furthermore , the Member States must actively engage in reviewing the Council 's work .
I welcome the fact that on the agenda of the 16th regular session are reports on the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic , religious and linguistic minorities , on the rights of the child , and on countering terrorism .
However , in order to improve human living conditions , issues relating to the right to water and sanitation should be considered at the session .
We must guarantee an effective mechanism to implement and protect what is a fundamental human right .
Every effort must be made to ensure that commitments in this area are implemented internationally and every person has access to safe drinking water and sanitation facilities .
Respecting , promoting and safeguarding the universality of human rights is part of the EU 's legal , ethical and cultural acquis , and is one of the cornerstones of European unity and integrity .
Every effort must therefore be made to increase the visibility and effectiveness of action on the part of the European Union and its Member States , and it is vital to ensure that the European Union is committed to actively participating in this important 16th session of the Human Rights Council ( UNHRC ) as well as in the UNHRC review process , which will take place in 2011 .
in writing . - A good report where , among other things , Parliament welcomes the fact that the agenda of the 16th regular session includes reports on the ' Rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic , religious and linguistic minorities ' , and on the ' Promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism ' , as well as extensive meetings on the rights of the child ; welcomes also this year 's nominations of Special Rapporteurs on these key topics , and takes note of the reports to be presented by the Special Rapporteurs on torture and other cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment , on freedom of religion or belief , and on the situation of human rights defenders ; calls on the EU Member States to contribute actively to these debates .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution as it highlights the important role that the EU plays in working with the Human Rights Council .
Given recent events in Libya , it is crucial that we continue to campaign for and seek to defend human rights at an international level .
I abstained on the final vote on this resolution on both substantive and procedural grounds .
The text of the resolution reinforces the idea of an EU policy of double standards in relation to human rights , especially on the issue of human rights violations in the occupied Palestinian territories .
The few amendments tabled on this issue , which I supported , do not hide the fact that the Union refuses to implement the guidelines of the Goldstone report .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left has tabled its own resolution supporting the universality of human rights in all social , economic and cultural fields .
On the other hand , the challenge of this resolution was to vote on the mandate of the European Union delegation to the United Nations Human Rights Council for its 16th session , although the session had already begun on 28 February , with Baroness Ashton having made several speeches .
Voting on this resolution when the session of the Human Rights Council has already begun makes little sense ; the European Parliament should have explained its upstream position .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the priorities of the 16th Session of the UN Human Rights Council .
I share the opinion that the Human Rights Council could be extremely valuable as a kind of ' early warning system ' and preventive mechanism , and I expect the External Action Service to involve itself accordingly in this body .
With regard to the review of the Human Rights Council , I obviously also support the call for an all-inclusive and , above all , transparent process .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12 : 55 and resumed at 15 : 00 )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of committees : see Minutes
1 .
Pakistan - murder of Shahbaz Bhatti , Minister for Minorities
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Pakistan - murder of Shahbaz Bhatti , Minister for Minorities .

author . - Mr President , I think all of us have been very deeply shocked and appalled by the assassination of Minister Shahbaz Bhatti , not least because he is someone known to us in this Parliament : he has visited here , he has met many of us ; but also because this is another highly symbolic killing , striking at someone who was looking for reconciliation and work across all minorities in Pakistan .
We should also add our condolences not only to his family , but also to all the families of those who have been killed in terrorist attacks in Pakistan .
This week , we have seen two such attacks , which have killed and injured more people than , for example , the London bombings .
The whole population is suffering , and intimidation is undermining democracy in Pakistan .
We are seeing a change in the demographics of certain constituencies , for example , Quetta , as intimidation works to force people out .
Our resolution is important in terms of wanting to continue and support the work , in terms of tolerance and mutual understanding .
I would like to make the point that we need that in the European Union , too , where certain recent ministerial statements , in my view , have not helped that .
So we expect leadership in Pakistan and in the European Union .
author . - Mr President , despite the request made by the Pakistani Minister for Religious Minorities , Shahbaz Bhatti , for more protection after numerous threats , an assassin managed to murder him on 2 March .
Our sympathies go out not only to his loved ones , but also to all Pakistanis who seek a more tolerant society .
This is a real blow to Pakistan as well as to humanity as a whole .
Why did the Pakistani authorities deny the Minister 's request for a bullet-proof official car , as well as his request that he select his own bodyguards that he trusted ?
By calling for reforms in the inhumane blasphemy laws , he was a human rights defender .
We equally want to pay tribute to the work of Naeem Sabir Jamaldini , the coordinator of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan , who was murdered on 1 March .
We need practical action such as investigations , including within the government .
These have to take place in line with international standards because impunity has to end .
The European Union should monitor the situation and try to fund civil society through the Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights .
Mr President , over the last 10 months , the European Parliament has adopted a total of three resolutions on religious freedom in the Islamic Republic of Pakistan .
In May 2010 , we talked about this subject here in Strasbourg in the company of the Minister for Minorities , Shahbaz Bhatti .
Today in Parliament , we are debating the circumstances of his death .
The murder of a high-ranking state official , which took place on 2 March , means only one thing : in Pakistan , no one is safe from the radical Islamists .
In danger are not only those who criticise the archaic law which prescribes a sentence of death for religious blasphemy , but also those who publicly stand up for the victims of intolerance , such as Mr Bhatti .
After 10 months , it can be seen that current European Union policy towards Pakistan is not bringing the intended effects .
Therefore , I support the idea contained in our resolution of holding round-table meetings on the situation of minorities in Pakistan .
I think the newly created European External Action Service must react clearly to events in Islamabad before more people become victims and before it is too late .
Mr President , Shahbaz Bhatti and all his family are an astonishing example of what brave , principled , loyal people can achieve .
He had only held office for six months when the Pakistani Parliament adopted a significant reform that guaranteed a 5 % quota to the country 's minorities in public positions .
That was just one of the numerous democratic reforms which Bhatti pushed forward and of which the Pakistani Government should be very proud .
Most significant of all is perhaps the ' Interfaith Harmony Dialogue ' , which he began at local level , and which aimed to diffuse tensions and tackle the problems that give rise to terrorism .
I saw in the idea the ingredients for the Nobel Peace Prize and I hope that the work to promote human rights and democracy in Pakistan will not cease , even though extremist elements gained a temporary victory when they disposed of the country 's most strategic human rights activist .
If dialogue succeeds in a country which is a centre of radical Islam , the positive effects will radiate everywhere in the world .
Only about a month ago , I met Mr Bhatti .
We talked about his possible death .
He was not naïve .
He understood very well what bravery could lead to .
I will die before too long , he said , but meanwhile I will try to change unjust legislation as much as I can .
I will die , but the law will remain and it will affect the lives of millions .
( Applause )
Mr President , I am afraid the situation in Pakistan is getting worse .
Attack after attack seems to be taking place and the government seems to have lost the will to intervene .
Last January , Governor Taseer was assassinated , and last week , the only Christian federal minister , Mr Bhatti , was assassinated , too .
The European Union and Member States are maintaining contacts with Pakistan in many ways .
Cooperation is afoot as regards Afghanistan , many hundreds of millions in aid are pouring into the country for education and reconstruction and efforts are being made to foster interfaith dialogue .
However , the time has come for us to put our foot down .
The Pakistani education system must be reformed and the preaching of hatred for Christians to young children must be stopped .
The aid for reconstruction after the flooding should be distributed fairly , and that includes to non-Muslims .
That is not only in the interests of the West .
If the Pakistani Government and the security services do not get the situation under control , the country will sink into the morass of extremism .
There is very little time left to reverse that tide .
Mr President , there is often only so much we can achieve here in the European Parliament in our resolutions on urgent matters , but , in cases like these , where there are at least two issues concerning freedom of speech and religious freedom in countries like Pakistan , there at least two things we need to achieve to make our voice heard .
First of all , I should like to say to the defenders of tolerance in Pakistan and to the defenders of religious freedom in Pakistan that they are not alone .
This is a very modest aim , but I believe that it is a first step towards some dignity and respect in the debate , and this message will reach those in Pakistan supporting religious freedom , so the first thing I should like to do is tell them that they are not alone .
The second thing I should like to do is make it very clear to the Pakistani Government that it cannot stop the extremists in Pakistan from thinking that they speak on behalf of everyone because this is the vicious circle countries often fall into when it comes to blasphemy laws , as is the case now in Pakistan , or as was the case , for example , in Indonesia .
We are dealing with a minority of very vocal extremists who speak very loudly and who eventually start to believe that they are speaking on behalf of everyone because they manage to intimidate the rest of society .
Consequently , in this case , if governments are not first in line to defend freedom in their own countries and fight against impunity , and if governments do not impose a bastion of dignity , the whole country will run the risk of being plagued by intolerance .
The Pakistani Government must therefore fully investigate Shahbaz Bhatti 's murder and must carry out investigations until conclusions have been reached as it did in the case of the Governor of Punjab .
What it certainly cannot do is allow the investigations to be corrupted by the kind of practices the police and the Pakistani secret services have been using in investigations , which have destroyed investigations , including even those relating to the murder of the former Prime Minister , Benazir Bhutto .
It is therefore vital that the Pakistani Government ensures that the extremists do not take charge of public discourse and , for our part , that we maintain our solidarity with the defenders of tolerance in the country .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Shahbaz Bhatti was killed in the name of so-called blasphemy laws by a group of fundamentalists who , as is happening more and more , used the name of God to promote their own schemes for power .
With this resolution , we want to applaud and thank Shahbaz Bhatti for the example he has set us over the years .
I hope so painful a sacrifice serves as a warning to the governments of the European Union and to the High Representative for Foreign Policy so that specific actions can replace the few words that have been spoken with such a lack of force to date .
In fact , in recent months , the European Union , or rather the Council and the Commission , unlike Parliament , have wasted time discussing whether or not they should include the word ' Christian ' in their weak condemnations , while Christians continue to be brutally slaughtered , often because they approached the West , even though there is nothing western about them .
I therefore believe that the Commission and Council would do well to look to Parliament on this occasion .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , I , too , wanted to pay tribute to the courage and the work of Shahbaz Bhatti .
I know many colleagues in this House have met him personally and his determination to work for minority communities in Pakistan , to hold up their rights , is an example to us all .
The fact is that he put his life on the line ; he knew that the threats were increasing , and his bravery should be recognised .
He has lost his life and we in this House have lost a friend .
So what can we do ?
I think there are a number of important points in this resolution .
Paragraph 13 about calling on the competent EU institutions to include the issue of religious tolerance in society is vitally important .
I would also call on the Commission , in talks and in trade issues as well , to bring up the issue of human rights too .
Paragraph 19 about the institutions and the government of Pakistan is also important , as is the call for recognition of democracy and human rights .
I think that , at the end of the day , we all would like to make sure our condolences are sent and I hope the President of Parliament will send a personal letter to Shahbaz Bhatti 's mother .
His funeral was last week and I think that is also important .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the murder of Mr Bhatti is the second murder of a high-profile Pakistani official in two months .
The murders of both Mr Bhatti and Governor Salman Taseer must be investigated thoroughly and the perpetrators have to be brought to justice .
Apart from Mr Bhatti 's murder , I would like to take up another burning human rights issue in Pakistan , namely , the situation of the Province of Balochistan .
The Baloch minority continues to be persecuted and , according to Amnesty International , at least 90 Baloch activists - teachers , journalists and lawyers - have disappeared or have been murdered .
Other people , such as aid workers , teachers , journalists and government officials , have also been subject to persecution and threats .
The European Parliament and the EU need to send a clear message to Pakistan and urge the Pakistani Government to do its best to avoid this kind of situation .
Mr President , these assassinations are , of course , intolerable , but what is more intolerable is the climate of impunity that exists , despite the increase in attacks .
Unfortunately , the citizens of Pakistan and the families of the victims cannot expect much from a judicial system that is blighted by corruption , intimidation and poorly-trained investigators and prosecutors .
Investigations take years and are based on discriminatory laws .
The criminal dimension of the judicial system , in particular , needs to be reformed and gain real credibility both nationally and internationally .
According to a poll carried out in universities by the Heinrich Böll Foundation , young Pakistanis believe that the credibility of the judicial system is more crucial for the survival of the country than military force or the parliamentary system .
The European Union must therefore use all the necessary instruments at its disposal to strengthen judicial cooperation with Pakistan .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , one by one in Pakistan , the voices of reform and progress are being extinguished .
Shahbaz Bhatti knew he was in danger , both as a Christian in a country where religious intolerance is rife , and as Minister for Minorities who fearlessly denounced his country 's draconian blasphemy laws .
However , he refused to be cowed by the Islamist fanatics who threatened him with death .
Only two months earlier , the Governor of Punjab , Salman Taseer , had been assassinated by his own bodyguards , but Bhatti was not even provided with bodyguards and , therefore , presented the easiest of targets to the heavily armed terrorists who cut him down on his way to a cabinet meeting .
Why was Mr Bhatti not shadowed by armed close protection officers ?
This is one of the many questions we must ask President Zardari .
I hope he can answer .
I hope the Vice-President / High Representative will press him to set more of an example in opposing the alarming radicalisation of Pakistani society .
Above all , this is a human tragedy .
A man of great courage and principle has lost his life and we as democrats honour his name and salute his life 's achievements today in this debate .
We send our condolences to his loved ones in their hour of grief .
Mr President , the provisions of Islamic Sharia law literally state that anyone who offends Islam shall be condemned to death .
I do not know what actions may be considered an insult to Islam in the Islamic world , but cases of murdering defenders of human rights and religious freedoms in Pakistan , as well as in other Islamic countries , show us that some Islamic spiritual leaders regard our civilised values , which give people a broad freedom to decide , as a threat to their faith and do not hesitate to declare , in accordance with their law , a fatwa against anyone who openly promotes adherence to human rights and civic freedoms in their territory .
Shahbaz Bhatti , a minister in the Pakistani Government , Salman Taseer , Governor of the Province of Punjab , or Sabir Jamaldini , Coordinator of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan , have become for us innocent victims of the fanatical application of Islamic law .
The example of these victims is supposed to terrorise not only the Pakistani people from seeking greater freedom , but also the politicians running the country from reforming the political system , so that they will continue to respect a set of rules harking back to medieval times .
However , if we do not want to bring the reformist politicians in Islamic countries into conflict with their religious authorities , we should , in my opinion , strive to find a platform for constructive dialogue with Islamic spiritual leaders regarding the peaceful coexistence of civilisations ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , we are talking about the murder of a government minister and of a man who avowed his Christian roots and was a Catholic .
We are talking about another murder in Pakistan which shows that , in fact , the authorities there are not in control of the situation , and this is a problem .
We are not at this point saying that the President or government of Pakistan have shown ill will .
Our charge is related to the fact that they are not even able to guarantee the security of people who are part of government structures but who profess a different faith from the rest of the country .
This is the tragedy of this country , which , step by step , is becoming increasingly aggressive and full of hatred towards religions other than Islam .
This is a real problem .
I am certain we should speak out about this .
We now come to the catch-the-eye procedure .
Very many Members have indicated to me - and since some of the group chairs and deputy chairs are here , I will mention this now - that we need a bit more flexibility when it comes to these urgency debates when so many Members are clearly interested in a particular subject .
I will now , to some degree , take into account to what extent Members are listed as speakers in later debates .
( DE ) Mr President , a week before he was murdered , I spoke with Shahbaz Bhatti in his office in Islamabad and he was aware of the danger he was in .
However , he was more concerned about his impression that , particularly in recent months , also in connection with the murder of Salman Taseer , the Punjab Governor , many people have shied away from the challenge of the extremists .
Ministers , parliamentarians , journalists , lawyers , even human rights activists , who have always got involved before , no longer have the confidence to stand up against the challenge of these extremists .
I believe we must call on everyone in Pakistan to stand up against this intolerance , otherwise they will be swept aside together or individually .
Sherry Rehman , that courageous politician who put forward amendments to the blasphemy law , is in particular danger .
I therefore call on the Pakistani Parliament to protect her now by finally making the amendments to the blasphemy law that she proposed .
That would clearly signal a united stand against extremism .

( RO ) Mr President , the murder of Pakistan 's minorities minister , Mr Bhatti , comes in the midst of the whole controversy about amending the law which stipulated the death penalty for blasphemy in this country , an amendment which he supported .
I think that the intolerance on which the laws on punishing blasphemy are based has also led to the appalling murders of leading figures who fought for the freedom of expression and belief in Pakistan .
At the same time , the incident involving Mr Bhatti has been condemned by a large section of Pakistan 's political establishment , in the media , and by people from a variety of ethnic origins and religious beliefs , which is a positive sign .
It is therefore the duty of this country 's government to prevent a recurrence of violent incidents based on intolerance and to continue its efforts to respect the democratic values enshrined in the Pakistani Constitution , the universal principles of human rights and the freedom of thought .
( FR ) Mr President , I , too , was deeply shaken by the cowardly assassination on 2 March 2011 of Mr Shahbaz Bhatti , the Christian Minister for Minorities in the government of Pakistan .
This terrorist assassination follows numerous other assassinations of courageous , tolerant Pakistanis who are passionate about human rights and defenders of the human rights of both men and women .
We once again urge the government of Pakistan to do everything possible to shed light on this cowardly assassination and to ensure that the protection of people threatened by fanatical religious extremists is truly effective .
I am naturally thinking , first and foremost , but not only , of Mrs Sherry Rehman .
Once again , I vigorously call on all the competent institutions of the European Union to include in negotiations , with a view to preparing future cooperation agreements , including the cooperation agreement between the Union and Pakistan , a clause ensuring respect for religious freedom and human rights .
( Applause )
( PL ) Mr President , once again , we are talking about the question of human rights violations in Pakistan , this time because of the recent murder of government minister Shahbaz Bhatti , who opposed the country 's blasphemy legislation and defended the rights of religious minorities .
He opposed intolerance and religious discrimination .
The European Parliament resolution on this brutal murder is our expression of opposition to the growing brutal religious extermination in Pakistan , but also unequivocally testifies that we are not leaving religious minorities , whose rights are very commonly violated , to fend for themselves .
It is our duty to condemn acts of lawlessness which threaten the freedom and life of other people .
Therefore , I would like to emphasise how important it is to support non-governmental organisations which fight for human rights in their efforts for greater democratisation in Pakistan and a cessation of the violence .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , in January , we deplored the murder of the Governor of Punjab , Salman Taseer .
A few weeks later , these acts of violence continued with the assassination on 2 March 2011 of Mr Shahbaz Bhatti , the Minister for Minorities in the government of Pakistan .
Vice-President Ashton strongly condemned the murder and expressed deep concern over the climate of intolerance and violence in Pakistan linked to the debate over the controversial blasphemy laws .
Mr Bhatti was the only Christian in the government of Pakistan and a well-known advocate of respect for human rights and religious freedom .
He was one of the few voices left who dared to speak out and knew he was under threat after the murder of Salman Taseer .
Yet this did not stop him from defending his rights which , after all , are enshrined in the Pakistani constitution .
Vice-President Ashton has called on the government of Pakistan to take its responsibilities and provide adequate protection for those in official functions or in civil society who are threatened .
The EU welcomes Prime Minister Jamali 's declaration that the government will do its utmost to bring the culprits to justice .
Our respect goes to Mr Jamali for attending Mr Bhatti 's funeral .
The government must now live up to its commitments and bring to justice the perpetrators and instigators of such crimes .
Mr Bhatti and Mr Taseer were outspoken critics of the blasphemy laws and at the forefront of efforts to amend them .
However , in the climate prevailing after the Taseer murder , the amendments were withdrawn from parliament .
The blasphemy laws , which carry the death penalty , are incompatible with the common values we seek to promote in our relations with Pakistan .
They have also led to miscarriages of justice and discrimination against religious minorities .
While we strongly support Pakistan 's democratic government and will do what we can to assist it as it seeks to cope with an unprecedented wave of terrorist acts , its members should stand up for the principles they subscribe to .
Freedom of religion or belief is a universal human right ; freedom of opinion and expression is intrinsically linked to it .
The Council has just adopted conclusions recalling the commitment of the EU to safeguard these fundamental rights and to step up efforts to promote and protect these rights everywhere and for everyone .
I have received six motions for resolutionstabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I should like to offer my condolences to the family of the murdered Pakistani Minister for Minorities , Shahbaz Bhatti .
I hope the perpetrators of this crime will quickly be apprehended and duly punished .
This brutal incident , the victim of which was a high-ranking state official fighting for equal rights for minorities in Pakistan , is further evidence of how difficult the situation is in that country .
Unfortunately , our current policy has not brought the expected results .
In view of this , the European Union must take specific steps which will help to increase respect for the letter of the law and democracy in the Islamic Republic of Pakistan .
In my opinion , a significant intensification of our work , by organising and holding annual EU-Pakistan meetings on the situation of minorities in Pakistan with the involvement of the European Parliament , can bring tangible benefits .
In accordance with the text of the resolution we have adopted today , I fully endorse the financial support being given on our part to organisations which defend human rights and which are fighting the blasphemy laws .
I hope we will be able to increase the scale of that support .
I hope , too , that we will be able , with the help of suitable diplomatic instruments , to persuade the government of Pakistan to respect the provisions enshrined in the democracy and human rights clause of the Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and the Islamic Republic of Pakistan .
in writing . - Shahbaz Bhatti , Minister for Minorities in Pakistan , sought to reform the country 's blasphemy laws and he was killed .
The Pakistani Taliban reportedly took responsibility for the murder and pronounced the same fate for any further critics of the blasphemy laws .
It is time for strong action to protect the reformers and human rights defenders who are risking their lives for freedom .
I call upon the Council and the European External Action Service to ensure the protection of the other human rights defenders at risk in Pakistan and the effective and timely investigation of Minister Shahbaz Bhatti 's assassination .
The perpetrators must be brought to justice and the response of the government must be firm in order to have a deterrent effect .
in writing . - To lose one advocate of freedom of religion is a misfortune ; to lose two is downright carelessness .
When we discussed the murder of Governor Salman Taseer , I warned about the rise of religious extremism in Pakistan .
Less than two months later , another tragedy has come to pass .
The Taliban Movement in Punjab has claimed responsibility for the assassination of Minister Shahbaz Bhatti .
His request for the use of a bullet-proof car had been denied by the Pakistani authorities .
Such negligence by the authorities makes them an accomplice to the killing .
I would like to hope that the European Union will address the murders of those high-ranking officials in Pakistan with the authorities there and call on them to repeal the blasphemy laws that have caused the escalation of religious violence .
Two months ago in plenary , and it was also during a debate on human rights , we condemned the attack on the Governor of the Province of Punjab , Salman Taseer .
The subject of discussion was the same as the one we are talking about today - attempts at reforming the controversial blasphemy legislation .
The two tragic events are closely related to each other , because the victims had worked together on behalf of national minorities in Pakistan , including religious minorities , and in defence of those who have fallen victim to the ideology of intolerance spread by the Taliban .
Unfortunately , the Western world can only look on at the advancing radicalisation of attitudes in the country , where not even a decade ago , Benazir Bhutto was introducing democratic reforms .
Pakistan is sinking into chaos - the Taliban are terrorising the country and with increasing frequency are carrying out attacks like the one which took place in Punjab on 8 March , for example , in which 25 people were killed .
Reports have now appeared of the next person whom the extremists have sentenced to death - Member of the Pakistani Parliament , former journalist and defender of women 's rights , religious minorities and freedom of speech , Sherry Rehman .
It was she who submitted to the Pakistani Parliament a draft of amendments to legislation on punishments for blasphemy .
At the next part-session , will we be condemning an attack made on her ?
2 .
Belarus , in particular the cases of Ales Michalevic and Natalia Radin
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Belarus , in particular , the cases of Ales Mikhalevich and Natalia Radina .
Mr President , I think it is important to remember that this is not the first time we have talked about Belarus in this Parliament , and from that point of view , this resolution is important insofar as it clearly condemns the arrests and imprisonment of members of the opposition and the violation of fundamental rights to which these people have been subjected .
Freedom of expression , freedom of assembly and freedom of movement in countries such as Belarus should be a priority , and it is therefore necessary to call for the immediate and unconditional release of these people , who cannot be called anything other than political prisoners .
Secondly , I think it is also important to condemn - and this is what the resolution does - the use of torture in these countries , as in others , in the strongest , toughest , clearest and firmest way possible , even when this occurs in the European Union , which , unfortunately , is sometimes the case .
However , in a country with which our neighbourly relations are continuing to grow , and with which we are strengthening our relationship , the use of torture as a form of treatment in prisons , especially when it is fuelled by political motivation , is something that demands our total rejection and full condemnation
Finally , I would also like to openly condemn the sentence imposed on the young opposition activist simply for having taken part in the demonstrations on 19 September 2010 .
I think Parliament is right to position itself clearly against these options , and I insist that its voice must be heard .
author . - Mr President , a large number of opposition figures , including former presidential candidates but also journalists and human rights defenders , were arrested after the events of 19 December 2010 in Minsk and they have been kept in KGB detention centres ever since .
There have been reports of torture and of forced confessions at the hands of the KGB .
These developments fit into a larger pattern of repression and politically motivated trials against opposition activists , civil society , the media and human rights defenders that continues to this day .
We urgently call upon the Belarusian authorities to allow political opposition , civil society , free expression and media pluralism .
The rule of law needs to be adhered to .
The credibility of the Belarusian authorities would be won if investigations carried out in line with international standards , with international experts , were to start right away .
We should consider restrictive measures , including economic sanctions on Belarusian government-owned companies , but we hope this will not be necessary .
We would welcome it if more countries in the international community were to join the call for such actions , because the status quo is unacceptable .
author . - Mr President , Belarus is so often on our agenda and this is because we care , because we want to see a democratic Belarus where human rights are respected .
I have the impression , however , that the messages that we send so often to the Belarusian authorities are not heard - neither those from the European Parliament , nor those from the European Council .
The decisions of the Council have had no effect so far on the situation in Belarus .
After a year of very modest progress , 19 December 2010 became a turning point for Belarus .
Since then , the country has been falling into self-isolation : this can save the regime for some time , but it is at the expense of the future of the Belarusian nation .
This has to be understood , and we will not stop reminding Lukashenko and his friends of it .
I hope that President Lukashenko will take good note of the events in the southern neighbourhood and understand that the only responsible behaviour is democratisation and the social and economic reforms in the country .
We in the European Parliament will not give up ; we call for the immediate and unconditional release of all detained protestors and for the dropping of all politically motivated charges .
At the same time , we still believe that Belarus has time to change ; we are working together with the other five eastern neighbours to find a solution leading to democratisation and to the creation of a situation in Belarus where free and fair elections can take place at the end of this year or at the beginning of next year .
Mr President , Belarus is a country which shares a border with the European Union but which seems to be 1 000 light years removed from it .
It is as if Belarus were inhabited by people who are guided by different standards .
However , this is not the case .
There are also Europeans living there - people who want to feel they live in a common Europe .
The problem is the president of the country , who makes use of methods known from the Soviet Union of several decades ago - what President Lukashenko offers us is a singular journey into the past .
Unlike Mr Vigenin , who spoke a moment ago , I think we should believe in our European voice and that Parliament and the European Union can put pressure on the Belarusian authorities so that they will respect human rights .
This is a question not so much of policy but of fundamental morals and ethics .
We should say to our Belarusian brothers today that they are not alone .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there have always been reports of human rights cases outside the European Union so I shall take the liberty , in this urgent debate , to begin with our vote today on the freedom of the press in Hungary , or rather in the European Union , because respect for fundamental rights in our House and respect for human rights outside the European Union are inextricably linked .
Given that we have managed to discuss the problems we are facing within the European Union in a vote that divided this House and split it in two , and which has given us a lot of work over the past two months , we can now confront President Lukashenko of Belarus with our heads held high .
We can tell President Lukashenko that he must stop his repression of demonstrations , his repression of opponents and his repression of the press in his own country , because he himself represents a government that thinks it has a monopoly on the right to decide what is right and what is wrong , what is balanced , what is neutral and what is objective , not only in its own assertions , but also in those of the opposition and those of the foreign press .
We even saw President Lukashenko confronting the international media with profound arrogance , following the repression of the demonstrations in December .
This is why I believe we can have hope that the voice of the European Parliament , the voice of the Commission and the voice of the Council will be heard in Belarus , and that we will achieve a moral authority , beyond that which we also need to preserve through our example in this House .
Mr President , during last week 's meeting of the Visegrad Group in Bratislava , the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Slovakia , which is currently chairing the group , sent a clear message to President Lukashenko of Belarus .
As long as there is even one political prisoner in the prisons of Belarus , the country can expect to be totally isolated in Europe .
Even today , unfortunately , three months after the presidential elections , the situation in the country is still critical .
Democratically-minded people are investigated , arrested , imprisoned and held in inhumane conditions just as we have been discussing today , with no possibility of legal assistance and with no possibility of visits from family members .
It is therefore also important for the EU to adopt a tougher stance towards the last dictator in Europe .
It may also be necessary to widen the scope of the economic sanctions we are applying , as all the evidence suggests that words , however tough , will not improve the situation for people in Belarus .
Mr President , this resolution is a clear signal to the Belarusian authorities that the European Union cannot and will not tolerate restrictions on the right to demonstrate , nor will it tolerate political prisoners in the country and , in particular , torture in detention facilities .
Brussels is intensifying its assistance to Belarusian civil society , non-governmental organisations , the independent media and students .
Furthermore , we need to abolish as a matter of urgency the expensive visas which prevent Belarusian citizens from travelling to the European Union , reduce the fee and negotiate a relaxation of the visa regime .
I feel that in this situation , it would still be useful for a European Parliament delegation to travel to Belarus , despite the fact that there are obstacles , and if a whole delegation is unable to travel , then Members of the European Parliament should travel there individually in order to better understand the situation and exert some influence .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it was in January when we adopted a resolution on Belarus .
It is not a good sign at all that we have to express our concerns on the situation there again and again , with no positive reaction from the Belarusian authorities .
Although the European Union has re-established sanctions and taken a hard line on Lukashenko 's regime , fundamental rights such as freedom of assembly and of expression are still violated and trampled upon .
Furthermore , the reports on continuous mental and physical torture of political prisoners and attempts at recruiting informants to the KGB give the European Union a clear signal that Lukashenko 's regime did not get our message from the previous time .
Perhaps we ought to speak up and make it even clearer that the situation in Belarus is unacceptable .
I would like to ask the Commission to report on further measures that can be taken against Lukashenko 's regime .
I would also like to call on European enterprises and investors to withdraw from Belarus if they have no desire to be handling blood money and directly or indirectly supporting Lukashenko 's criminal regime .
Mr President , Mrs Ojuland is right when she says she has the impression we are always talking about the same thing and never seeing the expected results .
However , unfortunately , she is mistaken in saying we are unanimous on this .
I would like to ask all of us here to speak with one voice , and to speak as strongly as Mr Protasiewicz , who has sent a clear signal to all those fighting for liberty and democracy in Belarus that we are with them , and who has given a clear warning to the regime in Belarus that what they are doing is unacceptable .
Well , alongside that voice , which ought to be supported by everyone , there are also other opinions being expressed , and unfortunately by one of the authors of the resolution , that incidents of torture occur in Belarus just as they do in some European countries and in some of the European Union 's Member States .
This is unacceptable .
Mrs Ojuland is right that we are being listened to , and that it is not only we who are listening to each other , but that there is also someone else who is listening to us .
If there are going to be such divergent opinions , then in my opinion , we are going to continue to be ineffective .
Thank you very much .
( FI ) Mr President , Europe 's last dictator , Lukashenko , has ruled Belarus with an iron fist for more than 16 years .
The country 's media and judiciary are under his sovereign control , and he also has no hesitation in using them to crush the political opposition , as we saw in the recent fraudulent Presidential elections in December .
At that time , special troops and the police , of course , violently broke up demonstrations and arrested hundreds of people , including nearly all opposition presidential candidates .
The EU 's demands to release political prisoners and end the violence against citizens have been totally ignored by the Lukashenko administration .
It is now imperative that the EU introduces more robust economic sanctions , since Lukashenko has simply exploited the Eastern Partnership programme and all the benefits of neighbourhood policy .
We cannot accept such brutal violations of human rights anywhere in the world , but least of all in the backwoods of Europe .
( FI ) Mr President , we do not actually have to go beyond Europe 's borders to find countries that violate fundamental rights .
In Belarus , you can be indicted and go to prison merely for taking part in a protest , standing in elections , or stating your opinion .
Political awareness on the part of the people and civil activism are not a burden for society : they should be something that enriches it .
It is difficult , however , to believe that democracy could be strengthened in Belarus merely through EU coercion .
There is also a need for dialogue at grassroots level and participation in civil society .
The EU should support democratic development in Belarus and continue to organise cultural and educational projects with it .
The European External Action Service should actively monitor developments in Belarus and support the Belarusians so that European values might also be internalised there .
( Applause )
( RO ) Mr President , two days ago , on 8 March , International Women 's Day , Natalia Radina was unable to enjoy this celebration because she was under house arrest .
On the same day , Ales Mikhalevich celebrated his 53rd birthday in prison .
The simple reason for this is that he is a free man , a man who dared to enter the presidential contest and , in a dictatorship like Belarus , the penalty for making such gestures of freedom is to have one 's movements restricted and get sent to prison .
I would like to highlight two points in our resolution which I regard as extremely important .
I feel that we need to support the extension of the restrictive measures imposed by the European Union by producing a list which includes the prosecutors , judges and members of the secret police involved in the recent human rights violations in Belarus .
Secondly , I also believe that we must do everything we can to support civil society in this country , which can give us some hope .
( Applause )
( RO ) Mr President , I would like to begin my speech with an appeal to the Belarusian authorities to stop the censorship against the democratic forces and independent press .
I also propose reopening the OSCE Office in Belarus .
Human rights were dealt a heavy blow at the time of the presidential elections in December 2010 .
The demonstrations organised by the opposition against election fraud were mercilessly crushed by the security forces .
Those arrested include one of the presidential candidates , Ales Mikhalevich .
He publicised the torture he was subjected to in prison , a fact , however , which has been denied by the authorities .
Journalists close to the opposition were also targeted at the same time .
In spite of the ban on making statements , they confirmed Mikhalevich 's assertions in the hope of attracting the EU 's attention to the critical situation in Belarus .
The circumstances under which the arrests were made are vague , but the treatment they state they were subjected to amounts to serious human rights violations .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to express my very sincere thanks for giving me the opportunity to speak , because several days ago , when I spoke to Ales Mikhalevich , whom I have had the opportunity and honour to know and be friends with for over a decade , I promised him I would do everything possible to speak today .
Although I know this is not the place to be sending personal messages , I would like to say : ' Ales , we are with you , as Mr Protasiewicz has said ' .
I think that today , it is very important to say to the opposition that we are going to support them - and we should say this not only to the opposition .
It is important to say this to those who are involved in carrying out the persecution - the prosecutors who conduct investigations as they are told to do , the judges who hand down unjust sentences , the directors of workplaces who fire people for their political activity , the rectors of universities who expel students for taking part in demonstrations - we should say to all of them : ' We will remember .
We will remember what you do and how you act today , and there will come a time when you will all suffer the punishment you deserve ' .
( RO ) Mr President , I , too , would like to join those calling on the Council , the Commission and the international community to increase their support for civil society and the democratic opposition in Belarus , in response to the events which have taken place since December 2010 .
The arrest and detention of more than 600 civil society activists , journalists , teachers and students , the majority of presidential candidates and leaders of the democratic opposition , along with the disproportionate use of force following the demonstrations organised in protest against Lukashenko 's election , are characteristic features of a dictatorship and show deep contempt for respect for human rights .
The case of Ales Mikhalevich , one of President Lukashenko 's opponents , who was tortured during his pre-trial detention , and that of journalist Natalia Radina are significant in a current situation which we are duty-bound to counteract by supporting the efforts of civil society in Belarus , the independent press and the opposition to encourage democracy .
Mr President , the fact that in Belarus , President Lukashenko 's secret police is still called the KGB tells us all that we need to know about his mentality and methods .
Twenty years after the collapse of the Soviet Union , he remains the archetypal homo sovieticus , a strong man whose addiction to power is as strong as his instincts for crushing dissent .
Lukashenko used the KGB , or uses the KGB , as a political tool to silence the popular protest , including the cases of Ales Mikhalevich and Natalia Radina , that followed yet another disappointingly rigged presidential election in December last year .
More than 700 people were arrested .
Stories abound of opposition activists being abducted , detained extrajudicially , and then tortured mentally and psychologically by the KGB .
Belarus matters to us so much because it is a European country and has become a Cuba on our own doorstep .
If the EU is to have any moral force in the world with regard to promoting democracy , human rights and the rule of law , it must surely start in Europe itself , our own continent .
I do not dispute the need to engage with the Lukashenko regime .
An empty chair policy would be counter-productive with the EU , but we need to increase support to the opposition in Belarus and tighten EU smart sanctions on Lukashenko and his KGB cronies .
Mr President , the events of the past months in Belarus clearly show how civil and political rights continue to be violated systematically by the government .
The arrests of the supporters of the opposition in December reflect the way in which an attempt is being made to silence Lukashenko 's opponents using violent means .
The imprisonment of Ales Mikhalevich and six other opposition presidential candidates on the unjustifiable pretext that they had provoked violent demonstrations contravenes political rights .
Similarly , the imprisonment of journalist , Natalia Radina , for more than a month makes the likelihood of free expression of opinion in Belarus an even more distant reality .
We need to take seriously the accusations of inhumane treatment and torture in KGB prisons made by Mikhalevich , Radina and others , and these should be investigated by an impartial body .
I want to remind Belarus of the international commitments it made by ratifying the UN Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the UN Convention against Torture , and , as a consequence , the responsibility it has towards the international community and , in particular , its own citizens .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , we are concerned about the worsening situation in Belarus , which unfortunately comes as no surprise .
The widespread detention and prosecution of civil society activists , including presidential candidates , in the post-election period led us to expect harsh sentences to follow .
As of today , we already know of four cases where individuals have been sentenced to several years in prison .
We fear that many more such sentences , involving up to 40 people who now stand accused , will follow in months to come .
What is more , we have been appalled by reports of the torture and ill-treatment of people detained on political grounds , including ex-presidential candidate Mikhalevich .
All these despicable events may call for an update of our EU response .
The situation today is as follows : as you know , the EU reacted to the fraudulent elections of 19 December and to the subsequent repression by putting nearly 160 people on a sanction list .
This was a very clear and strong message of condemnation to the authorities .
At the same time , the Commission and the European External Action Service have swiftly designed new dedicated assistance tools to provide urgent support to the victims of repression , their families and civil society , up to an amount of EUR 1.7 million .
This assistance is being delivered with the initial focus on providing legal assistance and counselling to victims of repression and on support to civil society organisations and civic campaigns .
We are also finalising a re-orientation of our mid-term assistance to Belarus to increase support to civil society .
The Commission is quadrupling its aid to Belarusian civil society for the period 2011-2013 to a total of EUR 15.6 million , with particular attention given to strengthening independent media and supporting students , including by maintaining funding for the European Humanities University .
It is now time to reflect on whether an additional response is needed .
The High Representative issued an immediate condemnation following the first sentence on 18 February , and she recalled that political motives had no place in a legal process .
The EU also strongly condemned the harsh sentences and torture allegations at the OSCE and is discussing the matter at the UN Human Rights Council .
Finally , the European Union will discuss whether the latest events call for a further expansion of our existing sanction list to add new names such as those responsible for issuing the latest sentences and leading the recent crackdown .
The EU stands ready to consider further targeted measures in all areas of cooperation as appropriate .
Parliament 's resolution will certainly be a useful and timely contribution to our reflections and discussions .
I thank Members for their attention .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
3 .
Situation and cultural heritage in Kashgar ( Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region , China )
The item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the situation and cultural heritage in Kashgar ( Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region , China ) .
author . - Mr President , Uyghurs have practically become a minority in their historic homeland .
They need international support to preserve their culture and identity .
In fact , the fate of the ancient city of Kashgar is in the balance .
A modernisation programme has slated up to 85 % of the traditional old city of Kashgar for demolition .
It is important to prevent the historic fortress being replaced by modern apartment blocks .
If the Chinese authorities are serious about convincing us that all will be well , they have to first of all convince the native population of East Turkestan that their cultural heritage really will be respected and that the Uyghur language will be taught in schools on an equal level with the Chinese language .
I call on the Chinese authorities to accept possible contributions by ICOMOS , which has impressive experience in the management of urban historic landscapes , and I ask the Chinese Government to agree to lift Kashgar to UNESCO world heritage status that will include several cultural sites along the ancient Silk Road .
author . - Mr President , under the banner of reform and development , the ancient Silk Road city of Kashgar is being demolished .
It is not only a blow to global cultural heritage , but most of all , the city is very important for the Uyghur and the Hui populations , and for China 's cultural diversity as a whole , which is now being destroyed .
China has stepped up efforts to boost relations through cultural diplomacy throughout the world , but no one will be interested in a marketed , homogenised culture of a country which has such cultural diversity .
In the interests of economic opportunity and sustainable relations with the rest of the world , respect for human rights and minorities in the broadest sense is essential .
We urge the Chinese Government to assess the possibility of including Kashgar in the joint application with Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan , Tajikistan and Uzbekistan for the Silk Road UNESCO world heritage designation .
The High Representative should step up the human rights dialogue with China and make it more action-oriented and effective .
Mr President , today 's debate on the rights of ethnic minorities in China comes a day after the Dalai Lama officially announced that he is resigning from his political role in Tibet .
In the coming months , we should watch the development of the political situation there carefully .
Today , however , we are talking about another minority group which is suffering discrimination in China - the Muslim Uyghur population .
China is justifying its policy towards them by the need to fight terrorism , and for the Chinese authorities , the persecution of the Uyghur people also means the destruction of the Uyghurs ' cultural heritage .
Particularly disturbing are the reports of the reconstruction of the city of Kashgar .
This will , in practice , mean the destruction of its historical centre , one of the most interesting and best-preserved examples of Muslim architecture in Central Asia , which attracts more than a million tourists every year and would be eligible for inclusion on the UNESCO world heritage list if China applied for this status .
I am confident that the European Union 's diplomatic service will demonstrate its effectiveness in talks with the Chinese authorities , and will remind them of the need to respect the rights of ethnic minorities and protect their cultural heritage .
Thank you .
Mr President , it is clear that Kashgar is the symbol , par excellence , of Uyghur cultural identity in the Chinese province of Xinjiang .
On 27 January , I organised a conference in Brussels , where I learned of the impact which the destructive Chinese urbanisation plans are having on the Uyghur population .
It is , indeed , the case that , under the guise of public security and modernisation , China wants to leave no more than 15 % of the original city intact and , in fact , transform Kashgar into one huge open-air museum .
I think it is high time that we responded powerfully to this , before it is too late .
After quashing the demonstrations in Urumqi in July 2009 , the Chinese authorities were called upon by this House to make every effort to bring about an open , permanent and respectful dialogue with the Uyghurs and pursue a more integrated and comprehensive economic policy in their area , aimed at encouraging local involvement and , above all , protecting Uyghur cultural identity .
Unfortunately , the current Chinese policy in Kashgar is proving to be quite the reverse of what was called for then .
Not only the destruction of Kashgar , while denying the local population any say in the matter , but also the Chinese refusal to allow Kashgar to compete for UNESCO world heritage status , is illustrative of the way in which the Chinese Communist Party deals with cultural diversity .
author . - Mr President , the EU 's motto is ' Unity in diversity ' .
Sadly , such a sentiment does not resonate in the People 's Republic of China , whose Communist rulers are obsessed with unity , but not much thought is given to celebrating diversity .
Undoubtedly , the attempt to impose Han Chinese majority culture on tiny minorities in the world 's most populous country is causing much tension and resentment .
We already know about the suppression of the ancient Buddhist Tibetan culture over the last 60 years ; now we see the same threat looming over the city of Kashgar in the restive province of Xinjiang .
For 2 000 years , Kashgar has been a thriving city on the Silk Road with a rich , unique and flourishing central Asian culture , but now it is facing wholesale demolition and rebuilding .
It is hard to escape the idea that this is Beijing 's attempt to break the will of the Uyghur separatists .
I personally have no brief or sympathy for the separatist cause , some of whose supporters , I am afraid , have links to al-Qaeda , but I urge the Chinese Government to think again .
The destruction of an ancient city like Kashgar would simply strengthen the resolve of all of those who would wish to foment violence against the state .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , to tell you the truth , out of the three urgent debates taking place this afternoon , this really is the one in which we feel the most impotent .
We have talked about Pakistan and Belarus and we then have reason to believe that the European Union has not only moral authority but also leverage or power over external authorities to try to ensure , at least , that they are on the right track .
In fact , when we talk about China , we know that this leverage is reduced because a lot of what we say in this House contradicts what the European governments in our capitals do : that is to say , what Mr Sarkozy , Mrs Merkel or politicians in my own country , Portugal , do , like Mr Sócrates , who only very recently diverted a demonstration against Chinese authorities so that the Premier , who was visiting Lisbon , did not have to come face to face with those protesting against his regime .
In other words , it is Europe itself that is repeatedly participating in this dream world or fantasy world , which the Chinese leaders are creating for themselves , in which there is no opposition and in which one development model suits all , and is the same in Beijing , Shanghai , Guangzhou , in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region , or in Tibet .
Therefore , it is really difficult for the European Parliament to say what we are going to say today , which is also what is written in our resolution : we are calling for the Beijing authorities to stop committing this demographic genocide against Uyghurs ; we are calling for them to preserve the cultural and ethnic diversity of the regions that make up China ; and we are calling for them to preserve places of architectural or heritage value .
However , the leaders of our own countries are throwing themselves into the arms of the Chinese leaders , pardoning them for everything that they have done in their country , and are giving them free rein in the name of a development model that ultimately we respect only to a very basic degree .
It has therefore been demonstrated once again that moral authority begins to take shape at home and that , in any case , when we in the European Union are talking about others , we are , first and foremost , talking about ourselves , and we need to review our attitude towards China .
Mr President , as has already been said , Uyghurs are not a minority but a people with an ancient Silk Road culture who gradually succumbed to Chinese rule , which was initially very relaxed .
The Uyghurs are supported , in particular , by the World Uyghur Congress based in Munich , and the cultural heritage of Kashgar is supported by the Blue Shield movement , the president of which , Karl von Habsburg , was here in Strasbourg this week to provide us with information .
If we are to support the Uyghurs , let us do so by means of a friendly appeal to the Chinese , because the Uyghurs are threatened with cultural ethnocide .
Moreover , China , as the oldest cultural nation in the world , should clearly recognise that one of the characteristics of a cultural people is the protection of , and respect for , other cultures , particularly when it comes to small cultures in a huge empire .
The Chinese only have to apply their own constitution , which states in three places that this cultural heritage must be preserved .
I would therefore like to say very clearly that we want some give and take from our Chinese partners on this issue - we want the protection of the cultural heritage of the Uyghurs .
Mr President , it is my personal view that , in this case , we must guard against one-sided judgments .
There is a risk of counterproductive bias , both in relation to the situation on the ground and to the partnership between the European Union and China .
The bloody violence in recent years in Xinjiang is glaring proof that resorting to force is the least satisfactory option .
This is why I believe that it is our duty to encourage interethnic dialogue .
It is my opinion that the European Parliament resolution must not affect the right of the Chinese authorities to defend the integrity of their country and the safety of all their citizens , especially against terrorist threats in a region where al-Qaeda is attempting to establish a presence .
We must clearly encourage balanced national development from both an economic and demographic perspective .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it is well known that Uyghuria is in imminent danger of becoming a second Tibet .
The People 's Republic of China has announced a ' Kashgar Dangerous House Reform ' , the purpose of which is to raze 85 per cent of the Old City in Kashgar .
Such philistinism must be stopped and the European Union must insist that the authorities of the People 's Republic of China do not destroy this important cultural site on the ancient Silk Road .
The UN Declaration of the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic , Religious and Linguistic Minorities , as well as the constitution of the People 's Republic of China , must be respected , even by Beijing .
The People 's Republic of China is more and more exercising sinicisation of ethnic minorities such as the Uyghurs and the Tibetans .
It is a cultural genocide in the 21st century , which we simply cannot accept .
Mr President , Chinese official circles have long found it irksome to have references to other ancient and important cultures and civilisations whose monuments are today located in Chinese territory .
Kashgar is the centre of the Muslim Uyghurs - one of the largest ethnic minorities in China .
For millennia , the Chinese tried to subdue the lands of the Uyghurs , and many times they failed in their fight to subdue these lands .
Even today , therefore , there is a certain aloofness in the position of the Chinese administration , and an effort to suppress any manifestation of the cultural traditions and identity that are linked to the rich cultural monuments of the Uyghurs and the city of Kashgar .
I am not sure whether the official Chinese bodies are today capable of accepting the philosophy that the current Chinese state is built not only on the traditions and history of the Chinese empire , but also on the traditions and histories of other peoples .
The behaviour of the Chinese towards Tibet , and towards the Uyghur monuments in Kashgar , bears witness rather to the fact that today 's China is incapable of appreciating the wealth which other peoples and other cultures have brought to its shared state .
It is therefore right to state from this place that we , in contrast to the Chinese authorities , appreciate and cherish all important cultural monuments located on the territory of the People 's Republic of China , as well as those in Tibet and in Kashgar .
Mr President , Kashgar is a city of three and a half million people , a bit smaller than the population of the entire island of Ireland .
It is closer to Baghdad than it is to Beijing .
It is on the great trading route of the Silk Road and has some of the best preserved Islamic architecture sites , some of which are buried beneath the desert .
It also has the largest mosque tomb in China and is a treasure , there is no doubt about that .
However , as has been said , it is under a great threat , ostensibly because the Chinese want to redevelop the city because of its susceptibility to earthquakes .
That is not acceptable to us , because we feel that a great treasure would be lost .
What can we do about it ?
Perhaps very little , but at least highlighting it here today is important .
We can , as we said , ask that it be included among the Silk Road world heritage sites .
Perhaps we could also make people aware of the treasures that are there , so that the people there can preserve them into the future .
It would be the world 's loss , but a bigger loss to China .
( FI ) Mr President , this resolution actually concerns the preservation of an important cultural heritage and the right of minority peoples to their cultural identity .
The ancient city of Kashgar is one of the best preserved Islamic cities in Central Asia .
Kashgar 's rich history goes back to China 's Han Dynasty , and the city was an important staging post on the Silk Road .
It linked Asia to Europe .
The entire Xinjiang Region has enormous cultural significance for the entire world .
China must take action to make Kashgar a UNESCO world heritage site and preserve the area for future generations .
The European External Action Service should also ensure that local strategies extend to the right to its cultural identity .
The European Union 's delegation to China could also earmark funds to support the traditions of the Kashgar minorities and their cultural identity .
Mr President , future generations depend on our actions today to protect timeless sites such as Kashgar .
Kashgar is a fundamental pillar of the history of Islam in China .
In 2009 , the Chinese Government announced an urban reconstruction programme that plans to demolish 85 % of the old city of Kashgar and replace it with modern apartments .
The demolition should be stopped .
Urban planners should identify a development plan that preserves the old city of Kashgar .
The whole Silk Road in China should be submitted for protection under UNESCO 's world heritage programme , which China joined in 1985 .
I call on the Commission and the Council to raise these matters with the Chinese authorities .
Mr President , cultural heritage is crucial to preserving identity .
This is clear in Europe , in China , and wherever , and the Chinese authorities know this .
However , we have seen , for instance , how they have purposefully destroyed this heritage , which means this identity , in several places like Tibet , and now they are doing the same in the Uyghur places like Kashgar .
This is why it is so important that we once again explain our position , and we urge the Chinese Government to stop the cultural destruction threatening Kashgar 's architectural survival immediately and to carry out a comprehensive expert inquiry into culture-sensitive methods of renovation .
This is not for nothing : the credibility of a government is also based on how it treats minorities .
If China wants to be credible in the international sphere , it is important that minorities , such as the Uyghurs , are treated properly , adequately respectfully and in line with human standards .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Hahn , culture and identity must clearly be placed centre stage at global level .
Just this week , Karl Habsburg explained to us how important it is in the search for identity for this cultural heritage not only to be available to the Uyghurs , but also for it to be a global asset .
China should make a concessionary gesture in this regard .
For example , we have recently entered into an agreement with the town of Wenzhou enabling direct investments to be made in dollars in future .
I see an opportunity here for the focus also to be placed on this region and for people in the different cities and regions of China to have equal rights .
International relations can indeed provide a great deal of help here .
( FI ) Mr President , there is no respect for the fundamental rights of the ethnic minorities in China , be they Tibetans or Uyghurs .
It is typical that the Chinese Communist Party refuses to support the city of Kashgar in its bid to compete for UNESCO world heritage status .
In recent years , China has provided support for an international project to add cultural sites on the Silk Road to the world heritage list , but Kashgar itself has not been on that list because it is the home of one of China 's largest minorities , the Uyghurs .
On the contrary , China intends to demolish large areas of the city , claiming that it fears for the safety of the residents , but cultural , civil and human rights organisations regard this plan as a cruel attempt to crush Uyghur culture .
The Chinese Communist Party must come to acknowledge the fact that the citizens of China are culturally diverse , and they must also have a right to cultural autonomy .
( RO ) Mr President , the old centre of the city of Kashgar is in danger and , along with it , the historic symbol of the Uyghur minority in China .
The policy being pursued of so-called urban reconstruction is resulting in the gradual disappearance of this group 's identity , which developed its culture around the fortress situated on the Silk Road .
I believe that moving the Uyghur population from their traditional dwellings and demolishing Kashgar are measures which violate minorities ' rights .
In addition , the city is regarded as the best preserved example of Islamic architecture in Central Asia .
Kashgar 's streets and buildings can be restored to improve the inhabitants ' living conditions .
The question is why the authorities are not investing in activities of this kind .
I recommend the inclusion of the old centre in the UNESCO world heritage list as part of the Silk Road .
I also appeal to the Chinese Government to stop demolishing the city and to look for alternative solutions .
( FI ) Mr President , owing to its remote location , Kashgar , on China 's western border , and the Uyghurs who live there , have succeeded in preserving their ancient traditions for centuries .
The city therefore attracts hundreds and thousands of tourists a year .
On account of its strategic location , the Chinese administration is now trying to control the region more effectively to guarantee better access to the energy markets in Central Asia .
China does , of course , have the right to develop economically , but the rights of minority groups , fragile as they are , must be protected .
It is possible to develop Kashgar in such a way that the way of life of the Uyghurs can continue to be guaranteed .
The earthquake safety of buildings and the infrastructure can be improved without putting into effect plans to destroy 85 % of the ancient city , with the Uyghurs being forced to move out to new residential areas and seeing their society fragment .
This reckless destruction of the ancient city should therefore be stopped , and the Uyghurs should be consulted on the development of the place where they have traditionally lived .
Otherwise , their exotic , fascinating culture is in danger of being completely destroyed .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to say it is to be welcomed that the European Parliament is once again talking about the Uyghurs , a Muslim minority which is suffering discrimination in China .
I would 