Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 29 January 1998 .
Ladies and gentlemen , since we last met there have been renewed acts of terrorism in three Member States of the European Union .
The prefect of Corsica , Claude Erignac , the French State representative in that region , was murdered in Ajaccio on 6 February .
On 30 January in Seville the terrorist organization ETA murdered another town councillor belonging to the Partido Popular , Alberto Jiménez Becerril , and in this case they also murdered his wife , Ascensión García . Similarly , the Northern Ireland peace process has come under attack once more through repeated terrorist acts against the people of Ulster .
Even at the risk of repeating ourselves , I believe it is the duty of our Parliament to speak out in condemnation once more .
All these acts of terrorism must produce the same clear , downright repugnance in us , the representatives of the people of Europe , just as they also provoke renewed interest in increasing antiterrorist cooperation within the Union .
Terrorism , no matter what its political objectives , consists of nothing more than an extremely serious infringement of the right to live , which is the first and most important of all human rights .
I have sent the appropriate telegrams of condolence and solidarity to the respective governments , acting in my capacity of interpreter of the sentiments of this House .
I call on you now to join with me in a minute 's silence as a tribute in memory of the victims
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Tourism
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0040 / 98 by Mr De Luca , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Court of Auditors ' Special Report No 3 / 96 on tourist policy and the promotion of tourism ; -A4-0049 / 98 by Mrs Wemheuer , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Commission 's conduct in respect of alleged fraud and irregularities in the tourism sector .
Mr President , this particular fraud in the tourism sector has cast a very dark shadow not only over the tourism sector but over the whole of the European Union .
We must condemn that fraud , there is no two ways about it , and condemn fraud wherever we find it .
Fraud damages not just the tourism sector but the whole foundation of many of our institutions .
So I want to make our condemnation crystal clear .
However I also want to acknowledge the progress the tourism section has made over the last couple of years under its new Commissioner , Christos Papoutsis .
Many of the improvements are due to him and the people working in that sector .
We have therefore to balance the condemnation against the progress that has been made and move forward .
Let us remember that tourism is one of the most important industries in the entire European Union and creates millions of jobs , in many , many countries around the European Union .
So we need now to condemn what has gone on in the past but at the same time to move forward .
We need to work with the Commission to boost the tourism industry .
This has been , to some extent , a Cinderella industry in the European Union for far too long and should be encouraged in order to create more jobs , more stability and more growth in our countries ' economies .
It is important that we move forward together for the benefit of all our citizens because jobs will be created by growth in the tourism sector .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Wemheuer on her devotion to her task of preparing the report she has presented to us today .
I am taking the floor to stress that after the detailed debate we have been conducting within the Socialist Group , we found that the old issues of fraud associated with tourism , as our rapporteur herself mentioned in any case , have been dealt with by the Commission both with administrative changes and by recourse to the courts on the initiative of the Commission itself and the responsible Commissioner , Mr Papoutsis .
The related decisions are forthcoming .
We feel obliged to make that statement because the report does not just relate to tourism as its title suggests , but more generally to the issue of the essential transparency and prudent operation of the Commission 's services .
And those remarks concerning the Commission 's modus operandi and the way the Commission cooperates with Parliament find us all in agreement , and we will certainly all contribute towards that direction .
Mr President , this is a very old issue that has taken too long to come to this stage , and without the work of Mrs Wemheuer we would probably still be wandering around in the dark .
Mr McMillan-Scott blew the whistle in 1989 about events then , and during the five years afterwards his reports were to some extent ignored and overlooked .
The Committee on Budgetary Control 's earlier report did not whitewash DG XXIII , but it really let them off the hook .
There is no need to recall what was going wrong because all that is now admitted by the Commission , and I quote ' although most of the actions were completed or in progress before the present college took office , the Commission recognises that as an institution it is answerable for such actions in terms of information to the Parliament and measures to correct detected shortcomings .
The Commission accepts that several aspects of the tourism programme could , and should , have been handled differently .
It regrets that warning signs were not acted upon as rapidly as with hindsight they should have been .
Lessons from the past have been learnt . '
I think the past is now the past .
Of course , we have still got to deal with the recovery of some of the money which has not yet been got back by the Commission , and these things are being considered and dealt with by the police authorities in at least two countries .
I want to stress to the Commission that the difficulties that we have had with them have been due to a mistaken loyalty to their predecessors .
I think that loyalty was misplaced and has resulted in much of the delay .
Mr De Luca is quite right in claiming that the result of this enquiry has brought the Commission and Parliament 's Budgetary Control Committee closer together in addressing the various problems .
DG XXIII has been overhauled , and the sound and efficient management brought in by Mr Liikanen will , I think , will prevent this kind of thing happening in other DirectoratesGeneral , so progress has been made .
As two speakers have already said , the tourism policy has suffered and must be allowed to get under way .
In summary , the Wemheuer and De Luca reports have vindicated two people completely .
First of all , Mr McMillan-Scott himself whose sheer persistence and insistence have caused these investigations to be continued when they might otherwise have been dropped , and the investigative journalist has also been vindicated ; his work has been very constructive in the work that we have been doing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the face of the immense fraud problem which is becoming extremely worrying within the Union , a new strategy is gradually being drawn up under the impetus of the European Parliament .
For many years , Parliament has spared no efforts in order to obtain increased means from the Council and the Commission .
In order to fight this scourge and enable the Community to protect its financial interests better , these policies must not be diverted from their objective and the citizens of Europe must be given an assurance that public funds are well used , and used in the public interest .
Mr De Luca 's excellent report is an important contribution to understanding the factors which have led to fraud in the tourism sector and related areas .
To deplore and condemn is not enough .
Certainly , the Commission has been caught out in the management of one of its most significant internal policies , but the most important thing must be to analyse clearly the shortcomings which permitted such a torrent of irregularities in operations linked to tourism policy and to put in place constructive proposals to remedy it .
This work has been done by Mr De Luca .
Should we be surprised , scandalised , when we learn that , the way it was handled , tourism policy enabled the payment of aid to bodies having no right to accept it , that people not authorized to do so signed contracts and these contracts were received and accepted , that the identification of eligible expenses was never clearly established and that the real beneficiary of a grant or financing was not necessarily the beneficiary designated on the contract ?
Such malfunctioning , such shortcomings are unacceptable !
In order to move forward , we must set out to identify the way in which the normal functioning of this policy has been compromised and the way in which it was possible for anomalies and irregularities to be conceived and developed to reach this climax which has so excited the media .
To recognize the mistake is already one step towards making out the truth .
What is important at the moment is that the Commission should be given the necessary means to put in place the remedies proposed by the De Luca report and by Parliament .
To agree on a position is not enough : it must be converted into action .
We expect significant actions which will demonstrate the determination of the senior officials of the Union .
Mr President , what Mrs Wemheuer says is correct . Parliament will ask questions on this matter until we get an answer .
I think that is a perfectly correct approach .
That is the way we should exercise our supervision .
SEM 2000 is not a good enough answer , even if good work is being done . Instead we must settle this question once and for all .
I believe it is more worthwhile for us to actually concentrate more on investigating the whole procedure of exoneration than to try to find individual guilty parties to such an extent , as has happened .
Ladies and gentlemen , there are other things in the report which cause concern , namely that we have perhaps not really seen clearly enough what we stand for , i.e. whether to continue to demand more supervision and more staff or to demand a more open and transparent administrative system generally .
General openness is the best check on the Community 's funds .
I hope that is the route Parliament takes .
For the rest , I must say that we should not draw the wrong conclusions and seek greater centralization of the process .
That would be the wrong route to take .
I also believe we should pay great attention to what role we are thinking of giving UCLAF .
There are , you see , signs that this unit is becoming ' a little state within a state ' and that its effectiveness is perhaps not as great as we might wish .
I hope that in connection with this we also take the opportunity to create uniform rules for auditing generally within the Union , and more uniformity with regard to accounting legislation and what verification should be kept in future .
Similarly , in other contexts we have touched on collection rules which are too unclear , and reclaiming .
Finally , I hope that we will also learn a lesson from this procedure when we renew the service regulations for all the Union 's staff .
Mr President , we are now discussing matters which came about before Finland joined the EU , matters which do not concern us but countries in the EU that lie further south .
I am not referring to any one specific country , as every country in the EU lies further south than Finland .
It would appear from investigations carried out that there are colossal problems in the EU when it comes to monitoring .
Administrative confusion is clearly peculiar to the European Union .
This confusion does not only concern tourism , but , in our experience , agriculture and , for example , energy policy .
Investigations show that the Commission is guilty of serious negligence .
The Commission appears to have operated in a way reminiscent of the Belgian police .
It is a serious issue when the Commission stands accused of responding negatively to investigation , that it holds back information from Parliament , and that illegalities have occurred which remain unexplained .
And a basis for not discharging them from liability for 1996 will persist if the Commission fails to provide Parliament with the documentation requested .
It amazes me that there are so many incompetent people working in the service of the Commission .
I think that with the salaries they pay , the Commission should be able to get more capable staff .
The rapporteurs have done a splendid job but , to my mind , have paid too little attention to negligence on the part of national monitoring bodies .
There has been financial negligence both at the distribution and at the receipt end .
I think if we are going to start hunting for robbers , we will be catching them at both ends .
I would therefore hope that national authorities are aware of their responsibility and Parliament will send a clear message to them regarding how ineffectual their systems of supervision have proved .
Mr President , Mrs Wemheuer writes in her report that ' ever since ... 1989 ... the European Commission has withheld relevant information from Parliament , and ... the Court of Auditors , provided information only after unjustified delays and , at times , provided misleading information . '
Can things really be so bad in the Commission ?
What is it the Commission is actually trying to hide ?
It must be something , since otherwise it would not have acted in this way , i.e. trying to protect its own employees and trying to put the lid on publicity by shutting itself off .
Openness in the EU system appears to be in a very poor shape .
Clearly the Commission does not dare look the citizens in the eye and explain that ' this has gone wrong , we made a mistake here , but we tried to achieve this in this way . '
Such admissions from the Commission are very difficult to obtain .
I would like to ask the members of the Commission who are here now whether it would not have been better to have proper publicity in the Commission ?
As Mrs Thors said , the best supervisory body we have is publicity and transparency , of which we should have a great deal .
This story has been going on for almost ten years .
It would therefore be best if we made a clean breast of things now so that we do not continue going over this issue again and again .
We in Parliament are not going to forget the questions we have asked .
The European Parliament is only doing its duty as the EU 's supervisory body .
The Green Group in the European Parliament is going to support Mrs Wemheuer 's report to the letter .
As far as the Committee on Budgetary Control is concerned , we are not content simply to inspect and find mistakes .
Instead we also draw up many constructive proposals as to how people can do better in future .
I really hope that the Commission reads our report and tries to do its best in future .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating these two brave rapporteurs , who have set out all these fairly unpleasant facts so very clearly and without beating about the bush .
I should also like to pay tribute to Mr McMillan-Scott , because I remember how , when this started in 1989 , he was almost alone - but I always supported him - in seeking the truth of this fairly sordid matter , where pockets were lined and where the people who lined their pockets have not , as far as I know , paid anything back yet or been officially asked to do so .
All of us know we have to go forward and that the present incumbents in office are not the people responsible for these depredations .
We all know the importance of tourism .
Tourism remains a sleeping giant to a great extent in the Member States .
We know it can provide more jobs - mention was made of 100 million , but we know there can be still more with more inter-state cooperation and marketing and with longer seasons in some Member States .
I speak with some feeling there , because I do not always offer the best weather in my particular part of the Community but it is very good for certain holidays .
We do not want to knock our sleeping giant on the head .
But that is a separate matter from trying to deal with the things that have been wrong in the past to ensure that they never happen again .
That is the position of most of us .
We feel there is still a lot of clearing-up to be done and that questions should be asked as to why the information was withheld or was misleading , and why the irregular practices were tolerated for years , due perhaps , as Mr Kellett-Bowman said , to an excess of loyalty .
But when there are criminal or fraudulent acts , an excess of loyalty cannot be tolerated by any elected Member of Parliament .
Is there going to be any attempt to recover the money by way of compensation ?
Are the criminal proceedings in the two Member States mentioned time-barred or not ?
I heard that was a possibility , so that is another avenue that may not be open to deal with this problem .
I have not heard of suspensions , sackings or fining .
Parliament has an interest to know whether that is going to happen .
Discharge provides a very strong weapon for Parliament , but it is very difficult for the job to be done if the information is not before the Committee on Budgetary Control and Parliament .
We really must be sure that we get the information before we grant the discharge in 1996 .
It has to be conditional until we get answers to all the questions raised here .
Is there going to be agreement from the Commission for the future ?
In paragraph 9 , Mr De Luca calls on the Commission to submit within three months a progress report on the recovery of undue payments .
Does the Commission agree with that ?
Does the Commission agree that there must be total transparency from now on and that such practices should not be repeated even if loyalty is at stake ?
These are the questions I would leave with the Commission .
I hope we are going to get answers .
Mr President , the issue of alleged fraud and irregularities in the tourism industry is one of the most worrying that the Committee on Budgetary Control has had to examine , because it comes close to a deliberate desire on the part of the Commission to avoid its responsibilities and to conceal from Parliament - an institution which , after all , represents the people of the European Union - the reality and gravity of the malfunctioning of DG XXIII .
Must I remind you that the first suspicions of fraud were expressed in 1989 ?
Since that date , reports , internal audits and special reports concluding that there were serious administrative weaknesses and flagrant irregularities have followed one after the other .
So the Commission has clearly followed a policy of obstruction in order to avoid the scandal being made public and Parliament being fully informed .
How do you explain that the head of the " Tourism ' Unit has had to explain his activities only five years after the most senior people within the Commission were informed ?
Unfortunately other affairs which the Committee on Budgetary Control has been made aware of show that these events are in no way isolated phenomena .
This is a worrying sign that the Commission is too often a deficient administration , stricken with fraud , irregularities , even corruption .
The Commission must not longer act as if it were a state within a state , to use a French expression , or like an extra state of the European Union , as someone said earlier , which is subjected to no political control , be it internal or from Parliament .
The De Luca and Wemheuer reports represent a courageous stance .
The 1996 acquittal is from now on conditional on the responses that the Commission will give to these two reports .
Our Parliament must remind the Commission that an attitude which consists of avoiding the truth will seriously damage the Union 's image , as well as our Parliament 's reputation , as we would from end up appearing inefficient and useless .
Mr President , if the so-called tourism affair has become a touchstone for the Commission , then the European institutions , with the European Parliament at their head , must do everything possible to ensure that this scandal does not cause the collapse of the EU 's tourism policy .
The rapporteur 's proposals , which will help clarify and improve the situation , should therefore be implemented as quickly as possible .
We strongly recommend that a Parliamentary committee of inquiry be set up without delay .
One aim here should be to bring about a general improvement in the Commission 's administrative machinery , and not only in the tourism sector .
But in addition , we need to rid tourism of its negative image and poor reputation .
The tourism sector has always been treated like a Cinderella industry by the European Union and has never had its own legal basis in the Treaty .
An intelligent European tourism policy could well provide new job opportunities like practically no other sector of the economy .
It should also be borne in mind that while Europe still leads the world in tourism , it has for years been losing its overall market share .
What is required here is therefore a radical purge which will place the Commission - both in terms of its staff and its budgetary affairs - in a position from which it can really do something for the tourism sector .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . If anyone thought that it was preferable for the European administrators to operate behind closed doors rather than in the full light of day , then the recent submission of the two reports being discussed today will have taught them differently .
We cannot at present quantify the actual size of the loss which tourism in the European Union has suffered as a result of this negligence - and here I am choosing my words carefully .
However , we must recognize at the same time that Parliament is very much committed to both these reports .
Not only are we committed to obtaining a satisfactory settlement on the part of the Commission at the time of the 1996 ratification , but we are also not ruling out the possibility of a committee of inquiry .
And even more importantly , we have entrusted ourselves with reforming the way in which our Committee on Budgetary Control operates .
This has now become an important issue because both these reports have made clear , and indeed this has been done by other reports - such as those submitted by Mr Vallés to the MED Committee and Mrs Kjer-Hansen to the PHARE - , that on the basis of the clearly insufficient flow of data available so far , we are not in a position to fulfil our role as the political representatives of the interests of European taxpayers .
This will certainly not be possible in future for a so-called neutral committee .
We must also ask ourselves , in the light of this and the decisions which we have to take in respect of these reports - and this must be done by Parliament and not by the Committee on Budgetary Control - just where we should locate our secretariat , for example .
These are practical matters which now have to be addressed in the wake of today 's report .
We have made appropriate funds available to the European Court of Auditors , as the authority on budgetary control authority , so that it can do a better job in the future .
We in this Parliament therefore have to be able to see this work through to the end .
We are in the middle of re-defining our role as the controlling body of European bureaucracy .
We must make it clear that the interests of the Commission and its members are not necessarily ours , and I think that in this light the two reports which have been submitted can be given our full approval .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the whole thing would be almost bizarre , if it were not so very serious .
We are talking about events which took place years ago and which involved relatively small amounts of money .
The countless investigations into the tourism industry go right back to 1989 and were carried out by the Court of Auditors , the European Parliament , the Courts and the Commission itself , which is being held fully responsible for the whole affair .
Have we really nothing better to concern ourselves with than yesterday 's news ?
I , for one , believe that the real problem lies elsewhere .
Is the tourism issue not much more symptomatic of the cross-dealing which has been going on within the Commission , and which has been suspected , and may still be , in other sectors too .
It is Parliament 's duty as a supervisory body to investigate these possible abuses , to point out where mismanagement , irregularity and even fraud has occurred , and to call for appropriate action to be taken and to ensure that this is done .
To do this Parliament requires a continuous and unreserved flow of information , primarily from the Commission , even though some officials may have acted in a negligent or culpable manner .
The mantle of immunity could also prevent their justified defence .
In the case in question , the flow of information to Parliament has been slow and fragmentary , at least in previous years .
It is to the credit of the Court of Auditors , with its two special reports , and also to the credit of our colleague and rapporteur , who has submitted three reports on the subject , that light has now been shed on the dark recesses of the tourism sector .
These reports will not have pleased the Commission .
Mrs Wemheuer has presented the chronology of the events in meticulous detail .
On her own initiative she has uncovered previously hidden sources and scrutinized piles of documents , and I only regret that these could not be equally weighted and incorporated into her assessment .
This information could well be used for preparing as yet unproven allegations of guilt .
Though the European Year of Tourism is at the heart of the report , Mr De Luca refers in particular to further serious abuses at Directorate-General level , but goes on to mention a number of improvements which the Commission has sought to introduce .
However , these measures , as outlined in the various verbal and written statements by the three Commissioners , namely Mrs Gradin , Mr Liikanen and Mr Papoutsis , as well as by the member of the Committee on Budgetary Control , are still inadequate .
Our demands are clear cut : we want greater transparency , the unreserved supply of information - especially when EU officials appear to be involved - , independent powers of investigation by UCLAF , examination of the question of immunity and strict financial control , to name but a few .
As stated earlier , we are very serious about both these resolutions .
Merely threatening to set up a European Parliament committee of inquiry serves no real purpose , in my opinion , if we are not prepared to make use of such an instrument .
It would be much more useful to put our own house in order by strengthening the powers and personal resources of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Let us hope , Mr President and members of the Commission , that by working together we can make a fresh start for a brighter future .

Mr President , Commissioners , Mr de Luca and Mrs Wemheuer have cast a new light on developments as regards fraud , which is a matter that has concerned me since I first came to this House .
On this occasion , we are not talking about national operators , nor about Member States , but about what a little-loved Commission official called " the rotten heart of Europe ' .
What we have here are situations that cannot be played down , dysfunctions that cannot be ignored , legal aspects which are not dealt with and failures to observe what is known as transparency , and which I would call honesty .
Let there be no doubt , corruption and fraud must be combatted , beginning with the prevention of fraud at home .
Where it does occur , it must be punished , the criminal law regimes of Member States must be harmonized so that a manner may indeed be found to severely punish any who act fraudulently .
I consider Mr de Luca 's approach to be extremely positive , and he outlines exactly what happened in Directorate-General XXIII in connection with European tourism , which is such an important source of revenues .
Action must be taken on the legal front , upstream , before fraud occurs , as well as after the event , downstream , with a view to identifying a means of severely punishing those who flout the rules of what is known as " good practice ' .
I believe that this is where the battle must be waged , and I am confident that the Committee on Budgetary Control has adopted the correct course . Moreover , I consider it a privilege to take the floor here today , since I am acquainted with the Committee 's members and with its excellent work to date .
Mr President , the findings of the Court of Auditors on financial management in the tourism sector during the period 1990-1995 are disconcerting .
A clear definition of objectives and acceptable budgets was missing from contracts , as well as a guarantee for the impartiality of the selection board .
Officials did not have adequate qualifications . Projects were approved without a stamp from the Financial Controller and subsidies were paid out without proofs of receipt .
In short , an environment existed in which there was plenty of scope for irregularities and fraudulent practices .
We are pleased to note that , within the context of SEM 2000 , the present Commission is working on improving financial management .
The Task Force for investigation into alleged fraud in the tourism sector , which was set up by the Commission , is worthy of appreciation .
Yet this Parliament is by no means able to close the case on fraud .
A large part of improperly allocated sums have yet to be recovered , after all .
The impartiality of the selection boards has yet to be guaranteed and disciplinary measures have yet to be taken against the high officials responsible .
Setting up a committee of inquiry is a weighty political instrument .
But if the Commission does not comply suffieciently with the requests in the De Luca report , Parliament will be forced to use this instrument .
I would like to insist that the Commission has another thorough look at the usefulness of the Community tourism programmes .
The fact that up until now the projects have not been subject to effective evaluation is a serious error .
If the Commission does not start working on this with some energy , Parliament will have to draw the obvious conclusion from this when the budget is set for 1999 .
We cannot go on indefinitely allowing credits for projects of which the effectiveness cannot be proven .
In addition to their effectiveness , the question of whether the European programmes have in fact an added value compared to national actions will also have to be checked .
According to Mr De Luca , the importance of tourism as part of the Community policy is undisputed .
I can assure him that this is not the case in this sector .
No one has ever been able to convince me , in any case , of the need and usefulness of a European policy on tourism .
And I am not alone in this .
Mr President , today we are debating an old issue .
But despite long familiarity with the matter , I am still disturbed by the way in which it has been conducted .
Issues like this serve to underpin the many myths and untruths that abound concerning EU institutions .
More and more people around Europe believe the Commission to be a closed system that refuses to adjust to its surroundings and citizens ' requirements and that it is an enormous bureaucracy where half the officials cheat and deceive while the other half endeavour to cover up the illegalities .
People become suspicious and alienated about European cooperation .
As a member of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I know that these myths are not true .
I know that the Commission is far superior to its reputation .
It is our job to make citizens aware of the many positive aspects of European cooperation , but we must also take existing problems seriously .
We must be open about problems and respond quickly when they arise .
Unfortunately , there are those in the Commission who have not carried out their work properly in this matter , and here I am not only thinking of those who have taken part in actual fraud , but also of those who have subsequently investigated the matter and whose responsibility it has been to inform Parliament .
Those who have not carried out their work properly bear a serious responsibility .
They are helping to fuel the scepticism and alienation about the EU that is extant in many Member States .
There are also , however , things to rejoice about .
In particular , Mrs Wemheuer 's work in this matter has been exemplary .
I would also like to express my satisfaction with the Commissioner for the Budget , Mr Liikanen .
I feel we are speaking the same language as regards administration and openness in the EU institutions .
I believe that the Commission has learned from this regrettable issue of tourism , but that will remain to be seen when the next fraud case comes up .
Let us hope the same mistakes will not be repeated .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the motion introduced by Mrs Wemheuer , as amended , is not an accusation against individuals but against flawed and suspect procedures which have nurtured the trade for decades .
Because of those procedures , the furtherance of penal and disciplinary matters has been and is being delayed and claims are being set aside .
The victims of all this delay are productive branches of Europe 's economy , in this specific instance tourism , which lack and have been deprived of Community support because of the prevailing mistrust surrounding the funding of those branches .
A classical example is the HOSPITALITY programme , whose funding was secured at the very last moment , last December , precisely because nobody wanted to support a programme for promoting tourism which was in other respects exceptional .
A second matter I should like to mention , ladies and gentlemen , is that the Committee on Budgetary Control cannot properly carry out its task concerning the granting or not of discharge to the Commission in respect of its responsibility to implement the budget , for the simple reason that the Commission does not provide the European Parliament with any figures .
How can we recommend to the House that it should or should not grant the Commission discharge if the Commission itself does not provide us with facts and figures ?
That is why a related amendment has been tabled , in which we ask that the Committee on Budgetary Control should be given the status of an investigative committee , so that when we ask for facts and figures , the Commission will give them to us .
Another substantial factor , Mr President , in which your own personal contribution will be important , is that the structures of the Committee on Budgetary Control must be reorganized .
It is impossible for the committee to function with the means provided for it today , nor with its present structure . Other speakers too have mentioned the issue .
This should become a matter of the first priority for the Bureau , and for you personally , Mr President .
I would also be very grateful if some corrections could be made , because some of the translations of Mrs Wemheuer 's resolution into various languages are incorrect .
I refer more particularly to the Greek translation .
I ask for a number of corrections , especially in Articles 4 and 2 .
Mr President , I commend the two rapporteurs and agree with what has already been said here tonight .
My few words are in regard to the De Luca report on the policy on tourism within the Union .
The present tourism operational programme for my own country , Ireland , accounts for IRL 369 million , which is over 8 % of total Structural Fund spending .
According to the mid-term evaluation on the spending of the Structural Funds in Ireland , carried out by the Economic and Social Research Institute , over 30 , 000 jobs will be created in Ireland in the tourism sector between 1994 and 1999 .
One of the most important issues which must be addressed with regard to the Irish tourism industry is how it will cope with the introduction of a single currency within the European Union .
There are a number of aspects to this .
Firstly , the introduction of a single European currency will result in lower interest rates which , in turn , will lead to higher consumer spending , which means a higher proportion of spending on Irish tourism-related products .
Secondly , a single European currency brings with it a frontierfree zone for capital , where bureaux de change no longer exist .
Finally , the elimination of transaction costs is good news for the Irish tourism industry as the costs of travel and the costs of holidays are greatly reduced .
The future is bright , and the single European currency will bring with it an increased number of tourists , which will mean an increased number of jobs in Irish tourism and a healthy industry into the next century .
Mr President , the two excellent reports from Mr De Luca and Mrs Wemheuer have shown one thing quite clearly : that tourism , although it has been a problem , is also a symptom of a much bigger problem .
We have to tackle both : the problem that was the European Year of Tourism and the systems that are quite inadequate in the Commission - witness the inadequacy with which the report of the Court of Auditors was dealt with .
This saga is nearly ten years old .
It clearly predates the existing Commission .
But the Commission , as an institution , has been slow in acknowledging its institutional culpability ; and , I have to say , had the Commission applied the principles of forensic accounting properly , then the saga that was the European Year of Tourism would have been laid to rest in days rather than weeks .
And yet we have had a saga that has continued for years rather than months .
There are institutional lessons to be learnt as well as those that relate to the Year of Tourism itself .
In that process , I have to say to the Commission as an institution - and here I am talking to the last Commission - that it was very seriously deficient in the information that it gave both to Parliament and the Court of Auditors .
In any other context , other than this polite gathering , I would say that it deliberately misled : in plain English , it lied , and there was a process of deliberate deceit of the institutions that led Parliament to the Holzfuss report .
The new Commission has been slow in acknowledging this , but there is much joy in heaven for the repentant sinner even when it comes later rather than sooner .
So we do recognize and acknowledge Mr Liikanen 's approach at penitence on behalf of the institution , even though we all accept that he was not directly responsible .
But this saga is a litany of failure .
It is a litany of a failed policy , of failure to control a contract , of failed financial control , of failure to disclose the faults , of failure to remedy the deficiencies , of failure to accept culpability and , above all , of failure to come clean at the earliest possible opportunity .
In that process two things have been seriously damaged : the tourism policy itself has been damaged , but so too has the reputation of the European Union in general and that of the Commission in particular .
The attitude of many people has been that if we make such heavy weather out of declaring the results of an investigation into what , after all , is a relatively small case , a relatively simple case involving a relatively small amount of money , how can public opinion express confidence that the same institution can deal with much larger sums of money in a much more complex area of policy with much more complex legislative arrangements ?
I believe that the opinion of the public at large says something along the lines that had any commercial undertaking safeguarded its interests and its shareholders ' interests with the same degree of cavalier inadequacy as the Commission has protected the taxpayer , then the only thing that would be booming would be bankruptcies .
So we have to examine the lessons to be drawn .
They are clear : that systems have to be investigated , examined and improved .
If there is to be any discussion of committees of inquiry , it must be in that area , looking at the system by which the Commission examines allegations of inadequacy , of impropriety , of irregularity against itself and its staff .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has to be reformed , not just in relation to staff , their location and their powers , important as those things are .
We have to look again at structures and procedures so that the Committee on Budgetary Control becomes less some sort of atmosphere of interinstitutional happy families and becomes more interrogative with a sharper cutting edge , possibly sometimes doing less but doing it better .
If those are the lessons that are learnt from the Wemheuer and the De Luca reports , then these two reports will have done Parliament and European taxpayers a great service .
Mr President , this is one of those subjects where the very fact that it comes up so frequently in this Parliament shows that something is not working properly .
And that is so despite the fact that Parliament is fulfilling its control function , the Court of Auditors has produced its reports , UCLAF has carried out its investigations and , Commissioners , I do not even have any doubts that the Commission is making a great effort to improve its control over the matters under discussion .
However , all this will be of little use to us if there still continues to be insufficient coordination between the Commission and the competent national services .
Also , there is still a need for the Commission to guarantee that it will automatically turn to the relevant national judicial authorities in cases of justifiable suspicion of fraud , corruption or any other crime in which officials are implicated .
Neither the Commission nor Parliament can be satisfied until that is the normal procedure .
Mr President , perhaps it is appropriate that I have the last word in this debate before the Commission .
Could I just say that for the first six years I spent in the European Parliament , I was trying to push tourism up the agenda .
In 1990 we had a celebration of that in the European Year of Tourism .
The Commission completely failed to organize it properly and when we discovered irregularities it was also unable to organize a proper cover-up .
This is why we are today , eight years on in the European Parliament , having a debate about two reports which deal with irregularities and fraud .
My conclusions , as a result of this , are that ( a ) there should be no immunity for Commission officials ; ( b ) that UCLAF ought to be separated from the Commission completely and made an independent body ; ( c ) the Court of Auditors ought to be ashamed of the two reports it produced on the subject .
I believe also that Parliament 's Budgetary Control Committee ought to be strengthened .
It ought , like the watchdog committees in the US Congress , to have the power to commission its own inquiries and then to bring in the Court of Auditors or UCLAF as appropriate .
Lastly I am not satisfied that judicial action in the two Member States referred to - France and Belgium - has been quick enough .
It is two years since charges were laid .
I spoke to the Belgian magistrate yesterday who confirms that proceedings are going ahead in Belgium .
In France the proceedings begin on 13 March .
This is two years after charges were first laid .
It is far far too slow .
This will not be Parliament 's last word on this matter .
In 1994 the door was kept open on the subject of an amendment I tabled .
I beg the Parliament , in its vote tomorrow , to keep the door open this time .
Mr President , the fight against irregularities , fraud and corruption is a high political priority for this Commission .
That message must be perfectly clear to those who consider tampering with the taxpayers ' money for their own personal gain .
On this overall objective I agree entirely with the two rapporteurs , Mrs Wemheuer and Mr De Luca .
An efficient system to deal with these kinds of problems is also of crucial importance for the Commission as an institution and for the European civil service .
At the outset I wish to reject the notion that the Commission has provided misleading information in the tourism case .
This Commission has spared no effort in shedding light on the complicated affair .
It has endeavoured to be as transparent as possible , its objective being to provide a reliable picture of events over the past few years .
My services have been instructed to cooperate with Parliament in an open and constructive manner , whether it be tourism or any other area .
I have made it clear that any suspicion of criminal behaviour should be pursued vigorously .
In the case of tourism , my services have been involved from the outset in the investigations .
The results of these efforts have provided the basis for the action taken against individual officials .
UCLAF established immediate informal contacts with the criminal authorities in July 1994 and formally requested in December of the same year that criminal investigations be launched .
Parliament has been briefed on a regular basis .
Obviously there are limits to the amount of publicity that can be given in a case under criminal investigation .
A restriction is normally imposed on the Commission if an ongoing case falls within national judicial confidentiality requirements .
With this in mind , Parliament has , to the best of my knowledge , been offered both relevant and correct information .
Let me now turn to what the Commission has done and to what it intends to do in order to be better equipped to deal with fraud and corruption .
When I took office in 1995 the task of combating fraud was scattered around several different services within the Commission .
My first step was to ensure that all anti-fraud units were brought under one single roof in UCLAF .
As a consequence , UCLAF has developed into a comprehensive operational service .
Over the past few years UCLAF has investigated more than 150 cases in the area of direct expenditure . These include investigations into a number of cases concerning irregularities within the Commission .
Since 1995 , Financial Control has conducted over 500 audits of beneficiaries and 20 financial system audits within the Commission .
The reports may lead to financial corrections or to proposals for administrative improvement .
A number of new measures in the area of sound and efficient management are presently being implemented in the Theme 2000 exercise .
These measures include the strengthening of preventive aspects and a greater focus on audit and financial follow-up of results .
I welcome a number of suggestions in the De Luca report which go in this direction .
The Commission has outlined in detail the rules , practices and procedures in a document transmitted to you in November 1997 .
The same document also announced a number of action lines that would be implemented .
Let me explain how I have followed up the action in my area of competence .
Firstly , I am at present preparing a decision by the Commission that will establish clear and comprehensive rules concerning internal inquiries by UCLAF .
This will allow UCLAF to act more rapidly and without obstruction .
Secondly , the operational independence of UCLAF will be strengthened .
This will be achieved by providing the head of UCLAF with a status similar to that of the independent financial controller .
This means , among other things , that the head of UCLAF can request me in my capacity as the responsible Commissioner , to raise a particular case in the College of Commissioners .
Thirdly , the organizational independence of UCLAF will be enhanced .
I will transform the existing Directorate into a task force within the secretariat-general .
In addition , I will propose that cooperation with judicial authorities be strengthened by a liaison unit within UCLAF of experts from the Member States in penal law .
This was proposed in the Tomlinson report on transit .
But it should be clear that this unit can only be a reality if the budget authorities support it .
Fourthly , I will also improve the links between UCLAF and Member States .
In practical terms this means that UCLAF will be the privileged interlocutor of the Commission for dealing with criminal matters in relation to fraud and corruption .
A number of these questions will also be discussed next month in connection with the report from Mr Bösch .
The Wemheuer report requests regular submissions by the Commission of information concerning UCLAF investigations and special audits by Financial Control .
As regards UCLAF 's investigation , I intend to review how the flow of information can be improved in a systematic manner .
I will do this while respecting the rights of the individual and the obligations of confidentiality in investigations and in relation to judicial proceedings .
As for a list of special audit reports by Financial Control , I will arrange for it to be provided to Parliament on a regular basis .
I believe that the measures I have outlined will strengthen our capacity to deal with fraud and irregularities .
However , it is my firm intention to continue the dialogue with Parliament on how we can continue to improve our performance in the fight against crime .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control and in particular the rapporteurs , Mr De Luca and Mrs Wemheuer , for their analytical examination of the subject of broader action in support of tourism .
I hope you will appreciate our efforts , in cooperation with Parliament , to bring to a conclusion this exceptionally difficult matter which , nevertheless , taught us many useful lessons and gave us many experiences .
I will first say something about clearing the files of the past .
As you know , we decided to re-examine all the direct action undertaken on behalf of tourism between 1989 and 1995 , even though the Court of Auditors had only asked us to re-examine the activities undertaken during the European Year of Tourism .
I want to tell you , then , that by the end of the month this particularly difficult task of analytically examining all 800 of the activities undertaken up to 1995 will have been completed .
Out of total payments amounting to ECU 31.4 million , so far excess payments of ECU 4.7 m have been identified .
Demands have already been issued for the return of payments amounting to ECU 2 m and we have prepared further demands totalling ECU 2.3 m , while in parallel we have already recovered about half a million ECU .
The process we have initiated is made particularly difficult by various factors , such as the time that has passed since then , the nature of the objectives and the difficulty of assessing some of the results .
In parallel , many of these cases may end up in the courts since already 40 % of those ordered to return funds have disputed those orders .
We are , however , determined to continue that work and to present a full account of its results as soon as possible .
However , all that I have said so far concerns the accountancy aspect of the matter .
But there is a series of more political issues which I should like to mention .
A basic question raised by many Members of Parliament is this : ' what have you learned from this affair , what measures have you adopted , and also , what are the consequences for tourism ? ' Indeed , many speakers today have raised all three of those questions .
I would therefore like to mention our conclusions .
Firstly , the activities on behalf of tourism did not just produce negative lessons but positive ones as well .
For example , we learned , and I believe that most of us learned , that tourism is the largest industry in Europe and one of the most promising fields for the creation of new jobs , and is likely to remain so for decades to come .
Secondly , the objectives of quality and competitiveness for European tourism must be supported by specific and coordinated action , in cooperation with the Member States and the industry itself .
It calls for action with realistic aims , which will be assessed continuously as well as on an ex-ante and ex-post basis .
Thirdly , Community action that influences tourism must be systematically coordinated .
Indeed , in that context the DirectorGeneral of the European Commission 's DG XXIII is already chairing an inter-service group that includes all the Directorates which undertake activities on behalf of tourism .
Fourthly , if we want to be effective in acting on behalf of tourism , we need a legal framework which sets out that the tourism dimension must be taken into account when determining and implementing other policies .
Some of those conclusions have been applied , initially in the adoption procedure , but also in the content of the Commission 's proposal for the first multi-annual programme on behalf of tourism in Europe , HOSPITALITY , a programme that has been examined repeatedly by the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions , the tourism industry and 13 Member States .
However , I think it is a serious contradiction for the European institutional bodies to declare that they want transparency , they want effective use of resources , they want and call for the cooperation of the Member States and want Parliament and the Council to exercise institutional control of the activities , while at the same time there are some Member States which are holding up the approval of a programme that safeguards precisely the aims we all agree on .
Some people speak of hypocrisy .
I simply call it a political contradiction , which will have to be resolved at some time .
The second thing we did was to completely reorganize DG XXIII .
The members of the Committee on Budgetary Control have already received a detailed note about all those changes .
And the changes , which began exactly 18 months ago in close cooperation with my colleague Mr Liikanen , include inter alia the creation of two new units , one of which looks after resources and controls while the second looks after contracts .
The strict procedures we apply in relation to the selection , monitoring and appraisal of the activities already reflect the recommendations in Mr De Luca 's report .
The result of those procedures is that today DG XXIII is one of the best Directorates in relation to implementing the SEM 2000 programme .
I am sorry , however , Mr President , because , despite the fact that tourism is very important for employment and development , as the rapporteurs also recognise , this affair has unavoidably negative consequences related to the prospects of implementing an effective policy for tourism .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that is all I have to say at this stage of the debate .
I think I have mentioned the most important matters that fall within my competence and concern the two reports .
Nevertheless , as you know , I am always at Parliament 's disposal to keep you informed about the progress of our work .
I just want to add some remarks to the contributions from my colleagues .
First of all , you said earlier that no disciplinary measures were taken in this matter relating to tourism .
That is not so .
Disciplinary measures were taken in 1995 and 1996 against Commission officials .
Secondly , what is important is that last year the Commission produced a communication on the financial and administrative measures .
We did so to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
What is essential here is that we have created an established system where every suspicion will be investigated .
It will lead to a decision either that there is no basis for further action , or to open disciplinary procedures .
This has not always functioned properly , but our new procedures will make it function properly .
Thirdly , we must also remember , even in this kind of case , that we must respect the rule of law .
There is always the presumption of innocence and the right to a defence .
I want to say that here , because there are many Commission officials today who feel threatened by this issue .
We must always be very clear about identifying the problems so as not to create uncertainty for those officials who are carrying out their duties properly in every respect .
Fourthly , the most important lesson to learn from this is that we must put our house in order .
When we decide how to run the programmes , we must plan well : there must be a limited number of targets , simplicity of administration , clear rules of eligibility and , very importantly , transparency and openness throughout all the procedures .
I agree with those who said that openness is the cheapest control because then those who did not get the money control those who got it .
This kind of simplicity , clarity and openness is the best tool we could have .
Of course we need good cooperation with all our controllers .
We have the Court of Auditors with whom we work .
It is not always easy , but it is an effort worth making .
We have the Budgetary Control Committee in Parliament which is the voice of the European people and their elected representatives .
We are ready to cooperate with you in the future also .
I hope we can concentrate on these reform programmes .
I have seen draft reports on the SEM 2000 programmes .
There are many new challenges facing us on how we will run the Community spending from the year 2000 on .
We must concentrate on those , taking into account the lessons we have learnt in the past .
The Commission is ready for this cooperation .
Mr President , on a point of information , Mrs Gradin stated that the Commission called in the police on the matter of DG XXIII .
The Belgian police confirm that it was not the Commission but myself who called in the police .
That is a fundamental point and the letters are available if Parliament is interested in seeing them .
Can I repeat a question that I put to the Commission on 23 November : on how many occasions has the Commission called in the police on matters of internal fraud in its 41 year history ?
It really is time that we had an answer to that .
Mr President , I wish to make a very important point .
Commissioner Liikanen told us a few minutes ago that disciplinary measures have been taken against certain officials ; this statement is contradictory to what has so far been affirmed several times by the Commission in the presence of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I would therefore like the Commissioner to be more specific and tell us which officials , when and why they have been penalized .
Otherwise , we will perpetuate an extraordinary situation in which some people go before Parliament to provide information and then the Commissioners state the contrary .
I would not like it to be simply a slip on the part of Commissioner Liikanen .
Mr President , as far as I am aware , the Commission contacted the Belgian police in September 1994 , whereas your contact came in February 1995 .
Mr President , the text is in French . I will read it to you , " the authority invested with the power of appointment , through the decision of 22 June 1995 , with effect from 1 August 1995 , imposed the punishment of dismissal , with full pension rights , on a civil servant .
Later , the AIPN ( Appointing Authority ) , through the decision of 28 July 1995 , imposed the punishment of termination of a temporary contract on a civil servant with effect from 1st August 1995 . '
I can give Mr De Luca the detailed text .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Macro-financial assistance for Ukraine
The next item is Mrs E. Mann 's report ( A4-0025 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Decision providing supplementary macro-financial assistance for Ukraine ( COM ( 97 ) 0588 - C40614 / 97-97 / 0312 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report before us is once again quite a technical one .
But we have managed this before and we shall again succeed in presenting it successfully to Parliament .
What we have to make clear is that even the macro-economic aid which we are sending to Ukraine is but part of an overall strategy which is designed to have a positive impact on the difficult process of transformation under way in that country .
This involves Partnership and Cooperation Agreements as well as an interim agreement , but what is much more important at the present time is the action plan which we have before us and which Mr Titley will shortly be presenting to Parliament .
This report will explain how the plan is creating synergies and will describe how this has been developed within the various EU programmes for the benefit of the people of Ukraine .
Now to the macro-financial programme .
The Commission is proposing that the EU should make a third loan available to Ukraine to offset the country 's balance of payments .
The amount involved this time is ECU 150 million and the loan is to run for 10 years .
The Commission announced this back in December 1996 and the Council of Economic and Finance Ministers gave the plan its basic approval in January 1997 .
The ECU 150 million loan means that the European Union will be meeting almost one quarter of Ukraine 's anticipated financial deficit for the 1997 to 1998 period , which has been estimated at ECU 765 million .
The EU 's involvement will follow the customary rules .
The funds which the Commission will be raising on the capital market are to be allocated to Ukraine under normal terms and conditions .
The granting of the loan is conditional upon the abovementioned economic requirements for macro-economic stabilization and continued structural adaptation .
Verification will be carried out at regular intervals , in close cooperation with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , to ensure that these requirements are being met .
The repayment of the loan is covered by a guarantee from the European budget .
According to the terms of the resolution establishing the guarantee fund , the Member States are obliged to contribute 15 % of the loan , in this case ECU 22.5 million , to the guarantee fund .
Each year the Commission will report to the Council and to Parliament on the continuation of these loan options .
Other important aspects include the fact that outpayments in this case are to be made in two instalments , something which is not usually done , and that the auditing criteria are to be laid down by the IMF and also by the World Bank .
The European Union will be relying quite closely on these criteria .
The first requirement is that satisfactory progress should be made by the macro-economic programmes .
This macro-economic programme has been drawn up with the International Monetary Fund as part of the standby credit agreement .
The second criterion is that progress has to be achieved in the area of structural reforms .
We know that this is a very critical point and that we in the European Union , and of course even more so in the European Parliament , have always urged Ukraine to make greater headway with its programme of structural adaptation than it has done in the past .
As has already been stated , this is the third package of financial aid which the Community has made available to Ukraine for its extensive programme of adaptation and reform .
In 1996 , Ukraine decided to embark on a programme of stabilization and reform , in conjunction with the International Monetary Fund , for the period 1997 to 1998 ; as far as I recall , this programme was to be supported by an extended funding facility .
The Ukrainian parliament failed to ratify this government proposal and the parties could not reach agreement on the fundamental aspects of the programme .
The government then approached the IMF with a new proposal - the one now before us - which calls for additional financing for a short period , namely 1997 to 1998 .
The progress being made in respect of stabilization and macro-economic reforms has clearly slowed down .
That is all too obvious .
I should like briefly to describe two amendments which the Committee on Budgetary Control has introduced .
I have proposed that we adopt one of these amendments , while I , for my part , have rejected the second .
Both amendments call for the closure of the Chernobyl nuclear plant to be made one of the auditing criteria for the outpayments , this applying to the tranche payments as well as to the overall programme .
I have already said that I find this completely acceptable .
The Commission has indicated the same .
The Committee on Budgets has extended this arrangement .
From a general point of view I can accept this extension , but I believe that for the examination of both tranches we should not again be introducing further provisos for checking on the closure of Chernobyl , which is scheduled for the year 2000 .
Mr President , I should first like to thank Mrs Mann most sincerely for her report and for the excellent work which she has done generally for Ukraine , including her contribution as a member of the delegation .
Mrs Mann started off by pointing out that the report had a certain technical content .
From the number of Members present in plenary one immediately knows when a really technical report is on the agenda .
On the other hand , this report undoubtedly has a very significant human angle , something which has been given too little attention .
We should not forget the degree to which the stability of Ukraine is dependent on support from the European Union .
Ukraine is without doubt one of those countries of the former Soviet Union which , in spite of the huge economic problems facing it , has succeeded in making the greatest apparent progress from a European perspective . It is a country which has found its own route , and a relatively stable one at that , out of the complex mass which was the Soviet Union .
That is why it is so important for us in the European Union to show our support for this independent route and to show that we will continue to provide support in spite of all the difficulties . As Mrs Mann and others have stressed , Ukraine has taken on certain responsibilities in association with the World Bank and other institutions which are ready to lend financial assistance .
I believe it is extremely important that the financial package should include Chernobyl and the Chernobyl auditing criteria .
Mrs Mann also supports this view to some extent .
We used to say at one time that we would support Ukraine in the building of the ROVNO II and CHMELNITZKY IV nuclear power plants , provided that Chernobyl is shut down in return .
I do not think - and I am speaking as an Austrian - that we really intend this to be the correct solution to the problem .
We must support Ukraine and enable it to build up its infrastructure in such a way that it can do away with these dangerous Russian reactors altogether .
Helping Ukraine to take an independent road should now be our main concern .
Mr President , first of all I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Mann .
Secondly , I want to say that , although the report is of course highly technical , its technical nature is interwoven both outside and inside with a very specific political content .
Both my group and I will be supporting this report , in other words we will vote for the motion on the need to grant a new loan to Ukraine , since the new loan has two objectives : firstly , to assist the country 's economic development and secondly , to foster political stability there , which is a very important factor .
These two objectives are contributions towards improving the quality of life for the people who live there .
However , regardless of the fact that both I and my group will be voting for the report , I would like to express my disagreement with the prerequisites laid down by the Committee on Budgets , more especially concerning the Chernobyl nuclear reactor .
I would like to inform you , Mrs Mann - and I said the same thing to the Committee on Budgets - that three times , in response to questions of mine about whether the money already given to Ukraine for that purpose , i.e. to close down the Chernobyl reactor or to improve its external cladding , was in fact used for that purpose . The Commission , the responsible Commissioner Mr Van Den Broek , told me , very diplomatically of course but very clearly , that there were suspicions that the money was not spent for that purpose at all .
That , if you will , is why the Committee on Budgets has been particularly strict in respect of the prerequisites for granting the second instalment of the new loan .
Recognizing Ukraine 's other needs , despite what I have said , my group and I will vote for the report .
However , this will be the last time we approve a loan of this kind without specific answers , not only to the other issues you have rightly raised , but also concerning the Chernobyl nuclear reactor .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I would like to start by also congratulating Mrs Mann on her excellent report .
Since its independence , Ukraine has been occupying a strategic position as a bridge between the East and the West .
It is therefore very important that the European Union supports Ukraine where possible on the road to free trade and democracy .
Unfortunately , the necessary economic and political reforms only happen with difficulty .
Economic growth is extremely important to the development of a stable situation .
A reliable energy sector is needed .
Despite a substantial decrease in the demand for energy this sector is wrestling with big problems in Ukraine .
That is why the Union is giving considerable support as part of the TACIS programme .
Many of these European subsidies could be spent more effectively .
This concerns first and foremost the choice of projects .
In particular , in the sphere of energy , a diffusion of existing , older technologies , such as nuclear technology , is often chosen , while it is in this area , above all , that the European Union can play a initiating and steering role by promoting energy efficiency and by stimulating environmentally-friendly solutions .
Secondly , when loans are granted , the question of whether the project the money is allocated to offers the most cost-effective solution should be looked at .
My group is still not convinced that the construction of two nuclear power stations in Ukraine to replace the loss of capacity as a result of the closure of Chernobyl is the least cost option economically speaking .
Investments , energy efficiency and clean sources of energy are at all costs to be preferred above maintaining nuclear power stations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , financial aid sounds all very well .
But unfortunately we are being asked here to vote for a process which will keep in motion the international money merry-go-round .
This money is not intended for public programmes .
I quite agree with you that Ukraine is in urgent need of major aid programmes to help it achieve stability and democracy .
Yet with this financial assistance we are using public money from EU taxpayers to pay off the debts which the IMF and the World Bank have established in Ukraine .
These so-called stability programmes completely fail to take account of the realities of the social and economic problems posed by this transformation process , but rather promise to plunge Ukraine into insolvency .
The EU 's so-called macro-financial aid is therefore simply a transfer payment via the Ukrainian budget to the IMF and World Bank .
The proposal of the Committee on Budgets is worthy of support and we can accept it .
But in view of the actual international finance deal being done here , even this proposal will not be workable .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the current proposal aiming to grant supplementary macro-financial assistance of a maximum of ECU 150 million to Ukraine follows the " Ecofin ' Council 's agreement in principle of January 1997 .
The presentation of the Commission 's proposal has been delayed for the following reasons .
Firstly , there were considerable delays in the disbursement of the second instalment of the previous Community macro-financial loan to Ukraine , due to legal problems on the part of the Ukrainians .
Secondly , there were changes beyond our control in the implementation of the 1997 / 98 economic programme , which was supported by an IMF stand-by arrangement of US $ 549 million .
The implementation of this programme has just been reviewed and is now considered satisfactory .
The Ukrainian economy must now face up to particularly difficult internal and external challenges .
Delays in the implementation of vital structural reforms risk reducing the results obtained over the last few years , in terms of macro-economic stabilization to nothing , in particular the drastic reduction of inflation and the introduction , under satisfactory conditions , of a new , stable currency .
Furthermore , under the influence of the monetary crisis in South-East Asia , Ukraine 's prospects for external funding have deteriorated .
In this context , the Commission considers that the granting of supplementary macro-financial assistance to Ukraine would send a clear signal that the Community is ready to provide substantial additional assistance if the Ukrainian authorities take the courageous economic policy measures that are necessary to maintain the reform process within the country .
This assistance has the aim of further strengthening Ukraine 's position in terms of foreign exchange reserves and of contributing to the reduction of social costs linked to the implementation of the necessary structural reforms .
Complementary financial assistance is also expected on the part of other bilateral donors , in particular the United States and Japan .
Following Parliament 's example , the Commission considers a commitment on the part of the Ukrainian authorities to implement the plan for closure of the Chernobyl nuclear power station to be essential , according to the terms supported by the G7 and the European Union .
The preamble to the proposal for supplementary macro-financial assistance contains an appropriate reference to this closure .
In this respect , the Commission is able to adopt the European Parliament 's amendment .
In conclusion , I would like to mention that , within this context , the Commission welcomes the Ukrainian authorities ' decision to consider the current economic programme as an interim programme and their firm desire , at the highest political level , to prepare a detailed and complete programme of medium term economic and structural reforms likely to put the country firmly back on track towards lasting growth .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
R & D activities ( 1997 annual report )
The next item is Mr Bloch von Blottniz ' report ( A4-0031 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the Committee 's annual report on the research and technological development activities of the European Union ( 1997 ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0373 - C4-0435 / 97 ) .
Mr President , if today we are to debate the 1997 annual report on the EU 's research and technological development activities , then we should also be asking a number of fundamental questions .
What , for example , is the point of having an annual report when the measures which Parliament called for in the previous annual report were not put into effect ? You know the story - the dogs bark and the caravan moves on .
Obviously the Commission has made efforts in some areas by conducting a statistical assessment of assisted projects and by presenting a clear description of the Fouth Framework Programme .
But some fundamental aspects are still outstanding , such as the links which exist with other programmes and the work of our JRC .
We need an evaluation system for the results of the RTD initiatives and activities , which will serve as a basis for future reports .
We should also have an independent chapter devoted to assessing the role of funding in the case of individual programmes for large industrial enterprises and , in particular , an evaluation of the possible knock-on effects .
Commission statements on personnel and administration costs should also be more precisely quantified and classified , since otherwise we will suspect that the costs involved are too high when measured against what has been achieved .
To sum up , the 1997 annual report is in many respects just a collection of facts and figures .
Only in very few cases does it contain any well-founded or singularly interesting analyses , such as in the description of the scientific and technical results achieved through the Fourth Framework Programme .
Here the Commission refers to major breakthroughs and achievements , including the satellite monitoring of forest fires , new discoveries relating to the volcanic eruption on Iceland and the development of an ocean survey robot capable of operating 6 000 metres below sea level .
Projects like this contribute little or nothing to the common objective of improving the quality of life and promoting economic development .
The study of global climate change , information and communications technology , the development of clean energy technologies and energy efficiency are far more likely to lead to an improvement in the quality of life .
The question which we should be asking at all times is whether the research activities being promoted are likely to benefit mankind , and whether they are ethically justified .
This important point is all too often lost in obscurity and the research work then becomes independent of outside control , serving to benefit only a few specialists and even carrying the risk of becoming antidemocratic and contributing to its own alienation .
Only in very exceptional cases is the lot of mankind enhanced in any significant way by research of this nature .
Let me finish by saying something about the SME problem-child .
There is still an urgent need to come up with a simplified procedure for these companies .
The application and proposal procedures are too complicated and time-consuming and for this reason they usually fail to reach the target group .
In my opinion it would be far more sensible to set up a Commission department exclusively for small businesses - rather than for their medium-sized counterparts , for which we already have a staff of up to 500 - to help them with their applications .
Industry itself has a department for this purpose .
Such a set-up would introduce real innovation , create real job opportunities and prevent the knock-on effect .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the uninformed reader might well ask why we bother to present this report at all .
He will simply get the answer , " because it is part of the Treaty ' .
But to me such a justification hardly seems adequate .
I would to like to examine in more detail whether the report is supposed to be a description or an evaluation .
If it is merely a description , then its results can be easily guessed at .
You only need to be a first-year organizational sociologist to know that if you ask an organization how things are looking , you will get the answer , " things are looking good ' .
No , ladies and gentlemen , this report cannot merely be descriptive in its purpose .
I wish to see an assessment , an analysis of the EU 's research policy .
I want to be given a compass , a chart for negotiating my way through the Bermuda Triangle which is European research policy .
When I compare this year 's research report with last year 's , a certain trend becomes apparent .
We see a whole collection of new listings .
Even the regional allocation of research funds has been broken down according to the various beneficiaries .
In my view three fundamental questions have still to be answered .
Firstly , when we speak to applicants for European research funds , the motto seems to be " frustration not administration ' , because many selection procedures are non-transparent and rejections are not explained .
There is no emphasis on European research objectives .
I would like to see an inquiry into why this is so .
I want more than just an assurance of greater transparency and the simplification of procedures .
Secondly , the EU research policy is like a string of lights with 20 specific programmes .
I should also like to know which of these lights is the brightest , which one has the most impact and where can we add a few more bulbs .
We do not want another description . We have had this one and that one and we have spent enough money on them .
No , what we really need is an evaluation of the potential impact of the individual programmes , and for this purpose we really require a coherent system so that proper comparisons can be made .
Thirdly , we need to re-examine the research task forces which were set up at great expense in terms of Commission manpower and also in respect of the official publications , which were an innovation in EU research policy .
When I look at this research report , I see that two whole lines have been devoted to the setting up of the task forces .
I think that we have given these task forces not just a first-class burial but a third-class one .
I think that this aspect , which Parliament fully supports , should definitely be looked into .
There is nothing wrong with different Directorates-General and Commission departments talking to one another - on the contrary , this should be encouraged , as should cooperation .
One can of course criticize the task forces too , but this initiative should be analysed in-depth so that we can obtain guidelines for the future .
Let me again ask the question : why do we bother bringing out this report ?
Why do we sacrifice so many innocent trees to do it ?
Have we really developed the Titanic mentality ? Everything is just fine , the bulkheads are holding , the rivets are okay and we are so happy that everything is doing so well .
No , I , for my part , want to know the problems and the risks , and I want to be able to analyse things and to look for improvements and for new ideas .
For , after all , nothing is so good that it cannot be improved on .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , like the two Members who have already spoken , we also think that this report ought to have a very different focus in order to be of use to the Commission , the Member States , research centres , Parliament and everybody .
We are going to support Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ' report in its entirety , except for paragraph A , because it is out of step with reality - it involves value judgements - , and paragraph 16 , because it is unrealistic .
It will be very difficult for you to submit the report on 31 March because many accounts have not been closed .
We think it would be useful if you were to carry out and include in the report a benchmarking operation - a comparison - of our results compared with those of Japan or the United States .
I also want to mention paragraph 10 of Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ' report , which states that there are overlaps between the various Member States ' own programmes and the EU programme , and suggests how to be a little more efficient .
There are hundreds or thousands of projects and hundreds and thousands of administrative records , entailing a very high administrative cost . We realize that this is necessary , because there are so many projects , but it should be reduced .
We trust that the Fifth Framework Programme will concentrate on the more important , larger projects , which are less spread out .
We are not very happy - nobody is - with the budgetary provision , and we will be discussing the funding of the Fifth Framework Programme tomorrow and on other occasions in the future .
But this will require us all to be much more efficient and to use the resources much , much better .
The Joint Research Centre , with its seven sites , also needs different guidelines , Madam Commissioner .
First of all , it seems to me we have to give the researchers their freedom , but not to the extent that each one does whatever he or she wants , and there should be an indicative programme , which perhaps could be implemented by the Institute fof Prospective Technological Studies in Seville .
The Fifth Framework Programme offers us many opportunities and I hope that we all avail ourselves of them .
In any case , we will support this report .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz on her report and comment on some of the points she made .
In paragraph G there is a certain inconsistency in her comments about profits and competitiveness .
I am sorry that the rapporteur seems not to approve of the private sector firms who make a profit and yet wants them to boost their competitiveness .
It seems to me that profits are the best measure of competitiveness .
I welcome her statements in paragraph I that SMEs are the most important source of technological innovation but we must remember , as other colleagues have said , that participation for SMEs is more difficult and we should not expect too much from them .
I share the rapporteur 's views in paragraph 6 about the absence of any review of those famous task forces on which we spent so much committee time .
Perhaps the Commissioner might care to address that point in some way in the near future .
In paragraph 12 the rapporteur sets out a long list of extra administrative tasks for the Commission in making reports , and I would suggest that we must beware of criticizing procedures for being complex and bureaucratic and then in the next breath calling for more of the same ourselves .
Finally , taking up a point made in the explanatory statement , I see no harm in R & D being about economic growth since that is how we improve the condition of life for our citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , Europe must be competitive in the area of science and research .
In those areas in which it holds a leading position , the Union must hold its place ; in those in which it is lagging behind the other world partners , it must make up lost ground .
However , this aim of making technological research and development competitive should not obscure the other three objectives that constitute the very foundation of its policies : to speed economic and social cohesion between its Member States and between European regions in this field ; to direct research and priority actions towards achieving a better quality of life ; and to open up to cooperation with the emerging economies by adapting strategies to the conditions that prevail there .
While the Commission report refers with satisfaction to the rising percentage of Objective 1 Member State participation in European projects , it neglects to mention the quality of this participation and the assessment of results .
Indeed , of the 25 , 000 research partners and the 3 , 000 publications and patents emerging from Community research in 1996 , how many were effectively translated into concrete results for the weaker members of the Union ?
The major difficulty encountered by small and medium enterprises lies precisely in translating the results of research into applied innovation .
This difficulty is particularly acute in the less developed countries .
The work of the six task forces dealing with the major projects developed by enterprises and institutions of the technologically-strong Member States will only produce the desired results for the Union if its weaker members are simultaneously strengthened .
In addition , I would like to see the Commission , in its next annual report , presenting a real state of the Union-type report regarding all technological research and development policies , as opposed to confining itself to Community-funded projects as it has to date .
Such an overview of Europe 's scientific and technological capacity is an essential basis for future planning .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report , and I will end by identifying two strategic priorities for the future : reformulating structural policies in such a way as to incorporate SME research as a priority dimension ; and helping Member States to enhance the efficiency of their research policy management .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would above all like to thank Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz for the quality of attention she has paid to this 1997 annual report on the research and technological development activities of the European Union and for the seriousness with which she has examined this document .
Her report contains suggestions which will prove to be extremely useful in the future .
But before commenting in further detail on this report , I would like to share with you the recent developments which have occurred with regard to the Fifth Framework Programme , which is currently under discussion within the European Parliament and the Council .
This inspires divided opinions , to say the least .
The positive aspect is that the Council , during the Research Council of Thursday 12 February , reached a political agreement on a common position on the Fifth Framework Programme .
This was not a foregone conclusion , far from it .
The risk of breaking the Union 's continuity of effort in research - if it still exists - now appears to be eliminated , but we must maintain the momentum we have gained .
Unfortunately - and this is the worrying point - the common position in question is quite far from that which was proposed by the European Parliament and the Commission .
Once more , and hopefully for the last time , the rule of unanimity has demonstrated its negative effects , since , in principle , two Member States forced the others to lower the budget .
The adopted decision makes the formal stand of the Commission difficult .
The Commission is obliged to dissociate itself from the position taken by the Council and to express its disagreement and concern on several points .
The first relates to the overall amount .
The Council agreed on a figure of ECU 14 billion , well below the ECU 16.3 bn proposed by the Commission , which remains convinced of the validity of this figure , and even further below the figure of ECU 16.7 bn which Parliament gave in its opinion during first reading .
This amount is ECU 500 million less than a simple renewal , in real terms , of the Fourth Framework Programme .
If it were finally adopted , we would witness , for the first time in the history of the Union , a decline in research efforts .
At a time when the President of the United States , in his State of the Nation speech , is announcing an unprecedented increase in public American research efforts , the citizens of Europe would find it difficult to understand why the Union hesitates to mobilize one of its greatest assets , its intellectual potential and human resources , to the full , in order to strengthen its competitiveness and create jobs .
The reduction in resources that would occur in such a scenario would have repercussions on all activities .
However , it would particularly affect the Joint Research Centre , which would find itself deprived of the means to accomplish its mission in the service of the Union regarding policies on which a consensus had nevertheless been achieved .
The Commission would then be obliged to seriously consider stopping certain activities considered to be essential .
The common position of the Council furthermore contains some unnecessarily restrictive measures in the area of committee procedures , and some of you earlier highlighted the complexity of procedures .
The Council text will increase this complexity , if we allow it to go through .
By setting up separate committees for energy and the environment , as well as socio-economic research , the effect will be a virtual de facto creation of distinct programmes in these areas .
Finally , with the adoption of the Fifth Framework Programme and its specific programmes , the Council is , on the one hand , setting out the future financial prospects for the Union , and on the other , establishing conditions which will again bring into question the principle of multi-annual budgets and predictability of resources which is the very essence and interest of the Programme .
Once more , Parliament and the Commission find themselves on the same side , sharing the desire to build up Community research and to provide it with the necessary resources .
The Commission knows that Parliament will in due course fight to set up a framework programme which corresponds to the needs of the Union .
We are counting on you to help us make adjustments and to ensure that the final Fifth Framework Programme will be closer to the one proposed by our two institutions .
Let me return now to what is concerning us today , the draft report and resolution on the 1997 annual report on the Union 's research activities .
Your rapporteur highlights the very informative nature of this report on many issues .
She notes the improvements made in respect of previous reports , recognising , in particular , that a certain number of the European Parliament 's recommendations have been taken on board .
The Commission is happy that its efforts to make this document a useful instrument and to improve it continually have been taken into consideration .
The draft resolution , however , sets out a certain number of criticisms and recommendations which demonstrate a misunderstanding of the very nature of this annual report .
It cannot and must not be considered as an evaluation report .
Basically , it is a document for information .
Its aim is to give , with the help of as many precise factual details as possible , an overall view of the Union 's activity in the area of research and technological development over the period covered , including projects initiated , results obtained and developments prepared .
It seems to me that the 1997 report thus gives a fairly detailed and complete picture of research policy during 1996 , including the implementation of the specific programmes of the Fourth Framework Programme and the first stages of the preparation of the Fifth .
The point which must be borne in mind is the following : this report must be seen in the context of a wider system which also includes all of the follow-up reports on each specific programme and the Framework Programme as a whole , along with the five-year evaluation reports .
Thus , two series of follow-up reports for 1996 and 1997 have been prepared and published .
The preparation of those relating to 1997 has been initiated .
In the context of the preparation of the Fifth Framework Programme , fiveyear evaluation reports have been prepared for all the specific programmes as well as for Programme itself .
The latter has been drawn up by a group led by an expert on Community research , the former Commissioner , Etienne Davignon .
I share the rapporteur 's opinion that a rigorous evaluation of the content of the Programmes and the way in which they have contributed to the achievement of the wider political objectives of the Union is essential .
This assessment will , however , be found in the evaluation reports .
Therefore , the Commission clearly notes the numerous suggestions formulated in the resolution .
It will be able to take them into account when implementing the overall policy .
Undoutably , improvements will be made .
The complementary nature of the three components , the annual report , the follow-up report and the evaluation report , must be strengthened .
The information contained in all of these documents and the conclusions of the different exercises must , moreover , be made available in such a way that enables all potential users , starting with the European Parliament , to become acquainted with it within the necessary time frame and under the best conditions .
The Commission intends to apply itself to improving the system in this way and will gladly welcome any suggestions that may help .
The objective is the same as that of the Fifth Framework Programme .
By definition , the Union 's research policy is for the citizens of Europe .
It must be implemented both in their interest and , in their eyes and those of the institution representing them , namely the European Parliament , with complete transparency .
The Commission and Parliament often share the same views and they must fight together to enable this policy to realize its ambitions .
I am sure I will be able to count on you in this respect and I thank you for your efforts .
You have rightly drawn our attention to several points , on the complexity of the procedure , for example .
The Fifth Framework Programme has been designed to concentrate its actions .
Such concentration is essential to improve management .
We have gone from 22 to four programmes , four large programmes which are then divided into a variety of key actions .
Nevertheless , there is a clear effort at concentration , which is in keeping with your requests .
The problems of ethics , which you have rightly highlighted , are truly worrying .
Efforts have been made to mobilize national ethics committees - where they exist since , as you know , they do not exist in all the Member States - so that they demand respect for fundamental ethical principles .
The Commission 's proposals for the establishment of the Fifth Framework Programme take up this demand once more .
Many of you have emphasized the importance of small and medium-sized enterprises and it is a problem I am very aware of .
You know that , although it was very weak at the start , the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in the Union 's research programmes has continually increased .
One essential step was the inclusion , in the Fourth Framework Programme , of what are known as technological stimuli , aimed particularly at small and medium-sized enterprises .
These actions will of course be followed up and substantially strengthened under the " Innovating and helping small and medium-sized enterprises to participate ' programme , which provides , in particular , for : assistance in the area of intellectual property ; financing for innovation ; mechanisms to encourage the creation and development of innovative businesses ; new approaches in technology transfer ; and , finally , networking and information services .
With a view to facilitating the participation of SMEs in the Framework Programme , increasing the efficiency of actions which concern them and reducing delays , accredited but not exclusive information and assistance networks will be developed by strengthening and rationalizing the existing structures .
You can see that , on this particular issue of SMEs , we have already made progress , although obviously much remains to be done , and that structural and administrative measures will be established , under the Fifth Framework Programme , to enable us to respond better to the expectations of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Madam Commissioner , allow me to ask another question .
Mr Chichester and I raised the subject of the task forces , which have not been reviewed in the report - or at least have only been given a two-line mention .
In its statement the Commission also failed to say anything about the work of the task forces .
In its response to a previous statement on the research report , the Commission said : " the annual report serves to present to Parliament those aspects which are considered to be of prime importance ' .
Am I then right in assuming that the task forces are not regarded as one of the more important aspects here ?
The task forces , may I remind you , were not provided for in the Fourth Framework Programme since , when I arrived at the Commission , the Fourth Framework Programme had already been adopted ; I introduced them along with a number of my colleagues in the Commission , in particular Martin Bangemann and Neil Kinnock .
These task forces have looked into a number of crucial problems that specifically affect the competitiveness of European business in both the sectors where Europe is particularly competitive , as well as those where it comes up against fierce competition , and we have distinguished a number of important issues .
We wanted to draw together researchers , manufacturers and others to consider these issues , in order to have a global vision .
This led us , furthermore , to the multidisciplinary approach of the Fifth Framework Programme , which follows a slightly different philosophy to that of the Fourth .
So the work that has been done by the task forces has not been lost .
On the contrary , it has been extremely useful and has enabled partners with different outlooks , in all of the Member States , to come together and discuss the different aspects of a topic .
This is what guided us through the Fourth Framework Programme .
For the Fifth Programme , there are no longer any task forces , instead we have key actions .
These key actions will work in the same way and according to the same multidisciplinary approach .
Let me take the example of the key action known as " the town of tomorrow ' in the Fifth Framework Programme .
In " the town of tomorrow ' we encounter problems concerning transport , pollution , housing and tele-commuting , as well as those concerning town planning , that is , socio-economic problems , particularly those affecting inner cities and suburbs .
We have therefore chosen an approach around themes which will bring the different disciplines together .
In other words , the task forces become key actions and we take a multidisciplinary approach .
This is based on the experiences of the task forces and will be developed within the Fifth Framework Programme .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Risks from chemical agents
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0051 / 98 ) , by Mr Blak , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Directive on the protection of the health and safety of workers from the risks related to chemical agents at work ( fourteenth individual directive within the meaning of Article 16 ( 1 ) of Directive 89 / 391 / EEC ) ( C4-0531 / 97-00 / 0459 ( SYN ) )
Mr President , I am pleased and proud to be here today as rapporteur in the second phase of the proposed directive on chemical agents .
I am glad that we have managed to break the three-year impasse in the Council .
I am glad that we can now make progress in creating greater security and better working conditions for employees in Europe .
And I am proud that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has reached agreement on a number of amendments ; this will further enhance the prospects of the outcome in the Council in important areas .
Almost four years have gone by since we last debated this proposal .
It is regrettable that we have had to wait so long , because the directive on chemical agents is an important part of a large collection of legislation .
It is part of the process that began in 1989 with the framework directive on improvements of employee security and health at work .
The jigsaw puzzle of directives under discussion here will make Europe even more attractive , particularly for those in employment .
First and foremost , it will be more secure and healthier to work in the Member States of the EU , and companies and workers alike can rejoice about the transparent and uniform regulations in the area of the working environment throughout the EU .
In addition to this , however , a very important incidental benefit is also achieved through the creation of common regulations in this area : it is an effective way of tackling social dumping .
Social dumping occurs when companies cross national frontiers to avoid giving employees decent working conditions .
It is important to take the problem of social dumping seriously , particularly in the light of forthcoming enlargement .
The proposed directive has two important components , to my mind .
On the one hand , it clearly establishes the commitments incumbent upon employers in connection with chemical substances that may be damaging to the safety and health of workers .
On the other hand , the proposed directive establishes procedures for joint initiatives to restrict chemical substances in the working environment .
One of the most important instruments in this area is the possibility of establishing limit values .
Let me be quite honest and say that I dislike limit values .
In principle , one should endeavour to make the working environment so clean that there would be no need for limit values .
Unfortunately , the reality is somewhat different .
It is often very difficult to determine exactly how dangerous a given substance is , and it may be necessary to put pressure on people who do not want to give the employees the benefit of the doubt .
Thus , there are instances when it may be necessary to set limit values .
To my mind , the greatest inadequacy of the Council 's common position is the lack of sufficient control in implementing the indicative limit values .
What is lacking is some mechanism to ensure that implementation is assessed and that , if necessary , proposals be made to set mandatory limit values .
Amendment No 4 addresses how to solve this problem .
Major progress would be made if this were to be adopted here in the House tomorrow and subsequently adopted by the Council .
I do not wish to go through all my amendments in detail .
They are already explained in the background to the recommendation and have been discussed thoroughly in committee .
However , there are two subjects that I must address , concerning two amendments in my recommendation .
Firstly , Amendment No 10 , aimed at supporting education as a means of minimising risks in the workplace , is a compromise in which a sentence has been mistakenly deleted , even though it actually supports the need for education and information .
Therefore , I would like to encourage everyone to vote for this amendment from the Group of the Party of European Socialists , which reintegrates this sentence .
Secondly , there are problems with Amendment No 11 .
The English translation states that health surveillance procedures shall be agreed to by the workforce .
This actually means that all workers at a given workplace would have to consent before any one of them could be subjected to a health check .
Of course , that is not what we want , and we would therefore like to table an oral amendment substituting the word workforce with workers ' concern .
Finally , I would like to take this opportunity to compliment the British Presidency on the work it has done on this subject .
It has been very gratifying to see active and constructive efforts aimed at pushing the directive through .
It is as if we now dare to recognise a social and international responsibility .
I do not know why , but I can hazard a guess .
If the directive on chemical agents is adopted by the Council at its upcoming meeting , this will not only be a victory for the British Presidency , but one we can all rejoice in .
There are no losers in the long term when it comes to creating a more humane and more social Europe ; there will only be winners .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate Freddy Blak very warmly on a tremendous job in preparing this report for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
He has recognized the fragility of the common position that took a very long time to reach inside the Council and , rather than seek to amend everything in sight , he has done the sensible thing and focused on a short list of issues that really matter .
One of the most important , from my point of view , is Amendment No 4 .
I understand the logic of the Community laying down indicative limit values , requiring Member States to disseminate information on those indicative values and further requiring Member States to take them into account when they set their own corresponding national occupational exposure limit values .
But that is not the same as requiring Member States to approximate to the indicative values laid down at Community level , or even move towards them .
I was therefore concerned that this might lead to a continuing disparity and I am glad that Amendment No 4 would address that by allowing a regular review , based on the information provided by Member States under Article 15 , leading , where necessary , to the Commission taking appropriate action to bring about closer harmonization .
I understand the Commission is prepared to accept that amendment or a form of wording similar to it .
Another important point , in view of recent cases I have dealt with , involving trichloroethylene and the recent exchange we had in committee with the Commission 's representatives , is Amendment No 7 concerning substitution .
It seems quite clear to me that some of the difficulties we are experiencing stem from the fact that we are not seeing proper implementation of the risk assessment and related sections of the framework directive .
That is leading , for example , to the situation where in some Member States trichloroethylene , a dangerous solvent , is banned , and in some Member States it is subject to exposure limits far greater than those laid down in others .
We have to work for a full and proper implementation of the framework directive but , in the meantime , the importance of substitution needs to be underlined in this directive , and Freddy Blak was quite right to do so in Amendment No 7 .
It is very good indeed to see that this directive has been resurrected after so long .
However , I wonder what the prospects are for a number of other directives which continue to be blocked in Council , for example , the directive on various modes of transport and the directive on physical agents , which covers noise , vibration , optical radiation and fields and waves .
I am particularly concerned about the subject of noise .
The original 1986 directive on the protection of workers from risks related to exposure to noise at work has exposure and action levels which are hopelessly out of date .
The then UK Government was very proud to have succeeded in pressing for a 90 decibel level for the mandatory use of ear-protectors at work .
It held this up as a costsaving measure .
But the cost for many thousands of workers has been paid in terms of reduced hearing and industrial deafness .
That 1986 directive was supposed to be re-examined by the Council , on the basis of a Commission proposal , before January 1994 .
It is now February 1998 and unless that physical agents directive can be revived , we must in any case review that earlier noise directive .
I hope we can receive an assurance on that point from the Commission .
It would not be fair to expect Mrs Cresson to respond to that but I hope the point can be raised with Commissioner Flynn .
I look forward to the Commission taking part in committee , at a hearing coming up within the next few weeks , on new emerging health risks .
We have succeeded in dealing with some of the outstanding ones here - the older ones - and we have some new ones to tackle together .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report that is currently under discussion regarding the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a directive which provides a framework for the protection of the health and safety of workers is extremely important and useful for workers who may be subject , in any Member State , to exposure to chemical agents .
This directive should not and cannot be further delayed .
The matter in question deserves the greatest urgency and the closest attention of Member States , social partners and institutions of the European Union .
The text of the Council 's common position currently under discussion is clearer , more explicit and less prone to ambiguities or to any shirking of responsibility .
The structure of the document favours a better definition and ordering of the objectives and scope of the directive .
In this text , the definition of a dangerous chemical agent , and the mechanism for establishing occupational exposure limit values and biological limit values are more clearly defined and occupy a more prominent position .
A clearer definition is given of the duties of the employer , the need for vigilance by workers , and the matter of consultation , information and participation of workers .
An emphasis is placed on the Member States ' obligation to enact legislative , regulatory and administrative provisions to facilitate the implementation of the directive .
The report reflects some of the concerns raised at the present time , and no doubt in the future , by the common position .
Meanwhile , however , the amendments now submitted by Parliament complement , improve and clarify the document under discussion .
Many of the amendments proposed by Parliament at first reading have been incorporated into this text , with the result that it has been noticeably improved .
I would briefly like to raise two points regarding the amendments .
Amendment No 1 emphasizes the additional caution to be exercised regarding pregnant women and young people ; in such circumstances , as in others , it is essential to protect current workers , but we should never fail to think of the future .
Amendment No 10 relates to the importance that should always be attributed to the training of workers , as opposed to mere information .
For these reasons , and others which have no place here , this report is certainly appropriate and is to be commended .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it has certainly taken a long time for the Council 's common position to appear .
But at the moment it is better than the Commission proposal .
I am extremely satisfied with the cooperation which took place with the rapporteur , Mr Blak .
I therefore did not need to submit further amendments , although I intend to support Amendment No 16 by the Christian Democrats .
What is the significance of this directive ?
Different standards damage regulation in the Member States .
Arguments related to competitiveness will always take the upper hand , after all .
This is bad for the employees and it is bad for the victims .
And those victims are often suffering terribly .
One European policy with binding standards is therefore best , and we in the committee and in Parliament call for this in Amendment No 4 .
In fact , we should also be prepared to ban a number of solvents such as xylene , toluene and trichloroethylene , and Amendment No 7 points to the direction we must take in this respect , since industry is encouraged to seek substitution , and substitution can be found in the use of reactive solvents .
In this context I would like to mention the solvents which are found in Marigold , for instance .
An experiment has been carried out with this plant , which was funded by the European Commission , in fact , and showed exceptionally good potential .
That is why , Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I would like to suggest that we , as the European Parliament , receive a periodic progress report , since I am not entirely confident about the implementation .
I would like to conclude by saying something on educating , training and raising the awareness of people in the workplace .
We have also submitted an amendment on this point .
So the issue does not only involve banning chemical agents , it also deals with the handling of chemical agents .
Once we have a decent package of proposals , I think we will able to take a step forward with this directive to combat the greater problem that lies behind it , for painters and other workers , for example .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank Mr Blak for the work he has done on this very important , but very difficult and complicated subject .
Health and safety at work is one issue where EU legislation has a real effect on a person 's normal working day .
It has to do with people 's mental and physical health , and their fitness for work .
There cannot be anything more important than this .
The EU must be able to provide a secure minimum level of health and safety at work to prevent sacrificing good working conditions in the name of competition .
Health and safety at work do not just benefit the worker , but also the employer and the whole of society .
This is why it is quite deplorable that this subject has remained on hold for such a long time in the Council , as we have remarked here on numerous occasions .
This directive was featured in Parliament 's first reading four years ago .
Hopefully the completion of a common position by the Council means that the health and safety at work log-jam is breaking up at last , now that it is the British term of office .
Mr Blak has proposed some amendments to the Council 's common position , most of which I completely agree with .
I am , however , concerned at the negative approach the report takes to setting biological limit values .
The report states that biological limit values may be determined only in exceptional circumstances where other means fail .
We in Finland , however , do not have such a restricted view on the biomonitoring of chemical substances .
On the contrary , we believe that it is often an effective way of monitoring employees ' exposure to dangerous chemicals , in order to protect their health .
Naturally , the principle of biological monitoring is always agreed beforehand with workers ' representatives .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , this argument really needs to be rammed home .
Mr Hughes had to do it too .
There has been much talk of cost saving in the area of health and safety at work , but no mention has been made of the costs which could be saved by those affected , and by our national economies , if we really introduced a proper safety scheme .
As a result , we are again faced with a long-running scandal .
Health and safety in the European workplace is not keeping pace with developments in the internal market and with technological progress .
Mr Hughes has already referred to two directives which are still pending .
In the case of this directive we need to discuss the advantages and drawbacks of the strategy which the Commission has chosen to confront the problem : elegantly-defined principles , progress without protection .
The individual directives can be added later , while we focus on developing the main directive . But the price will be high .
The problem lies in the content of the framework directive .
We have to ensure that the individual directives do not fall behind the framework directive , and then there is also the problem of harmonizing procedures between the individual framework directives , such as that on explosive atmospheres - which is looming - , for this is creating increasing complications in individual cases and is hampering progress .
I would just like to stress again that Mr Blak has done an excellent job .
I do not believe that Amendment No 16 is better than Amendment No 3 , and in the case of Amendment No 18 , I would ask Mr Blak why the risk assessment has to be made at the beginning of the information form .
Does this not run contrary to what he has said in Amendment No 6 ?
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Freddie Blak for the work he has done on this report .
It has been a hard fought for report and his endeavours have been greatly appreciated across the board inside the committee .
While it is technical , it is also very real .
In fact ten million people across the European Union suffer an accident or illness at work .
This is a well-known fact and eight thousand of these people unfortunately die every year within the European Union .
Many other unreported accidents , illnesses and deaths go by the board , of course .
Many of these deaths and illnesses arise from ignorance and the taking of unacceptable risks .
As long as these risks are ill-defined , it is right that the Commission should introduce legislation to mark these risks quite appropriately .
Why do people take unnecessary risks ?
We all do it now and then .
We all cross the roads , perhaps without looking , and we all take inappropriate care .
This is a bad attitude for life , and definitely a bad attitude for work , but these attitudes can be dismantled and reassembled in a progressive and positive way to stop the kind of problems we face at work .
This is why this report , which is unlocked by the UK Presidency 's initiative as Freddie remarked , aims at stopping the inappropriate behaviour of the use of noxious chemical agents which are some of the worst chemical agents that people can use at work .
The hazards of using such chemical agents , must be assessed as to the risk for workers , not just from the immediate effects but the long-term effects as well .
The training notices must have a substantial impact as well as training itself .
This is why such importance has been given to training in this report , to the extent perhaps of widening the framework directive 's interpretation of training and that is a welcome move .
In small businesses , for example , workers are 50 % more likely to suffer from an accident at work .
Why is this ?
It is because there has been better training in larger companies and appropriate notices , none of which are obvious within smaller companies .
Also , in larger companies risk is taken seriously because health and safety is regarded as a productive and profitable element for the future of any company structure .
This is why the Safe Action for Europe project , which unfortunately cannot get past the question of a legal base , would have been quite appropriate for small businesses .
Freddie has also mentioned relocation of chemical production and companies .
I remember the case in Bhopal , India .
Low social costs were given as the reasons for this .
This meant that Bhopal is remembered as a major disaster and for total exploitation of the workers in that country .
We must not forget that , if this is a directive which adds to the sum total of European workers ' rights , perhaps we could be exporting this type of model elsewhere in the world .
Certainly we must not let capital get away with simply exporting the dangers and disasters which we know beset this minefield in this particular Continent .
It is progressive enough for us to feel that it will be significant in protecting workers and yet it is also realistic enough to produce results .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , speaking on behalf of our group , Mr Mendonça has already presented the technical aspects of this subject in some detail .
I should therefore like to discuss some of the more general issues involved here .
The Council allowed itself three and a half years before submitting a common position to Parliament after first reading .
This shows just where the delay is in drawing up European legislation .
The rapporteur has taken pains to ensure that the outcome in Parliament does not deviate too much from the common position , so that the directive on the protection of workers ' health and safety from the effects of chemical agents at the workplace is neither further delayed nor threatened .
No blame whatsoever can be attached to Mr Blak for this situation .
He has done an excellent job .
At all events , I expect him to give way to the amendment which I am re-submitting to Parliament .
Let me present some of the important facts surrounding this subject .
Technical directives of this type are very significant for workers and for workers ' health , but plenty of even more important directives are still needed , for example , on teleworking and the wider aspects of part-time employment .
When does the Commission think it will get around to doing something about this , or does it hope to divert us from the really important issues by submitting technical questions ?
Does the Council intend to brood much longer over the directives mentioned by Mr Hughes ?
The real victims of all this delay are the working people of Europe and we , as serving politicians in this European Parliament , cannot tolerate this situation any longer .
We expect that progress will ultimately be made in this direction and that the Commission and the Council will take the appropriate steps to see that this is done .
Mr President , the target must be that no people should be injured at work .
The issue in this recommendation for second reading was first raised four years ago .
Minimum rules are a requirement for people to be able to bring about reasonably equal conditions within the EU in this area .
I would like , in particular , to emphasize the principle of caution , that is , that there should be a good margin for workers being exposed to risks .
It is better to prevent than to discover risks afterwards .
There is strong political opinion behind this report . We saw that at first reading and we can see it now .
There is a unanimous committee behind these fifteen amendments .
What we are proposing are improvements to the Council 's position .
The three most important which I shall emphasize here are : the evaluation of the implementation by the Member States ; information to workers about the risks and the danger of agents ; and training in protective measures .
In addition , we must ensure that there is coordination between these measures .
The Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party supports this recommendation for second reading from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Mr President , in ancient Greek ' the beginning of wisdom is to give thought to naming ' means that one should always begin by defining one 's terms in order to lend substance to action .
I believe that we are now witnessing such a process in connection with a very important issue , which is reaching a favourable intermediate stage of completion .
In other words , it will go further .
I believe that whether we call it sabotage or just delay , this matter has at any rate taken a number of years to progress from first reading to the second reading here today .
Mr President , it was the previous Parliament that gave the first reading and we are now occupied with the second .
I can justify the fact that , as is being proved , this directive 's development has shown that substantive redefinitions were needed .
The directive as such , the rationale of its explanatory concepts and the statements that go with it are , I believe , so important to a degree that I would describe it , if I may , as a historic document .
The question is , how well do the specific articles realize the intention ?
I believe that with all this procedure of the common position , approaches have been made which bring hope and lend perspectives to this directive .
I agree with the modest satisfaction expressed by our rapporteur , Mr Blak .
I believe that the amendments constitute an important and substantive step , as we reiterate with persistence and steadfastness to the European Parliament , in the anticipation that they may now be acceptable . They represent a first step , and I believe that we are not just taking a first step but we are making tangible progress in relation to the situations and views that prevailed four years ago .
I echo the call to the British Presidency to speed up , promote and complete this common position decisively , because that will enable us to save time .
It has been said , stressed , and I too repeat it , that the definitions now being adopted are wise ones in that they are not absolutely binding .
I believe that we really cannot , at this point in time , give a complete list of all the dangerous substances , because new ones will emerge which we do not now know , or hitherto unrecognized dangers will be discovered .
This potential extension with the passage of time , precisely in order to prevent infringements of the directive based on today 's criteria , is , I believe , one of the directive 's strong points .
This , then , is a framework directive which implements the very important Directive 89 / 391 / EEC , but as a framework it allows for further scope and is an important starting point at the present stage .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Blak for the quality of the work he has carried out on this proposal , and to thank him and all of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for their continued efforts to improve the health and safety of workers .
The Commission greatly appreciates the constructive approach that has been adopted with respect to the common position .
Firstly , I would like to highlight the political importance of the Council 's common position .
The Commission is convinced that the principles of health and safety protection must continue to be enhanced at Community level .
The Council has recognized this in the common position and , although the text is clearly not perfect , it represents a considerable advance in the field of health and safety .
Most of the European Parliament 's amendments to the text of the common position are real improvements and can therefore be accepted by the Commission .
I am referring to Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , the first part of 5 , 6 , 9 , 11 , 12 , 13 and 18 .
I would now like to comment on the few amendments which cause some problems for the Commission and which , consequently , cannot be accepted .
The second part of Amendment No 5 imposes on employers the need to record a risk assessment in a suitable form , taking national law and practice into account .
This measure would undoubtedly weaken the common position which anticipates that the documents should be established in accordance with national law and practice .
I am convinced that it cannot be Parliament 's intention to permit a discretionary appreciation of respect for legislation .
This idea cannot therefore be retained .
Amendment No 7 stresses the principle of substitution to eliminate risk .
The Commission is certainly in agreement with this principle , which aims at replacing hazardous chemical agents by others which are not hazardous or which are less hazardous to workers .
Nevertheless , to encourage optimal preventive action on the part of employers , the most practical obligation to reduce risk to a minimum must be maintained when the complete elimination of all risk is impossible .
Amendment No 8 is politically delicate .
It was only after difficult negotiations that the Member States and the Commission came to an agreement on this text .
As the proposed addition goes beyond the compromise reached and , although the Commission understands Parliament 's position , it prefers to keep the text as it is , given that on the basis of Amendment No 4 , which can be accepted , it is possible to come back to this question at the time of the five-year evaluation .
In the case of Amendment No 10 , the Commission considers that the withdrawal of the paragraph on the nature of information would not facilitate the task of the employer on this very important point .
I have one last observation concerning Amendment No 14 .
The Commission cannot accept the removal of the term " and the new findings ' from amongst the cases demanding an adaptation of the annexes to technological progress .
Indeed , new findings constitute the main reason for technological modifications .
This principle was , moreover , approved by the Council in its common position and on many other occasions .
I hope that Parliament will not thus be looking to limit the Commission 's rights of initiative .
It is not a question of the Commission using the pretext of adaptations to technological progress in order to bypass Parliament , as the rapporteur seems to think .
Regarding Amendments Nos 16 and 17 , the Commission is not able to accept them , for it considers that Amendment No 3 , which it does accept , is better than Amendment No 16 and that Amendment No 17 adds no further information to Article 8 of the common position .
Mr President , I heard that Commissioner Cresson had not included Amendment No 11 among the amendments that the Commission was able to adopt .
However , I have tabled a verbal amendment , in collaboration with the Commission in fact , so I hope the Commission will not retreat at the last moment .
The arrival of this amendment was somewhat delayed , so I hope this was merely an oversight .
I fully concur with you - this is also a gentle hint to my colleagues - that there is no reason to vote on Amendment No 16 when the Commission and the Council already accept Amendment No 3 .
We must take care not to hold the banner up so high that we lose our footing on terra firma , so I am actually very happy with your comments .
However , I do hope , Mrs Cresson , that you dream tonight that you want to have a hand in reviewing these matters once again , because then we can get a directive through that has been standing still for four years .
I have bent over backwards , the Council has bent over backwards , and I believe the Commission , too , can come towards us a little .
I am quite sure that you will dream about this tonight , so we can achieve a positive result tomorrow .
It will not be long .
Amendment No 11 is accepted by the Commission , indeed , I believe I said this earlier , but perhaps it is a simple case of a problem of translation .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0017 / 98 ) .
The Commission would remind the author of the question that , according to the provisions of the new Article 255 introduced by the Treaty of Amsterdam , the citizen has the right of access to the documents of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , subject to the principles and limits the Council has to determine , according to the codecision procedure , within two years of the entry into force of the Treaty .
On the basis of these general principles which are common to the three institutions , each one should draw up its own regulations on the specific provisions regarding application .
The Commission will therefore submit a draft legislation , according to the entry into force of the Treaty .
So far , no decision has been taken on the exceptions to the right of access the Commission should propose .
Without any doubt , the Commission considers it essential to develop the policy of transparency and access to its documents , but the future legislation on this matter depends on the result of the interinstitutional negotiations .
Naturally , the declaration included in the final document will be observed , which allows each Member State to ask the Commission or the Council not to disclose a document originating from the country itself without prior permission .
Mr President , I have three short questions .
I would like clarification of whether this document will concern all or just three - the most important three - bodies mentioned in the Amsterdam Treaty : the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
Personally , I think it should be a matter for all to consider .
Next , I would like to ask about very sensitive issues .
Is it understood that Europe 's future central bank should be subordinate to public legislation ?
In addition , Europol cooperation has proved to be an area where there is a need for more openness .
Finally , I would like to ask whether the Commission could not put together some sort of Green Paper on the subject of openness so that all bodies , including Parliament , could discuss in broad terms what should be done concerning this document ?
I think this would be an excellent way to proceed .
As a general outline to this additional answer , I have to say , Mr Hautala , that the general secretaries of the three Institutions concerned have already held specific meetings to discuss this point and have formed an interinstitutional working party , under the direction of the Commission , which has been given the task of conducting a preliminary study of the problem .
The working parties have already been set up and the group is currently reflecting on the questions to be dealt with in the proposal for the future legislation .
I wish to ask you , Mr Hautala , whether it will be applied to the three institutions ?
As I recalled , according to the provisions of Article 255 , it is a question of access to the documents of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission and there will be general principles common to the three institutions , on the basis of which each of the three institutions will then draw up its own regulations for specific application .
Mr President , I would like to ask the Commissioner whether his studies also cover the internal workings of Parliament , because we have a body , the Conference of Presidents of the various groups , which keeps the Parliamentarians in the dark , and takes all sorts of decisions in secret meetings that we hear nothing about .
Could this be sorted out ?
The second thing I wanted to ask is this : what is your attitude to the idea of forcing the European Central Bank to make a public declaration of this kind , which would have the effect of opening the doors to American speculators ? .
It would not take long to wreck our currency then !
With regard to the European Central Bank , I have nothing to say , as Article 255 does not refer to this institution .
With regard to the first question , it seems to me that , as the Member said himself , it relates to the European Parliament 's internal documents and it is therefore not up to the Commission to give an opinion in this connection .
I would like to ask whether the Commission supports the principle of reversing the burden of proof which was passed by a large majority of Parliament in part-session and by the Committee on Institutional Affairs by 34 votes to 0 .
According to this , the basis for any decision must be that the documents and meetings are open , unless a qualified majority of two thirds of those present at Commission meetings , in Parliament or at Council meetings decides that a meeting or document should be closed for good reason .
In other words , we should reverse the burden of proof , so it takes a qualified majority to close a document .
Can the Commission support this principle which was passed unanimously by our committees ?
Thank you for this additional question .
This is a matter I will bring to the attention of the working party formed by the general secretaries of the three institutions .
I have no particular information to offer by way of an answer ; I therefore take note of it and will pass on the question to the group composed of the three general secretaries .
Question No 61 by Julio Añoveros Trias de Bes ( H-0048 / 98 )
Subject : Internet and Community Law
When will the EuroLaw server be accessible through the Internet ?
Does the Commission intend to offer free access to the CELEX database on the Web ?
Do the institutions plan to provide a page providing information for the public on the Community legislative process and on the officials responsible ?
If so , could the institutions design such a page jointly in order to optimize its usefulness ?
The EuroLaw server , the provisional name to which the Member refers , will make the whole text of the Official Journals available , both the L and C series , free of charge on the Internet Europa site , which can be found at http : / / europa.eu.int , in the 11 official languages of the EU for a period of 20 days .
This site is currently being prepared : the actual date for its opening should be in the spring of 1998 and will be announced officially by the Official Publications Office of the European Communities .
The EuroLaw server will enable users to access the following services free of charge and in progression : the list of Community legislation in force , supplemented by the texts of the documents shown in the list by their title alone , as shown in the CELEX data bank ; the collection of EU treaties ; the consolidated text of the Community legislative documents ; the recent judgments of the European Court of Justice ; and the COM documents .
Consequently , all the legislative texts in force will be extracted by CELEX and made available to EuroLaw users free of charge .
For the time being , however , the Commission is not planning to offer the CELEX data bank for consultation via the Internet free of charge .
It should be recalled that CELEX offers a very wide range of advanced research possibilities and that the proceeds deriving from consultation of the base are used to finance part of the considerable work of documentary analysis required to give CELEX its specific added value .
The Commission shares the Member 's opinion that it is advisable to inform citizens of the Union 's decision-making mechanisms and the functioning of the interinstitutional procedures .
For this purpose , it plans to present the principal interinstitutional procedures in the form of a diagram , in order to be concise .
Moreover , to the extent that resources are available and in cooperation with the services of Parliament , the Commission will try to circulate general information on the state of the current procedures , an objective that will be realized , in particular , through modernizing and putting the APC system that is already accessible to the public on the Internet .
Mr President , I do not want to put a supplementary question , but just to say that the Commissioner gave a very full reply , for which I am extremely grateful .
I thank the Commissioner for his answer .
I would like to put one more question : when is it going to be clear that through this EuroLaw link people will be able to see how far the Member States have incorporated the law into national legislation ?
We currently have an experiment as far as Finnish legislation is concerned , but what does the Commissioner think of the possibilities of getting information about the situation in all Member States through the same service ?
In addition , I think it is important that in future this server has the technology to make it easy to see what is news , so-called ' push technology ' , which your colleague Commissioner Oreja has promised to consider , and which I hope can be implemented very soon .
I believe that for easier use it is important that people also get news quickly .
I would like to say to Mr Thors that it had been hoped that the EuroLaw server would be available immediately on the Internet .
This is not possible . To do that , preliminary adaptations need to be made to all the technical devices , particularly those of the Publications Office ; everything will be ready in a few months ' time .
We understand the urgency and importance of this tool and every effort will be made to make it available as soon as possible .
I will take this opportunity , and the specific question raised by Mr Thors on the importance to the citizen of knowing whether the Member States have included the Community regulations , to indicate another information tool .
In the wide range of material on the internal market , since November 1997 the Commission has been publishing a scoreboard , a periodic report , that indicates the situation of each Member State as regards the inclusion of directives , the observance of infringement procedures , and so on ; this scoreboard is already available on the Internet .
As you can see , we are certainly heading in the direction rightly hoped for by Mr Thors with all the means available .
Question No 62 by Ian White ( H-0112 / 98 )
Subject : First-weight mail rates
Would the Commission indicate which EU Member States currently link costs of first-weight correspondence , usually 20 g letters , for domestic and internal ( within the EU ) mail ?
At present , the current UK rate is the same for first-weight mail , but there are proposals for this to change .
Would the UK postal services be acting contrary to Article 6 by charging more for non-domestic internal first-weight mail ?
In around half the Member States of the European Union , there is a unified tariff for sending correspondence at national and intra-Community level in the faster standard category belonging to the first-weight group .
In the other Member States , tariffs vary according to the destination , usually depending on whether it is national or intraCommunity correspondence .
Directive 97 / 67 / EC on postal services states that the prices of each of the services forming part of the supply of the universal service should be correlated with costs .
This obligation applies to all the correspondence in question , whether national or intraCommunity .
This could encourage some Member States to rectify the current charging system for their own postal services to that effect .
The Treaty establishing the European Community , and particularly Article 6 , does not prohibit a similar tariff differentiation provided it is commensurate with costs , as laid down by the aforesaid Directive 97 / 67 / EC .
I think it would be useful for me to explain the background of the question to the Commissioner .
A change in pricing to the structure of the international tariff within the United Kingdom is proposed from 6 April this year .
At present the first-weight rate charge is the same for domestic and EU post .
The proposal is for domestic post to stay at 26p but for EU post to increase to 30p .
There is also a proposal that the non-EU rate be decreased from 31p to 30p which effectively classes the EU alongside all other foreign post .
I would submit that is contrary to Article 6 and therefore there is a responsibility upon the Commission to ask for an explanation from the United Kingdom postal authorities on this point .
Can you please reply in detail ?
I wish to thank Mr White for further clarifying the context of his question .
There may actually be an apparent contradiction between single tariff and price correlated with costs , but it is only an apparent contradiction .
Article 12 of the Directive on postal services states , on the one hand , that prices shall be correlated with costs and , on the other , that the Member States may decide whether to apply a single tariff to the entire national territory .
These two statements may seem to be contradictory .
However , the obligation on the correlation of costs does not imply a total coincidence between price and cost and leaves the Member State the possibility of applying a system of making tariffs equal for specific provisions of the universal service .
I would add that applying a tariff distinction based on costs between national and intra-Community post or , possibly , between post to different Member States , does not constitute an infringement of Article 6 of the Treaty , as such a distinction is not based on nationality but rather on the criterion of the actual cost the provision of different services entails .
Question No 63 by Anne Van Lancker ( H-0114 / 98 )
Subject : Preparations for integrating the Schengen acquis in the Treaty
According to the Treaty , the Schengen measures on checks at external borders , asylum , immigration and judicial cooperation in civil matters should come under Title IV of the Treaty establishing the European Community , while the provisions on police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters should come under Title VI of the Treaty on European Union , the third pillar .
In the Commission 's view , what should the SIS ( and later the EIS ) come under ?
Article 286 of the Treaty says that from 1 January 1999 Community decisions on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing and free movement of personal data shall apply to the institutions and bodies set up by , or on the basis of , the Treaty .
What arrangements should there be for the protection of privacy in the SIS ?
Will Article 286 also apply to personal data gathered under third pillar initiatives ?
The question raised by Mrs Van Lancker is fundamental in nature and requires a brief but comprehensive answer .
The principle of the integration of the Schengen acquis into the EU has been sanctioned in the protocol attached to the Treaty of Amsterdam .
To achieve this integration , various measures have been adopted , including the decision by the Council , as provided for in paragraph 1 of Article 2 of the protocol , based on the relevant provisions of the Treaties , establishing the legal basis for each of the provisions or decisions constituting the Schengen acquis .
Pursuant to the provisions of the Treaty on European Union currently in force , the distribution of the Schengen acquis between the first and the third pillars would have been a very difficult task on account of the unclear distinction between the areas of competence of the two pillars mentioned .
However , the Treaty of Amsterdam provides greater clarity and the distribution should not raise too many problems .
As regards , in particular , the division of the provisions on the Schengen Information System , the Commission considers that a dual legal base should be established in relation to the first and third pillars .
In fact , the Schengen Information System collects data relating to both the first and third pillars .
Article 96 of the Schengen Agreement , on the categories of aliens to be refused entry , refers to external frontier controls and visa and immigration policy and therefore to data belonging to the first pillar .
Other categories of data , such as definitions provided for extradition purposes , unquestionably fall under police and legal cooperation in criminal matters and therefore come under the third pillar .
The establishment of a dual legal base should not be detrimental to the operation of the Schengen Information System .
The dual legal base is not something new .
The Customs Information System is also based on a regulation from the first pillar and an agreement from the third pillar based on the same text .
With regard to specific Schengen provisions on data protection within the scope of the Schengen Information System , a dual legal base should be established , comprising the first and third pillars .
The same regulations should be applied to data protection with regard to sectors coming under the first and third pillars , in the exchange of information through the SIS .
Finally , the question as to whether Article 286 of the EC Treaty will be applied to the Schengen Information System has not yet been resolved .
I would like to start by thanking the Commissioner for his interpretation .
I think it agrees fully with my own .
The necessary instruments for the implementation of the new Community pillar with regards to free movement of people cannot come under the third pillar .
But , Mr Commissioner , I am getting strong indications from the Council , and not only from one Member State within the Council , but from several of them , that the Council has a completely different opinion . It seems that someone in the Council is saying quite forcefully that the entire Schengen Information System , and therefore also the European Information System , should come under the third pillar , with all its consequences for parliamentary and judicial control and for the European Commission 's right of legislative initiative in this rather delicate affair .
Can the Commissioner tell me which arguments , legal and political , the Commission can produce to win over the Council , and that it will not start fiddling with the adequate legal base which must be used in this matter so that the Schengen Protocol might be properly categorized ?
I have to say that current efforts and the work I have briefly described is ongoing , despite being complex .
In the declaration relating to Article 2 of the Schengen Protocol , the Member States agree that the Council should take all the necessary measures laid down by Article 2 as well as that relating therefore to the distribution just mentioned , by the date of entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
For this purpose , it establishes that the preparatory work should begin in good time to be completed before that date .
I have to say that , after the signing of the Treaty of Amsterdam , the Luxembourg Presidency began work within the Council and that the current British Presidency has taken it over immediately .
Various meetings are already planned to observe the timetable which has been established .
Some results have already been achieved , and this allows us to believe that the deadlines will be observed .
We therefore have no reason to be pessimistic .
I well understand the Member 's concern , but it is obvious that the Commission has taken an active and constructive part in the Council 's work on this matter , to ensure that the integration of the Schengen acquis , within the scope of the European Union , takes place in full compliance with the law of the European Community and the European Union .
It seems obvious to me that the European Parliament is involved in distributing the Schengen acquis , as this distribution will establish the legal base for future proposals seeking to amend the Schengen acquis and therefore relates to Parliament 's role with regard to these future proposals .
I therefore propose that the Council duly submits to the European Parliament the draft decision on the distribution of the Schengen acquis .
My question about the Schengen Information System concerns the supervisory function of the JSA , the Joint Supervisory Authority .
This authority is responsible for checking that the rules which exist for this system are respected .
The first report issued by this supervisory authority pointed out major defects in the SIS system , including inaccurate information on those registered .
In addition , it states that there is different information about the same people in different parts of the SIS database .
The JSA also emphasizes that it has totally inadequate resources to carry out the investigation it wants , including budgetary resources and resources for translation .
It also underlines that it has been denied access to the SIS computer here in Strasbourg on at least one occasion when it has tried to carry out an on-site inspection with its experts .
My question is whether the Commission intends to strengthen the JSA 's budgetary resources and authority to carry out its work .
Is it the Commission 's opinion that this should happen ?
With regard to the Joint Supervisory Authority , the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam naturally has to be dealt with . However , with regard to the other aspects of the question , I believe that only the actual bodies involved in the Schengen Convention are in the best position to give more thorough answers .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think it has become clear how closely connected Title IV of the EC Treaty and Title VI of the EU Treaty are .
I would like to ask you about the connection between the issue of external borders , which is dealt with in one , and the issue of fighting organized crime , which is dealt with in the other .
I think we really need to proceed with the Schengen Information System accordingly and see the connection between the two .
Your comment highlights the very purpose of these constructions : to provide space for freedom of movement and at the same time space for security .
Schengen arose within this perspective and is operating within this perspective ; its incorporation into the Treaty of Amsterdam is also moving decidedly within this perspective .
The information structures should reflect this fundamental dual objective .
Question No 64 by Graham Watson ( H-0147 / 98 )
Subject : Ticket allocation system for the 1998 football World Cup
The French authorities have proposed a ticket allocation system for the 1998 football World Cup which limits worldwide sales for matches to just 40 % of total tickets , while 60 % of tickets will be restricted to the French market .
In view of the precedent set by the " Cassis de Dijon ' judgment , does the Commission agree that the proposed ticket allocation is a fundamental breach of internal market legislation ?
Does the Commission have plans to investigate the proposed ticket sales operation ?
Mr President , the French organizing committee of the World Cup at first envisaged a system of ticket distribution based on territorial exclusiveness which would essentially not have permitted the sale of tickets in other Member States of the European Union .
It also envisaged linking ticket sales to other services such as accommodation and travel .
Following an approach by the European Commission , the organizing committee agreed to make changes which would enable both specific tour operators and travel agencies firstly , to sell either tickets alone or packages of services , and secondly , to sell them in other countries . This ensures competition between various distributors throughout the European Union .
After complaints in the press regarding the infringement of European rules of competition so far as the sale of tickets for the football World Cup 1998 was concerned , the Commission has approached the French organizing committee and five tour operators selected for the sale of tickets in the UEFA area .
Replies to those letters are being awaited and we believe that when we receive them the Commission will be able to form a complete picture of how the French organizing committee set about distributing tickets , and to ascertain whether and to what extent the rules of competition have been contravened .
If Community law has been infringed , that will most probably be due to contravention of the European rules of competition , mainly Articles 85 and 86 of the Treaty , rather than an infringement of the law in relation to the Cassis de Dijon affair mentioned by the Member , which covers the elimination of quota restrictions on imports between the Member States pursuant to Article 30 of the Treaty .
At any rate , no such infringement has so far been confirmed where the distribution of tickets for the football World Cup 1998 is concerned .
Thank you very much , Mr Papoutsis .
Mr Watson , the Rules of Procedure do not include any rule prohibiting Members from bringing a ball into the Chamber , but I assume there is no trademark or any subliminal advertising on that beautiful football which I can see from here .
In any case , you have the floor to question the Commissioner for one minute .
I assure you that I have no intention to kick this football in the Chamber but it is an excellent example of a souvenir World Cup football .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for his answer .
Clearly under Article 7a of the Single European Act , and indeed under Article 85 , it must be held that any product lawfully put on sale in one part of the Union cannot be barred from being imported into any other .
Indeed , the Commission has just fined Volkswagen some £ 68 million for breach of this principle .
It is my information that the French authorities are preventing ticket agencies and tour operators from selling tickets outside France .
A ticket , for example , for the Brazil v Scotland match which would cost £ 50 in France , has been on sale on the black market in Britain for nearly £ 800 .
Did the French authorities consult the Commission before making their arrangements ?
Does the Commissioner not agree that this is outrageous and does he not agree that it contravenes EU principles ?
Will he take action against France if it is found to be in breach of the Treaties ?
Mr President , first of all let me tell you that the ball at the front of Mr Watson 's bench reminds me of my childhood years , when I too had the chance to engage in this wonderful sport .
I would , however , like to make some comments on what Mr Watson said .
As I mentioned before , we are waiting for replies to the letters we sent to the tour operators and the French authorities .
So far , we have no information confirming the accusations that a specific infringement is indeed taking place .
What I must say , however , as a general principle , is that the Commission believes that competition among the various suppliers and products certainly benefits the consumer compared with a system of exclusive distribution and committed ticket sales .
We will insist that the rules of competition must be applied , and we believe we will be successful .
The next item is a continuation of the joint debate on air pollution by motor vehicles .
Mr President , I should start by saying that the Commissioners ' speech gives me the feeling that , unfortunately , there is still very little room for dialogue on these directives between the Commission and Council , on the one hand , and Parliament , on the other , and therefore , unfortunately , we cannot find the openings we were expecting .
However , I believe , as has been said , that the high number of deaths and serious harm caused by air pollution , largely due to vehicle traffic - think of the damage caused by acid rain - mean that we need clear , fast decisions , even if we are convinced that we cannot solve the problem just by concentrating on petrol and vehicles .
Other initiatives are in fact needed , such as the introduction of new fuels , with the use of innovative transport systems .
But above all , we need initiatives encouraging , for example , group transportation , switching passengers and goods to less polluting means of transport . These are all things that are not included in these measures but which , if not pursued , would make it difficult to achieve the objective .
With regard to the two directives in question , the Greens certainly share the problems raised by the rapporteurs and the solutions proposed in their reports .
We believe , in particular , that the level of sulphur in petrol should be reduced , the quantity of aromatics and polyaromatics reduced to non-hazardous values , that lead should be totally eliminated and , with regard to vehicle systems , that a system providing on-board diagnostics should be introduced for all vehicles .
However , it should certainly not be said that the measures to be taken before 2000 are too soon and should be postponed to 2005 and then say that they are not compulsory : either they are compulsory or they are meaningless !
Mr President , this afternoon we were talking about the Kyoto Summit and CO2 emissions .
The debate we are going to have now has a lot to do with what we were talking about this afternoon .
In fact , in the Commission 's communication on the Kyoto Summit issued at the end of 1997 , reference was made to those sectors which produce the most CO2 - one of the most dangerous greenhouse gases - and it was clearly stated that unless measures are taken , CO2 emissions from transport will increase by 31 % by 2010 .
So that is what we are going to talk about now .
I think the rapporteur has the right approach .
He envisages globally integrated measures - in other words , not just using more advanced techniques for engine production , but considering aspects such as better quality fuel , traffic management , the promotion of public transport - which is being neglected - , trans-European transport networks and alternative fuels .
In other words , he proposes a series of integrated measures which are very important to bear in mind .
The report also says that an improvement in fuel quality would have immediate effects if it were brought in - more so than actual progress in engine production - because it would affect all the cars currently in use in Europe . As the rapporteur rightly says , in some countries - such as my own , Spain - most cars are old and would be very expensive to upgrade .
Finally , Mr President , I think this Parliament needs a clear majority to approve these reports tomorrow . Parliament will have more say in the codecision process if its position is firm and clear , like the one approved in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Mr President , this Auto-Oil Programme is nearing its completion .
When the standards for 2005 are laid down in a binding way , industry will be given clarification .
On that point I fully agree with both rapporteurs .
Binding standards for 2005 , both for vehicles and fuels , are absolutely necessary .
Substantial investments will indeed have to be made , but technically it can all be achieved and it is vital for air quality .
Only on the point of the NOx catalytic converter , however , is some patience needed .
Amendment No 28 which will reduce the sulphur content to 100 ppm in 2000 strikes me as very realistic .
Once the catalytic converter is in production , low sulphur fuel should at least also be available .
I wholeheartedly support the amendments on on-board diagnostics and cold starts .
I also support a durability test after ten years .
I read that there is some movement on the CO2 demands , even though it does not sound particularly positive .
Now that the emissions of heavy polluting chemicals have been pushed back considerably , it is all the more pertinent to push back the use of fuel in general , especially since it is being demonstrated that with small technological improvements , large fuel savings can be made .
I would draw your attention to the fly wheel vehicle which manages a reduction of 20 % , and the developments in the fivelitre car .
Is the Commission considering binding legislation at European level ?
We believe the time is ripe for this .
That way the Kyoto agreements might be achieved .
Mr President , the dawn of the next millennium will finally see the start of a European road transport policy aimed at combating the problems of air pollution caused by road traffic . If we had to measure its effectiveness , bearing in mind the large number of measures planned , we would certainly be more than optimistic .
The joint programme drawn up by the Commission and by the motor and oil industries of the Auto-Oil Union has defined a strategy aimed at reducing vehicle gas emissions to improve air quality , establishing two deadlines : 2000 and 2005 , the dates by which the quality of fuels and the limit values of emissions should be defined .
With regard to the two reports being discussed , drawn up by Mr Hautala and Mr Lange , the important points of the entire Auto-Oil programme indicate a subtle contradiction between the fact that improving the quality of fuels will have immediate effects both on new and older vehicles and the fact that establishing limit values and improving engines should , however , only concern new vehicles .
We would like to establish three priorities : firstly , to combine respect for the environment with respect for work and research in industry ; secondly , to establish the final system by 2005 ; and thirdly , to firmly establish the principle that the " polluter pays ' , providing tax incentives for anyone investing with a view to improving quality . It is right that the companies conducting research and making large investments in order to supply a less polluting product should be rewarded .
We too believe that the marketing of leaded petrol should be prohibited in all Member States by 2000 , apart from the fact that this would lead to some economic problems which , we believe , could be prevented by intervening now .
In any case , we should start with Council 's decision to fix compulsory values by 2000 and indicative values by 2005 .
With regard to diesel fuel , we accept the proposal made by the Chairman of PSA Citroën-Peugeot , who recently pointed out the possibility of using biofuels at no extra cost to the motor industry , particularly dister , a highly concentrated , environmentally friendly diesel oil .
Important factors in the campaign to reduce emissions include : better engine design , better technical control , more frequent inspections and recourse to new types of fuel , together with more attentive management of traffic and public transport .
We believe that a whole series of new technologies could be developed to combat pollution effectively : I am referring , for example , to the fitting of on-board diagnostics systems .
We also believe it important to improve on the directive on CO2 emissions caused by vehicles , which is currently at a stalemate , together with the proposal to establish a system of tax incentives , that should not mean new taxation but rather an inspection and more effective check of existing ones .
Mr President , all citizens - not just a select few - have the right to breathe clean air and protect their health .
This view , and the increase in air pollution due to our traffic using two fuels , led the European Parliament to vote unanimously at first reading for the amendment to this directive to improve the quality of the air we breathe .
The European Parliament 's position and the right to good health , as provided for by the Treaty of Amsterdam , were undeniably echoed by the Council , although that echo is still inadequate since it only takes the form of indicative limit values .
So we are sure that despite the hard-hearted pressure to which they have subjected us , some petrochemical companies will make the necessary investments - as the automobile sector has already done - so that they can offer better quality fuels when the health of their shareholders and clients , and of course the citizens as well , forces them to do so .
It would be a serious matter if private interests were to take precedence over the quality of the air we breathe , especially after the Kyoto Summit . We have all noticed the alarming increase in air pollution in urban areas .
Some cities , such as Paris , Athens and Bologna , have even had to ban traffic on occasion in order to provide a solution to this serious health problem . And I think it is important to emphasize that some of these cities are located in the south of the Union .
Rule 2 of our Rules of Procedure says : " Members of the European Parliament shall exercise their mandate independently . They shall not be bound by any instructions and shall not receive a binding mandate . '
Accordingly therefore , and exercising my own personal responsibility , I shall vote in favour of Mrs Hautala 's report - in favour , that is , of health and the environment .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although Commissioner Bangemann has already gone , I would not like him to get a surprise in the Conciliation Committee .
We are not just talking about the same old proposals for amendments - we too are impressed by how far the Council has moved away from the Commission 's position .
I think that is a good sign for the conciliation process .
There is nothing new about attempts to reduce emissions of pollutants from motor vehicles .
A lot of progress has been made in recent years , but not enough .
Complicated measures will be required to ensure unlimited mobility for our citizens in the future , and that is my particular concern .
That is why I welcome the approach adopted in the Auto-Oil programme before us today .
There are two sides to this : first , optimizing vehicle technology so that pollutants are reduced ; and second , improving fuel quality so that pollutants are totally eliminated or are reduced , as well as facilitating the introduction of modern engine technology .
The Auto-Oil programme was the first time that had happened , and it is unfortunate that the original cooperation between the oil industry and the automotive industry is not continued in the Commission 's proposal . It is actually very important for these two European industrial sectors to work together , given that the competitiveness of European industry is at stake .
So it has to be reiterated that a legislative approach must be adopted to make progress .
It is really a truism to say that improved fuels are needed to reduce emissions from the existing motor vehicle fleet and to ease the introduction of fuel-efficient engine technology in the future .
This House made its position on this quite clear at first reading .
What I find totally incomprehensible is the attitude of some parts of the European oil industry , which is fighting tooth and nail against significant fuel improvements .
It claims that it would involve high costs for the oil industry with little benefit for the environment .
Both claims are wrong .
The most recent calculations indicate that the cost of desulphurizing fuels and other measures are by no means as high as originally assumed , and it will be passed on to the consumer anyway .
I would just like to point out what is involved .
We are talking about just ECU 0.004 per litre for petrol and 0.009 per litre for diesel , based on the strict limits at first reading .
So what are the environmental advantages ?
They are certainly enormous .
One European car manufacturer recently tested its vehicles in California , where fuels that comply with these limits are already on the market .
The result was a reduction of about 40 % in hydrocarbon emissions and about 30 % in NOx emissions .
I would call that a major environmental benefit .
It is not fair to threaten refinery closures because of the Auto-Oil programme .
A new Commission study has confirmed what is already well-known among specialists : there is over-capacity in Europe 's refineries , and this is a structural problem .
At present , the oil industry is investing outside Europe .
Demand for clean fuels would bring this investment back to Europe and guarantee the competitiveness of this sector in Europe , and that is something we all want .
Although the compromise proposal is very much a backward step compared with the first reading , I still firmly support it , particularly as regards the mandatory values for 2005 .
Mr Florenz has already said today that industry has to invest .
We know that .
It needs to invest money .
But we can give it a guarantee that this money will be well invested , instead of letting them invest with 2000 in mind and then suddenly coming up with totally different values , so that their investment has been wasted .
We cannot be a party to anything like that , and it is not this Parliament 's intention in any case .
Of course , technically speaking it would be possible to go a lot further than we are proposing here .
It remains to be seen whether the legal framework is adequate to achieve everything that is necessary and feasible .
If not , the report before us also allows for further improvement .
Maybe you will take that as a warning .
Mr President , thank you and welcome to the Commissioner .
I want to thank both of the rapporteurs for their input in this very important area .
I also have to declare an interest in this matter because Ireland 's only oil refinery is placed in my constituency of Munster , my home county of Cork , and they have approached me with very serious concerns regarding some of the proposals put forward .
However , there are a few things that I want to point out .
Firstly , we must of course - and I think all Members in this Parliament agree - have the best possible environment for each of our citizens to allow them to have full freedom of health and safety .
Any actions that we can take here must seek to enforce best practices and ideas .
Secondly , we also have a duty to ensure that the working environment and the ability to compete and to get a job within our Community is also made available and is as accessible as possible .
Looking at some of the suggestions with regard to the maximum levels permitted under the reports , if you just take Ireland as one example , the air quality in Dublin , the capital city , is already meeting the standards that are set down within this report .
Cork city , where I come from , is 50 % better than Dublin and the rest of Ireland , rural Ireland we call it , is 10 % better still .
Surely imposing a European directive and a Europe-wide legislation will seriously impact on these areas , as Members have already admitted there is a cost factor built into this : costs that will be passed on directly to the consumer and costs that will affect our industrial capacity as well as affecting our competitive edge .
To overcome this , Members have suggested that we bring in differential tax incentives to give encouragement and so on .
How does this marry with the idea of the single market ?
Rather than taking up any more time , I would like to say that I will be voting against the reports tomorrow and I hope that through conciliation we can reach a more reasonable suggestion .
Mr President , our whole present disposable lifestyle is a threat to future generations , and continued automatization poses a threat to climactic stability .
Vehicle emissions must be cut by every possible means .
Work must be done at their source , with the development of the combustible engine .
Fuels must be improved .
It is important now to develop viable catalytic convertors for diesel fuels and to improve their quality .
The European oil industry represents the old smokestack capitalism , based on the exploitation of human beings and the destruction of nature and the environment .
The oil industry , though not all companies , opposes limitations on emissions , saying that new investment would have to be found for them .
The industry is acting as if it had to meet these new costs itself .
We all know , however , that investment always ends up with the consumer having to pay .
But it is the polluter who should pay .
That would result in just a minute rise in the price of fuel .
If the polluter does not pay , it is the people who are getting sick who pay .
Even if the European oil industry is not proving competitive , the costs of investment should not get passed on to the consumer .
It is the European Parliament 's duty to refuse to ensure the survival of the oil industry by subsidizing poor quality oil .
Any oil industry which cannot sell its products except at the cost of the pollution of the natural world deserves to go bust .
Mr President , I think it is vital that both Mr Lang and Mrs Hautala 's reports be approved .
It is important if we wish to improve air quality .
Mr President , it is important to remember that , basically , the Auto-Oil programme is about improving the environment and human health .
Many studies have shown that air pollution affects people 's health .
So there is a direct link between increasing mortality and air pollution caused by road traffic .
These studies clearly show that clear limits must be set on motor vehicle emissions , and clear standards must be set for petrol quality .
This means it is important that the levels should be binding , and not merely indicative .
Fixed standards are the only realistic way of achieving the air quality desired .
For the same reason , it is important to limit the exceptions to the standards to the absolute minimum necessary .
This does not mean , of course , that we should ignore the economic aspects .
New technology and higher standards mean increased costs , but the first thing to do is to look at all the relevant variables .
Cost-effectiveness cannot be the only basis for assessing individual mechanisms .
We must assess cost-effectiveness in the light of the improvements and savings to society as a whole .
So I agree that the directive 's proposals should include the solutions which are best for the citizens ' health as well as for the economy .
Experience from California also shows that the Commission 's estimates exaggerate the costs which would be involved in the new petrol quality standards and emission limits .
I believe it would encourage innovation if demands were made on industry .
Hopefully , the directive concerned will encourage the industry to develop vehicles running on renewable sources of energy .
I can therefore heartily support the Council 's joint approach to all the amendments the Committee on the Environment has made .
Mr President , in ecological terms Mrs Hautala and Mr Lange 's reports certainly constitute a shining hour in Parliament 's history .
What might at first sight appear to be a handicap for the automotive industry is in practice a great opportunity .
It was the same with the catalytic converter : people originally said it would be the downfall of the car industry , but in fact it resulted in technical progress .
By sticking to its old position , the Commission is spoiling the prospects for constructive dialogue , which would be a vital opportunity .
So the car will remain the number one environmental enemy .
The debate about the true costs of road traffic will have to be stepped up .
Parliament has offered a solution , but unfortunately it has not been accepted .
If there is a confrontation , there will be no winners , neither the environment nor the car or oil industries .
There will just be losers , which is a great pity .
While Parliament will certainly pass the elk test tomorrow , in my view the Commission has already failed it .
Mr President , Parliament made the right choice at first reading .
It enabled the Commission 's position to be significantly developed since the Council was making somewhat more favourable proposals .
We can go further though and this is what our citizens expect .
Every day we see in the papers that town pollution is on the increase and that the greenhouse effect is threatening us .
It is now imprinted on the collective conscience that we can use technological progress to resolve these problems of civilization , quality of life and health of our people .
It is therefore essential that restrictive and strict standards be set for the year 2005 because this will be an advantage for the automobile industry .
Of course the manufacturers are somewhat hesitant , but they must understand that the credibility of the motor vehicle rests precisely on the possibility of having standards in line with our expectations .
It is all the more important that the European automobile market understands one difficulty , that is , the replacement of the stock of cars on the road .
Only clean , safe cars can legitimize renewing the number of cars on the road , and thus reviving employment in this sector .
We also know that the question of cars already on the road , which has been raised by many colleagues , is essential .
From this point of view , the efforts demanded of the oil industry are essential , for there are a large number of older cars . I hope that Europe will also consider ways for a speedier removal of older cars from our roads , bearing in mind that they often belong to poorer people .
We need a Community strategy to speed up this transformation of the older rolling stock .
Finally , the environment is not the enemy of employment : the evolution of the car is an opportunity for the car industry !
The oil companies , which are blackmailing us over the refineries , have accumulated considerable profits over the years , profits which must be reinvested in order to modernize their industry for the general interest .
They must not then hide behind the environmental question to justify the closures which they had - unfortunately - planned , whatever we decide today .
Mr President , we in Parliament can note with pleasure that the Council has tightened up the Commission 's original proposal on important points and moved in the direction of Parliament 's position .
On the other hand , the majority on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection supported Mrs Hautala 's modifications concerning fuel .
These amendments were sensible considering the short time remaining until implementation in the year 2000 .
It is important to stimulate technical development towards more advanced exhaust gas purification technology and towards more fuel-efficient engines by guaranteeing access to fuel with a very low sulphur content until the year 2005 .
During the transition period we would then also see a substantial improvement with regard to emissions from older vehicles .
This is quite simply a short cut to better air quality .
On the other hand , I think that the Committee on the Environment has gone too far with regard to aromatics in petrol in the year 2000 .
On this point I think the Council has a more realistic approach .
In a large number of modern refineries there is a conflict between sulphur requirements and aromatics requirements .
From the environmental point of view the sulphur requirement is much more important and should therefore be given priority .
In addition , modern catalytic converter technology takes care of the aromatics .
It is also important for Member States to be allowed to take a lead and to have the right to use economic means of control to improve the environment .
In large parts of Sweden a fuel is used which meets the requirements being made for the year 2005 . I can guarantee that the environment has been manifestly improved where this fuel has been used .
It is also easy to use economic means of control and to prevent them from being used in such a way that competition is restricted .
Finally , it is pleasing to note that the development towards cars with zero emissions is moving so quickly .
We can see them , not only as a vision , but also as a reality .
Mr President , the European Parliament will today give its opinion on two proposals for directives in which there is a considerable amount at stake , for the environment , for industry and for employment .
Our position must therefore achieve a fair balance between the desire to improve air quality and to promote new technologies , as well as our desire to maintain competitiveness and employment in the European vehicle and oil industries .
You will tell me it is a little like squaring the circle , and I would like to make a number of observations .
Firstly , reasonable time limits must be defined to allow industry to adapt to the new standards . Secondly , we need to know if controls greater than those strictly necessary would not cause exactly the opposite effects to the ones we are hoping for , in particular an increase in cars , thus provoking an ageing of the cars on the road and a worsening of pollution and safety risks , along with economic difficulties for the manufacturers .
The Council 's position already seemed to be an improvement in relation to that of the Commission .
Parliament is calling for more severe standards and it seems as though some of them can be accepted by the Council .
It is therefore possible to find a satisfactory balance which is not maximalist and which shows that Parliament knows how to fulfil its responsibilities , both at environmental and industrial level .
Mr President , economic arguments have long prevailed in debates on this subject .
On the one hand , the oil industry , with highly disparate technical and financial conditions between the countries of the South and North and , on the other , the automobile industry , bombard us with their arguments .
We , however , would like to concentrate on the issue of the environment and public health .
Air quality is essential to public health : 7 to 10 % of cases of respiratory disease in children and 19 % of cases of pulmonary illnesses are but a few figures that may be attributed to air pollution .
It has been proved that the excessively high concentrations of particles in the air originating from lead reduce children 's intelligence levels .
In some European capitals , the speed limit is reduced in response to air pollution , when traffic is not banned completely .
We wish here to demonstrate and express our support for the position of the Committee on the Environment because this problem also exists in southern Europe .
But we would like to concentrate primarily on three main points .
Firstly , we must combat leaded petrol : it must urgently be eliminated .
The Union and Member States should launch a major information campaign to make citizens aware of the environmental advantages of unleaded petrol .
Secondly , we need to defending the establishment of binding emission values by the year 2005 , contrary to the position of the Council and of the oil industry , because this is the only way to seriously commit the industry to an environmental contract with society as a whole .
Finally , in our view , the role of the European Parliament now , as at first reading , is to raise the benchmark vis--vis the original proposal .
We should also leave the matter of maximum values for sulphur emission for negotiation with the Council , during conciliation procedures . This is because we acknowledge that there are cases , such as in Portugal , where the absence of environmental investment in the sector has caused the postponement of reforms that are today proving to be unavoidable .
Mr President , we face a challenge here today .
Can Parliament coherently defend public health and the environment , maintaining the values of the quality of fuels and continuing to call for better technology in motor vehicles , as stated in the Hautala and Lange reports adopted by the Committee on the Environment ? Or will we give in to the numerous pressures from the economic sectors involved ?
I do not dispute that what we are requesting here implies financial and research efforts by the oil and automobile industries .
But it cannot be denied that air pollution in our cities , including Lisbon and Oporto , frequently reaches levels that threaten public health , and that recent studies confirm that the lead content in children 's blood in risk zones and in urban areas exceeds admissible levels .
There is no doubt that particles , benzine , and other pollutants produced by automobile combustion are highly cancerogenic .
Therefore , we need better cars and better fuels , particularly in view of the fact that no significant technological improvement is possible with the current content of sulphur in petrol and diesel . This is true both for the introduction of a new generation of catalytic converters , or a new generation of engines , such as direct injection for petrol , which has significantly lower consumption which can fall below 25 % in the urban cycle .
Lower consumption means lower spending for consumers , less pollution and less CO2 emissions - the main gas responsible for climate change .
Hence , the calculated annual costs of ESC 1 000 per motor vehicle , and ESC 1 800 per diesel vehicle may not even apply , as a result of the technological evolution leading to the production of better cars with lower consumption .
It should also be emphasized that better fuels immediately mean less pollution , since even today 's cars will function better and produce lower emissions .
The individual cases of CEPSA , REPSOL and PETROGAL cannot force the whole of Europe , and particularly the Spanish and Portuguese populations , to continue to breath health-threatening , polluted air .
If these companies experience particular problems , then it is up to their respective governments to negotiate covenants with them which define time frames and mechanisms .
As a Member of Parliament , I am ready to analyse with an open mind any requests for derogation that may be submitted to me .
However , I cannot hesitate in defending the Huatala and Lange reports which are the only possible way of reconciling conflicting interests in a manner which allows this Parliament democratically to state its position in defending the rights of Europe 's citizens .
Mr President , although we aim , reasonably and justifiably , to lessen the need for traffic , especially car traffic , in transport and regional planning , the unpleasant truth is that the number of cars in Europe , and more particularly globally , is going to grow .
This means increased risk to vulnerable nature and people 's health .
Against this background the Auto-Oil programme is most welcome .
The European Parliament at first reading clearly took a more progressive position than the Commission on which targets for exhaust emissions should be met by the years 2000 and 2005 .
Only binding targets on emissions are valid .
The recommendations of the Council do not put enough pressure on the European oil industry to develop their technology to produce better and cleaner products .
Nor has the Council yet understood the power of tax incentives , which encourage consumers to use better quality fuel .
In any case , this has already happened , and with good results .
Employment is an issue in Europe .
Slowing down the adoption of cleaner technology will not serve to aid employment .
It might go the other way .
Consumer demand favours those refineries which make environmentally friendly products .
Unless these products are available in Europe , other companies and products from outside may come to dominate European markets .
The effects on employment of this are unfathomable .
We must ensure that we remain competitive and that oil products in Europe are of the highest quality .
Mr President , we are all concerned about air quality .
Now we are asking the vehicle and oil industries to make an effort .
Let us look first at the vehicle manufacturers .
For the past thirty years we have been asking them to make significant efforts , and they have contributed some 90 % to the improvement of air quality in terms of their vehicles ' emissions .
Now we are asking them to comply with even more stringent controls .
I am more in favour of the common position , considering that the constraints imposed it are already significant .
In my opinion the figures must be made compulsory so that our industries can be clear on the issue and define their strategies for development accordingly .
I therefore believe that it is particularly important that the measures be made compulsory by the year 2005 .
But technological developments in the area of car manufacture will not be able to truly bear fruit unless there is a manifest improvement in the quality of fuel .
In this respect , it is absolutely necessary that the oil companies make the necessary efforts .
Up until now , it is not they who have participated most in the improvement of air quality .
It is thus important that the oil companies make an effort to reduce the level of sulphur , amongst other things .
We know it is essential for the nitrogen oxide catalytic converter , and in my opinion this is particularly important .
That is why I wish to support fully and vote for the Hautala report , because it seems to me completely incoherent to call for efforts from the vehicle industry and not to ask for significant efforts on the part of the oil industry in order to make the new technologies completely effective .
That is all I wanted to say .
May I add that if fuel is improved , we will immediately see the short-term effects , since this will concern all vehicles and we will immediately note improvements in air quality .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the car is part of our freedom .
We do not want to give it up , and the car is essential for our economy .
But it is a very young means of transport , still at the beginning of its life cycle .
For me , it is fascinating what the car industry is already capable of .
The competition to get a better and more environmentally friendly car on the market first , the car of the future , is enormous .
However , it is certainly not our job as Members of Parliament to protect the automotive industry in its efforts to produce cars despite the impact on the market and the health of our population .
I also find it fascinating that Renault 's exhaust gas expert , Mr Hublain , is calling on this Parliament to adopt stricter requirements for petrol and diesel .
Better fuels are the key to reducing emissions , and we must give them our wholehearted support .
The oil companies are worried about their high investments .
For one thing , the fuels Parliament wants to see already exist in various countries .
No-one denies they will involve greater investment , but the oil companies ' balance sheets are remarkably healthy ; they are making enormous profits .
I am sure they can take these investments in their stride .
To avoid any misunderstandings , I have nothing against large international companies or anyone else making big profits , but it is our job to look after our population 's health , and it is also one of the Community 's declared objectives .
As Members of Parliament , we are bound to implement the duties of the Community as laid down in the treaties .
We will have a chance to put this into practice in tomorrow 's vote .
Mr President , this debate has been something of a battle between the vehicle and the oil industries to woo the European Parliament to one or other side .
I regret that because the position is rather more complicated by the chemistry of this Parliament itself .
It has to be recognized that the European Parliament has built up - and we see this in the persons of our rapporteurs - a certain expertise in this field .
Parliament is reluctant to abdicate a role in the conciliation process which we would do if we simply said ' fine ' to the common position .
I would ask you to remember that this is the last open debate to be had on these subjects before they disappear into the Conciliation Committee .
I and my British Conservative colleagues are likely to support the Hautala amendments but we have our doubts over some of those proposed by Mr Lange .
We accept that there are some Lange amendments which require changes in vehicle production that would be very difficult if not impossible to bring about within the accelerated time scale proposed .
On the other hand , we see the Hautala amendments as likely to bring about improvements quite rapidly which will affect all vehicles on the road and not simply the very new ones .
However , I want to sound an alarm over the question of leaded petrol .
We should not look kindly on legislation that , on the one hand , says that all leaded petrol will be banned from 1 January 2000 and then also says that where a country can plead socioeconomic difficulties this ban will not have to apply until the year 2005 .
This kind of thing makes it very difficult to argue that we all care equally about Europe 's environment .
In some of our more crowded ancient cities enormous damage is being done to people 's health by emissions from leaded petrol engines .
The let-out clause for such countries would allow this to continue for another seven years .
We welcome the ban from January 2000 but we owe it to the millions of people who own cars that run on leaded petrol to tell them what happens then .
In Britain there will be 1.3 million cars at least still on the road in 2000 that were designed to run on leaded petrol .
Imagine the headlines : ' Brussels drives us off the road ' .
It is now up to the oil industry and to the governments in the countries which have no contingency plan to find some way out to offer people who own these cars , either through the marketing of lead additives or through the marketing of re-formulated petrol .
We owe it to these people and the Commission , national governments and the European Parliament should come up with some solution for them .
Mr President , Commissioners , the citizens of Europe are rightly asking to be able to breathe clean air in their cities , and the Auto-Oil programme , which the European Parliament is preparing to vote on at second reading , proposes a global strategy for trying to achieve specific air quality objectives , in line with the recommendations of the World Health Organization .
We are faced with two very important measures that will certainly have an impact on the environment as well as on the industrial strategies of our countries : the Hautala report proposes to establish new regulations on petrol by the years 2000-2005 , particularly as regards the percentage of reduction in petrol , aromatic products and sulphur contained in fuels , that are causing serious illnesses such as cancer ; and the Lange report proposes to make certain modifications to engines by those same dates , providing them , for example , with a special on-board diagnostics system ( OBD ) to control the limit values for emissions .
According to the Lange report , the motor industry is therefore required , in a realistic and technically feasible space of time , to adapt to the specific limits laid down by the directive while , with the Hautala report , we can go further than the common position , maintaining the modifications introduced by the Committee on the Environment , aimed mainly at establishing stricter limits for petrol and diesel .
Italy , in anticipation of the Community directive , has imposed severe limits for some time on petrol ( 1 % ) , aromatics ( 35 % ) and oxygenized products ( 2.7 % ) and , apart from several problems with sulphur and lead - for which stricter limits should be achieved by 2005 - has certainly the best petrol in Europe today .
I hope that these directives , improved by Parliament during conciliation , are approved and come into effect as soon as possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of a long list of speakers , including many from my group , it is up to me to say something new .
That is not an easy task , but I think I can manage .
First of all , I would like to set out the position of the Group of the European People 's Party .
Some differences certainly emerged in this debate .
It has been quite a struggle , but I can inform you that my group is in favour of the Lange report and the Hautala report .
We have not been able to support all the details .
However , we are first and foremost in favour of mandatory values for 2005 in both reports , and I think that is the key issue .
I am glad that we have achieved this result and that we will therefore be giving this our 314 votes at tomorrow 's sitting .
I would like to make a comment now on competition .
I believe it is right that we have discussed the competitiveness of German industry and industry in other Member States ; it is also right that these industries have presented the problems to us and that we are looking at this in a global European context .
But there is an important difference between this and our normal debates .
We often burden our industry with conditions that other players on the world market do not have to comply with , which therefore restricts competition .
This case is totally different , because if a company or a refinery outside the EU wants to sell petrol within the EU , it has to comply with our conditions .
So it is not a question of a distortion of competition that will push up our production costs , but rather a sensible means of protecting the environment and enhancing our capacity for innovation .
Finally , I would like to make a comment to the Commission .
I am sorry that Mr Bangemann is not with us .
I would like to say this to him personally , but you can pass it on to him , Mrs Bjerregaard .
We have a new European Union health policy , thanks to this Parliament .
Even Mr Bangemann changed his view .
He brought forward some good proposals on baby food and the labelling of maize and soya .
Please tell him that we would be delighted if he decided to share Parliament 's viewpoint .
Perhaps that will make him realize what is needed , and enable us to get a really good result in the Conciliation Committee .
Mr President , I would simply like to say thank you for the debate .
I think it has been exciting to listen to all the contributions on the problems this report raises .
It has also been clear to the Commission that there has been considerable support for the reports by Mr Lange and Mrs Hautala .
All we can do now is await the vote tomorrow and prepare ourselves to begin conciliation procedures .
I can only say that I hope we can get this started quickly .
I think the proposals deserve our unanimity so they can be applied in real life .
As I see during the debate today , we are at any rate agreed on the goals , and so it should be possible to achieve a result within a reasonable period of time .
So thank you for the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
European Environment Agency -European environment information and observation network
The next item is K. Collins ' report ( A4-0030 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EEC ) amending Council Regulation EEC No 1210 / 90 on the establishment of the European Environment Agency and the European environment information and observation network ( COM ( 97 ) 0282 - C4-0363 / 97-97 / 0168 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , the Agency regulation which we are , I hope , going to conclude this evening , entered into force in October 1993 .
I do not need to go into the history of it .
It was a fairly vexed history at the time .
At the time it provided for a review of the regulation two years later .
However , the review itself was then postponed for a further two years to allow it to be a fully operational Agency .
If it had happened earlier it would not have been operational .
The Commission proposal , when it came , was fairly uncontroversial and the aim of the amendments to the proposal is to strengthen existing provisions and thereby allow the Agency to consolidate its work to date .
However , I think a lot of people still do not understand what the functions of the Agency are .
That came through very clearly indeed when we were discussing it in committee .
I would like , therefore , tonight , to lay out the aims of the Agency and then describe how my amendments will further them .
The key reason for setting up the Environment Agency in the first place was to facilitate the collection of comparable environmental data across the Community , across the whole of Europe , indeed .
Until the establishment of the Agency we had no way of comparing the state of each nation 's environment , and yet comparable data are clearly a prerequisite for an effective environment policy .
Quite simply put , the Member States all collected environmental data , but you could not compare Spain with Portugal ; you could not compare Portugal with Greece , nor Greece with Germany , nor Germany with the United Kingdom .
So we could not have an overall view of the state of the environment in the Community .
That was the reason , in the first instance , for setting up the Agency .
The long-term aim is for the Commission to use the data supplied to the Agency to help monitor the state of the European Union environment and also to implement environment policies more effectively .
The Commission reviews the Agency performance to date .
Basically its review is pretty favourable .
It suggests some new areas for Agency action and , broadly speaking , is in favour of further increased cooperation between the Agency itself and third countries , particularly those in central and eastern Europe .
We very much welcome that , with the prospect of enlargement looming .
However , there are certain gaps in the review .
I have attempted to fill these with my amendments to the report .
For instance , the Commission proposal overlooks the very important role of Parliament .
It says very little about it .
It tends to over-emphasize the role played by the Commission and the Council .
I can understand why that happens , but I think it is right that we should correct it .
I also feel that the Agency and the Commission need to put in place a framework in order to facilitate greater cooperation between them and avoid duplication of each other 's work .
The Commission should not be doing work that is being done by the Agency , and the Agency should not be doing work that is being done by the Commission .
We have tried to clarify that .
As the Agency plays a key role as information gatherer in the Community in order to aid the Commission 's implementation and enforcement of legislation , it should be encouraged to cooperate more with bodies such as IMPEL because enforcement and implementation are key features of the development of environment policy in the Community .
It is clear that in order to provide information to the general public the Agency needs to publish documents in more languages , wherever possible .
That is one of the reasons why I fully support , for example , Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza 's amendment .
I believe that the provision of the repository of information and a data register will allow the Agency to disseminate information better to the general public .
That is also a very important feature of environment policy in the Community .
Finally , if we are going to require the Agency , and we do , to produce a multi-annual work programme , then that has to be complemented by a multi-annual budget .
To do one without the other , I think , and the committee believes this , is entirely inconsistent .
That final point is very important because the key challenge faced by the Agency in the view of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection over the coming years will be the budgetary challenge .
Ladies and gentlemen , we would do well to note that simply because the Agency has not had its functions considerably expanded does not mean that it should have its budget frozen or reduced .
We need to consolidate its work .
This , after all , is an Agency that contributes significantly to European Union policy and could contribute even more significantly in the future .
Therefore it needs a degree of autonomy .
It requires the support of Parliament behind it .
The Agency needs to consolidate its work to date and then be allowed to expand if and when necessary .
But it can only do that if it receives the right budget .
Frankly , some of the attitudes displayed in some of the amendments that we received from one important committee of Parliament did not suggest that anybody really understood that properly .
This is a functional Agency .
It is not a think-tank .
It is necessary for the Community .
It is a functional part of the Community and needs to be treated as such .
Mr President , this report is part of a five-year review of the European Environment Agency which is based in Copenhagen .
The aim of the Commission review is to decide if the agency 's status and tasks need upgrading .
Obviously the nature and substance of its work is more a matter for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection than for the Committee on Budgets .
In the light of the financial constraints which apply right across the whole of the European Union , the budgetary implications for this agency are fundamental to its future .
Before I go any further I should like to congratulate the Director and staff of the Environment Agency on the way in which they have managed successfully to implement the objectives set out in the founding regulation and to express my appreciation of the way in which the agency has supported Parliament 's moves towards transparency and accountability and the harmonization of the regulations .
The draft report by Mr Collins has taken over one of the three amendments tabled by the Committee on Budgets , the one on Article 1 ( 6 ) .
The initiative recommended by this amendment will provide Parliament , as the political and budgetary authority , with the right to evaluate for the first time the cost-effectiveness of the environmental policy of the Union .
The tasks which are decentralized and executed by a satellite body and the activities run at a centralized level by the Commission need to be clearly defined in order to ensure complementarity and to avoid duplication .
On the other hand , Parliament has stated clear principles for all the agencies within the 1998 procedure .
Since the budget and the establishment plan are published in the budget and therefore belong to budgetary remarks , any change to them needs to be communicated to the budgetary authority .
The Committee on Budgets has been consistent with the Parliament 's decision and has tabled its Amendment No 1 in this sense .
This was an opportunity to enable the Environment Agency to draw down resources for alternative budget lines and could have helped the agency to receive extra payments for rented services as its basic regulation allows , provided transparency is assured .
If the Environment Committee had maintained this amendment it would have given legislative coverage to that budgetary position .
We are sad that this has not been taken up .
The Committee on Budgets is also concerned about the annuality of the budget process in the Environment Committee 's Amendment No 8 .
In the same way , between the link between the work programme and the approved budget , there is now a horizontal principle adopted by Parliament which applies to all agencies and which gives them some sense of flexibility to make a selection of their priorities .
Therefore , the Committee on Budgets has introduced this principle in the legislative proposal .
Mr President , there can be no doubt that we think the Environment Agency in Copenhagen has made a good start to its activities .
We now hope that with these opinions we can make the Environment Agency even better .
The starting point for the Committee on Research has partly been to not demand too many changes , since the Environment Agency has just started many of its new tasks .
However , we have proposed some minor changes .
The Agency 's task is to provide us with information about environmental policy so that we can conduct a good environmental policy .
We on the Committee on Research think there should be a unit within the Environment Agency to check the quality of data and assess the uncertainty in the material collected from the various countries .
The main task of this unit would be to continuously monitor the quality of the data being offered and to be expressly responsible for identifying and describing the uncertainty which there is in much of the data collected .
In addition , the unit should also have the authority to question the national data collected , and be given sufficient resources , if appropriate , to seek and obtain alternative information .
It is only with relevant information that we can make the necessary and right decisions in the environmental sector .
Within the Environment Agency a great deal of expertise about the environmental area has also been built up .
It would therefore be a great mistake if this environmental expertise was not used .
Consequently , the Committee on Research recommends that the Environment Agency should not only do work to order , for example where giving advice and expert opinions are concerned , but that it should also be able to initiate various projects itself .
In addition , it is , of course , important for us to be able to disseminate the information which the Environment Agency collects so that everyone is able to use it , not least the general public and non-governmental organizations , the research community , students , etcetera , in order to make the material and thus the EU 's environmental policy as good as possible in future .
Mr President , for us , the Members involved in the struggle to create and establish the European Environment Agency , nothing is more satisfying than the Collins report on the assessment and revision of that Agency 's responsibilities .
As Mr Collins shows , in the short time it has been in existence the Agency has amply fulfilled the objectives established by the then President of the Commission , Jacques Delors .
It has accurately and competently provided objective , comparable information on the environmental situation in Europe , so that Parliament , the Commission and the Member States can all respond appropriately .
Having said that , I just want to spend a moment on one aspect of the new responsibilities : the area of strengthening its information function .
In other words , whenever possible , the Agency should try to issue its publications in all the official languages of the European Union , as Mr Collins said .
Otherwise , the valuable work the Agency does to spread information would be diminished , and it would cease to fulfil its main objective .
I realize , Mr President , that that involves extra expense .
But the cost of environmental damage is greater , and one of the objectives of the European Environment Agency is to prevent that very damage , as I said a moment ago .
An amendment has been presented on this point and I hope the Commission and the Council will see fit to accept it .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , of course the European Environmental Agency wasted a lot of time at the beginning , because it was three years until its location was decided .
We are still making up for that lost time .
Nevertheless , despite all the problems that entailed , the Agency has done some very good functional work , which I would particularly like to acknowledge here .
However , it is also true to say that the amendments to the regulation on the establishment of the European Environmental Agency essentially reflect the functional requirements that have since become apparent , and that only limited changes in its role are envisaged .
The planned widening of the Agency 's role relates to supporting the Commission in monitoring environmental impact and in producing reports , disseminating information on environmental research and setting up a repository of environmental information .
We also particularly welcome the proposal that the Agency should support the Commission as regards the reports .
The objective of involving the Agency in reports must , however , be to avoid duplication in cases when the Commission and the Agency separately request data and reports from Member States . We also need to ensure that the Commission and the Agency act on the basis of the same sets of data .
In monitoring the work of the EEA we need to put special emphasis on the need , as a long-term objective , to harmonize national environmental information systems with the European environment information and observation network ; to ensure close coordination between the Agency and the Member States on the subject and methods of data acquisition ; and lastly , to make sure that we do not create data cemeteries by gathering and archiving unwanted and useless data .
On a formal note , I must once again criticize the Commission for not presenting a consolidated proposal , which made the discussions Mr Collins led considerably more difficult .
Mr President , I congratulate our rapporteur on the studied and calm analysis of the way which the Agency is performing .
It is very good and I congratulate the Commission also on that .
I am bound to say that , until we get some helicopters in the Agency and introduce the concept of people coming from Copenhagen to put matters right , with those helicopters descending upon areas of serious environmental damage , then nobody is going to take it that seriously .
But if we saw a helicopter they would and I am not being entirely silly about this because , although I have had this debate with my colleagues in the Environment Committee , I am conscious that our aspirations for the Agency are completely different from that what has been set up .
As Mrs Schleicher said , it is a tame cemetery for data , that is not really good enough .
What we should be aspiring to - and it would necessarily mean a change in the status and the statute of the Agency - is an Agency which is capable of carrying out international inspection .
That means paying serious attention to the issue of enforcement which sadly , at the moment , is overlooked .
We do not have the mechanism by which environmental law and policy can be enforced throughout the Union partly because that is still done by the nation-states .
Nobody is going to respect nation-state agencies ; they would however respect , in my view , an Agency which was international in composition and was an inspectorate of inspectorates .
That is a long way away and perhaps we should not be making that kind of assessment of the Agency work so far , but unless somebody says from time to time that those should be the aspirations of the Agency , then it was surely not worthwhile Copenhagen putting up the understandable fight that it did to have the institution based there .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the decision in 1990 to found a scientifically independent European Environment Agency for the collection , processing and analysis of environmental data at a European level was an important development in the attempt to work out a credible and coherent policy for the environment sector in the European Union .
Four years after that Agency began operating , we are called upon , on the basis of experiences and appraisals , to approve amendments in its founding regulation that will improve its work .
The main aim of the amendments must be to extend and assist the collection and processing of reliable facts and figures , and especially the provision of information both to the institutional bodies and to the Member States for the elaboration of measures and policies .
We therefore favour improved information and the formation of links between the Agency 's work and the Community 's institutional bodies , especially a stronger link between the Agency and the European Parliament .
This is because Parliament 's contribution to the preparation of policy guidelines and its participation in the process of legislation play a definitive and continually increasing role in the final formulation of environmental policy in the European Union .
The Commission should not overlook that fact .
Besides , we must stress that the policy of broader information dissemination via networks and telematic applications to all the decision-making centres , and to the wider public , will also contribute positively towards the appraisal of solutions and help make people aware of the justification and use of environmentally friendly technologies .
We know that the correct application of Community law is today the Achilles ' heel of environment protection policy in the European Union .
The Agency can play an important part in collecting data and monitoring compliance with Community law once the use of the IMPEL network has been reinforced and extended .
We are in favour of the Agency incorporating support for the Commission in the process of information exchange and the development of criteria for the assessment of environmental impact into its duties , since important problems have emerged in all the Member States due to the incorrect application of that directive .
The amendments proposed are , I believe , necessary if the Agency 's valuable work is to continue at European level , especially with the challenges the European Union will be facing when the forthcoming enlargement takes place .
Mr President , may I start by thanking the European Parliament for having put this amendment to the regulations on the Environmental Agency on the agenda .
I think it is important that we get these proposals passed as soon as possible , so that the Agency can start working under its new operating conditions .
I would also like to thank Ken Collins , the rapporteur , for the work which has gone into the report .
The Agency has got off to a good start , and its work is progressing well , as has been emphasized in the debate here .
This is gratifying , and I know that Parliament thinks the Agency is very important .
In the public debate , we have also been very pleased by the reports which the Agency has published , so we must continue to push on .
And let me start by pointing out an important opportunity for development .
It is vital that the Agency comes to play a role in the development of central and eastern Europe .
We must ensure that the countries which so desire can be involved in the Agency 's work , as Mr Collins , the rapporteur , also emphasized .
I think the rapporteur 's amendments are very positive , and I am very pleased at the constructive comments on the Commission 's proposals .
Amendment No 1 concerns the Agency 's support for developing and implementing environmental policy .
The Commission accepts both the proposal to return to the original wording of the regulations and references to other EU institutions .
Nor is there any problem with the reference to the schedule of work .
So we are agreed that there will be close cooperation , and we will work towards that .
Amendment No 2 states that the information records as proposed are to include a data register .
The Commission supports this , but I have been informed that there may be some legal obstacles to the subsequent text on reporting on the Community and national legislation and so we will have to look at this more closely .
The amendment also refers to enforcement , and this really takes us back to previous debates .
The Agency 's main role is to provide the institutions of the Community and Member States with information on what is happening with our environment .
This can be achieved by working closely with Member States .
If we start to mix the information role with an enforcement role and incorporate this in the regulations , we risk undermining the cooperation and hence the effectiveness of the Agency .
In fact , this may mean that we risk not getting the information we need , and that also makes it clear that I do not share the view which Ian White expressed in his contribution .
I do not feel we should include enforcement in the Agency 's tasks , because it is assumed that the conclusions which the Agency reaches on the environmental situation will tell us more about whether our legislation and mechanisms are being effective .
And , as Parliament knows , I have not been backward when it comes to enforcement .
Amendments Nos 3 and 6 are useful proposals which the Commission accepts .
As far as Amendment No 4 is concerned , we can only accept the wording that the Agency will ensure that environmental information is widely distributed if we can add a note to the effect that , in particular , this includes information on the environmental situation .
This will help focus work on the Agency 's skills and knowledge without preventing work in other fields .
We accept the demand for enabling the use of all official languages which both Mr Collins and Mrs Diez de Rivera wanted .
However , we think the reference to a new article 2.14 is superfluous .
As far as Amendment No 5 is concerned , the legal department informs us that Parliament 's proposals should not propose amendments to articles which have already been amended in the Commission 's proposals .
Having said that , we can support the point on IMPEL which Mr Collins also brought up today , and I can tell you that cooperation is already in place , as was confirmed at the last IMPEL meeting .
I can also state that the Council 's environmental working party is considering how this specific reference can be included in the regulations .
Amendment Nos 7 and 8 are understandable , but we believe they are unnecessary .
Finally , as regards Amendment No 9 , we can support the comment that the next audit of the Agency 's work should be carried out as part of developing the EU 's environmental policy in general .
The Agency can help us considerably by establishing itself as an independent , objective supplier of reliable information : this could be on greenhouse gas emissions , coolant tanks and so on .
In view of this , I cannot rule out assessing profitability , and the Commission 's proposals therefore include a demand for an assessment of results and effectiveness in 1999 .
However , profitability will be examined in terms of the Agency 's own targets , roles and results and not in any wider context such as the Commission 's targets .
Finally , I would like to say that we can also accept the comment in Amendment No 9 that Parliament should also receive the audit report by 15 September 1999 , and I would like to end by giving my thanks once more for the debate we have had today and thanking Mr Collins , the rapporteur , for all the work on the proposals .
Once again , the focus has been on the Agency 's work , and that is good .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Ionized food
Mr President , I want to congratulate Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz on her long involvement in this matter which far preceded my coming into this Parliament and may well go on long after I have left it .
Apparently the international radura label is sending Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz blind .
There are many things that might send you blind , but I would not have thought this innocent label is one of them .
It is one of the issues on which the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection took a different view in its own debate from the point of view the rapporteur has put today .
Opinion is still divided on when and how irradiation can be used for the preservation of food .
What has changed , of course , in these eight years - and this makes it impossible for us to go back to a renewed first reading - is the arrival of the Single Market .
In many Member States now , which have set their face against irradiation , there is a probability that they will now have to admit irradiated foods whether they like it or not .
Tesco , in my country , has shown that a not insignificant percentage of foodstuffs not declared as irradiated have been found to be so .
So I think one of the first principles which is in the proposals that have come back to us in this long-delayed common position which we have been presented with is that you should put consumer safety - and first , and foremost , information - at the head of our agenda .
The principles which should guide us today have been clear since that first reading debate .
They are : only irradiate when public health gains and the consumer benefits ; label with accuracy but not with hysteria ; and strictly limit the products which are so treated with additions subject to codecision .
Frogs ' legs , which Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz mentioned , are now struck off from the list of products , and quite rightly so .
We are now down to three products .
We do not want to see further additions without a quite specific procedure subject to codecision once more before they are authorized .
This is what the Environment Committee 's own amendments have attempted .
The consensus that we have built there , supplemented tonight , I hope , by agreement on the radura label - I look forward to hearing what the spokesman of the EPP says on this because they have been very reluctant to have any proper warning labelling - is the best approach , rather than the skull and cross-bones approach which we have had from the rapporteur .
I do not know which of the amendments will be ruled in order because a number were struck out in the Environment Committee .
So it is hard to argue a hypothesis .
We do not know what you will accept at this stage .
We cannot support Amendments Nos 29 , 31 , 32 and 33 because the key cautionary words there - what the rapporteur wishes to say - have been absorbed into the other committee amendments or by alternative symbols or the careful wording we have put in our Amendment No 30 .
In conclusion , what we want is a precautionary framework and not a prohibitive diatribe .
I appeal to colleagues to support the amendments of the Environment Committee .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can understand the rapporteur 's dissatisfaction at the rejection of these amendments which are only made necessary in the first place because of a new report from the Council .
I urge the President to reconsider this , because we really need these amendments .
They concern new issues that we need to vote on , in my opinion .
So I too believe it is high time we made some headway on the directive on the irradiation of foodstuffs .
A start was made many years back .
The previous speakers have already mentioned that it took the Council eight years to reach a decision .
Of course national regulations range from a complete ban on irradiation to its unrestricted use .
That means there will naturally be problems in reaching a consensus , but eight years seems a bit too long to me .
At the heart of all this are the people who ultimately consume these foodstuffs , the consumers .
I believe that they should be able to tell if a product has been irradiated or not .
The labelling requirement takes account of this and is therefore an essential component of this directive .
Mr Whitehead , we need to clearly follow the labelling directive here , as it shows us the way forward .
Madam rapporteur , you yourself have seen the problems with new signs and symbols .
They will not work .
Let us stick to what the consumer knows and write it on the label .
As far as I am concerned we could also stipulate the dimensions in centimetres or some other unit .
But consumers are used to the label showing how a product has been treated .
So I would like to make a plea that we should proceed along the lines of the labelling directive , which seems far better .
Another extremely important issue is the detectability of irradiation .
Without it , how can we spot any inaccurate information on labels ?
If we are to allow foodstuffs to be irradiated , we must ensure that the interests of the consumer are protected and that proper monitoring is possible .
These proposals would guarantee that .
Furthermore , we must stick to the principle that hygiene and health provisions , and satisfactory production and farming methods , in accordance with European standards should always be given priority over irradiating foodstuffs .
We must veto any attempts to rely on irradiation instead because it might be cheaper .
We have our consumers ' health in our hands here today .
We take this responsibility seriously and call for compulsory labelling and for checks on irradiated products , in order to protect Europe 's consumers .
We in this Parliament naturally want to take part in the important decision-making process that lies ahead .
Nothing inspires more confidence in consumers than open discussion in Parliament .
We will certainly have enough to discuss when it comes to the list of approved foods .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal regarding the ionization of food was presented for first reading in 1989 .
It raised so many problems , so many fears on the part of the general public , Parliament and the Council , that the latter did not adopt a common position until 27 October 1997 , eight years later !
To clarify the debate , two quite distinct parts have been proposed : on the one hand , a framework directive regarding the general conditions for food ionization , and on the other , an implementing directive establishing the list of food products which may be ionized , a list which currently consists of only one category of product : herbs and spices . This has been agreed on , there are no complaints , but it still has to be implemented in stages until 31 December 2000 , in consultation with the Scientific Committee for Food .
We can congratulate ourselves on the adoption of this directive , whose objective is firstly to safeguard health , but also to provide the consumer with sufficient information .
Indeed , all the studies carried out up until now have unambiguously demonstrated that ionization of food products poses no risk whatsoever to the health and safety of the consumer .
The ionization of food , of products susceptible to contamination , for example , must even be considered as beneficial to the consumer by providing safer , healthier food and by preserving the nutritional quality of the product better than other techniques .
However , this method must not serve to cover up defective preparation of a food product , nor be employed when it is not necessary .
In conclusion , this directive brings every possible guarantee of clear information and control of the different stages of food ionization .
It can be voted for without the amendments proposed by the rapporteur , which bring no improvement and which , on the contrary , risk causing detrimental confusion by using a symbol , which is misleadingly worrying , which would label food as " radura ' when an unambiguous label has already been provided for .
Mr President , I would first like to congratulate the rapporteur on her work on this report .
In the common position irradiation is accepted as a possible method of preserving foodstuffs .
Even though at present there is only one category , which was mentioned earlier , namely herbs and spices , it is still the idea that it should be possible to use it for considerably more foodstuffs .
I believe that is what people must take into consideration when they decide on this issue .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has put its finger on the health aspects .
I think that is important and would appeal to the Members of this House to support the amendments from the Committee on the Environment .
Then there will be an opportunity to further strengthen the opinions in the common position .
We know that in today 's EU it is the case that certain countries allow the irradiation of foodstuffs , while other countries do not allow it , such as Sweden and Germany .
Personally I am of the opinion that radiation does not belong together with food and foodstuffs .
It should therefore not be allowed to happen .
In itself , what has been said here may be true , that it does not present any risk to human health .
There are also tough requirements so that it is not allowed to present any risk .
However , there is another aspect , namely the false impression of freshness which irradiated foodstuffs can give .
Food can look as if it is quite fresh , even though underneath it is old and quite bad .
That is a way to mislead consumers .
In this respect , it does not help no matter how many labels are put on food because the appearance itself misleads consumers .
For my part , I am going to support the rapporteur 's amendments in this House , even though my group is limiting itself mainly to supporting the amendments proposed by the Committee on the Environment .
I see it as two steps : first and foremost that we support the Committee on the Environment ; but the same time it would make sense to go a step further and support the amendments which have been presented to the parliamentary debate by the Green Group .
Mr President , the fact that several Member States have already been imposing a ban on the irradiation of foodstuffs for many years , and that this has worked very well , shows that irradiation is fundamentally unnecessary as a method of preserving food .
There are also clear disadvantages with losses in nutritional value when you extend the shelf life of foodstuffs .
The best thing in this situation would be if we could decide on a ban on the irradiation of foodstuffs with the exception of herbs and spices , but we do not have that option here .
The choice between the Council 's position and the proposals of the Committee on the Environment is simple .
The Committee on the Environment tightens the rules in this area on a number of points , not least with regard to labelling , the view on hygiene and health practices which cannot be substituted by irradiation , and methods of analysis .
My group is therefore going to vote in favour , not only of the Committee on the Environment 's amendments , but also most of the amendments proposed by the Green Group .
Mr President , in October 1989 I was amongst those who voted for my colleague , Mrs Block von Blottnitz 's report , who at the time was no longer here . She had been replaced by Mrs Quistoudt-Rowohl but in fact it was she who had drawn up the report .
This report , which was voted for by a very large majority , proposed the banning of the principle of food irradiation , with the exception of herbs and spices .
The position of the Council , which is a double one , and which has taken eight years to reach us , is based on the opposite logic .
Now it is setting up this method as a method of food conservation with , firstly , the possibility of irradiating herbs and spices .
Given the enormous amount of time that has lapsed , I therefore find it logical to accept all the amendments which move in the direction of re-establishing the position at the time of the first reading .
I note that some of the amendments will not be put to the vote , unless the Presidency changes its mind before tomorrow , in particular Amendment No 27 , but also two amendments which were approved by the Committee on the Environment , numbers 10 and 13 .
Nevertheless , there is a problem with this .
The Chairman of the Committee on the Environment rejected certain amendments but accepted others and the Presidency of the Parliament has taken another position .
You must admit that this makes things a bit messy .
In such conditions , wisdom would suggest that all of the amendments are accepted and submitted to the vote , in the knowledge that some will not be voted for .
I would though like to ask for two types of amendment : those which recommend a logo .
I have furthermore cosigned , with Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , an amendment requesting that there should be a very clear logo .
Indeed , the labelling as it is anticipated is insufficient , we all know that , and does not enable the consumer to be seriously informed .
In addition , I believe that it is necessary to have a systematic method of analysis .
How can we accept that irradiated products may be put on the market when a standardized and effective method of analysis does not exist ?
It is unacceptable .
You cannot have a ruling which has no method of verifying whether it has been respected or not .
It is incoherent .
I therefore propose that we vote for these amendments through a concern for coherence , in particular , Amendment No 27 .
Mr President , common consumption rules in the EU are good in principle , as there is a considerable volume of goods in circulation .
When goods cross frontiers , we risk having to accept irradiated products in practice , unless this field is regulated .
Irradiating food must not become the solution to long distance haulage and poor storage .
An irradiated apple may look fresh , but actually be old .
Shops can continue to sell food past its sell-by date if irradiation is allowed .
The Council proposes that very few foods may be irradiated - only spices .
I am satisfied with that .
But , unfortunately , gradually extending the allowed list could alter this situation .
The requirements are stringent , that must be admitted , but it is essential that things happen out in the open , with Parliament 's involvement and in accordance with important health and consumer principles .
One of the main principles of the EU 's consumer legislation is that consumers must not be misled .
They would be if we allowed irradiation , because food would appear to be different from how it actually is .
The need for irradiation as a way of preserving food is also hard to see .
Europe has mountains of food .
If food can be irradiated , it must be marked in any case .
Consumers must be able to choose , even in the cases which pass the health test ; I support the studies of the health risks from irradiation .
Nor does irradiation deal with all the toxins in food .
On the contrary , some of them thrive on it .
It is also important to say what methods of irradiation may be used .
This is an aspect the Council has overlooked , but which the European Parliament 's Committee on the Environment will be taking up .
Mr President , I can agree wholeheartedly with my party colleague , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz .
The irradiation of foodstuffs is risky and unnecessary , at least for all foodstuffs with the possible exception of certain herbs and spices .
That is also the official view of the Swedish government .
Under current Swedish rules , irradiation is banned except for certain herbs and spices .
That makes this a very special case for Sweden .
One of the most important promises given before Sweden 's membership of the EU was that no rules for the protection of health and the environment would have to be weakened .
I repeat : no such rules would have to be weakened .
If Parliament does not follow Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ' amendments , Sweden will be forced to weaken its legislation .
That would further intensify the crisis which exists , for many reasons , between Sweden and the EU .
If that happens , it would be the most serious weakening of Swedish health rules , so I really hope that Parliament supports Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ' amendments .
Mr President , I find myself having to take part in this second reading debate and vote , despite the fact that the first reading took place before my country joined the European Union , so that neither I nor anyone else from my country had an opportunity then to bring forward ideas or modifications that could be reintroduced as amendments now .
I really think that in view of all the changes in the European Community and given its enlargement , we need to rethink the rules for first and second readings and conciliation , so that all Member States are on the same footing .
As for the subject matter itself , my view is that we should avoid irradiating foodstuffs , because I am afraid that it will be used to give an appearance of freshness and as a substitute for other hygiene measures , thus misleading consumers .
Nevertheless , I believe that we need to proceed with this second reading and that the vote in the part-session should mirror the vote in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , because information , labelling and above all checks on irradiated products need to be prescribed in the interests of consumers throughout the internal market . That is the only way to guarantee that consumers have a free choice of foodstuffs .
I also think it is particularly important that we should be able to follow the deliberations of the Standing Committee on Foodstuffs in public , that we should have a say , and I do not mean just having an influence on which foodstuffs are added to the herbs and spices already on the list . We also need to have information on the duration and strength of the irradiation of individual foodstuffs , which is also important .
Only openness and labelling will convince consumers that the European Parliament and the European Union are concerned about preventive health protection and are working on it .
Mr President , the Commission 's 1989 proposals were aimed at establishing a system of close checks on irradiated food , right through from producers ' use of the process to sales of products to end-users .
To make it easier to get legislation passed on this subject , the Council divided the proposals into two parts , namely a framework directive and an implementation directive , with a list of the foodstuffs which could be irradiated .
The eight category of foods in the Commission 's proposals as amended were reduced to one in the common position , namely dried , aromatic spices , including roots .
On the proposal 's position on whether it is necessary to use standardised methods of inspection to detect if food has been irradiated , I must point out that controls on many other preservation processes involve administrative and not laboratory checks .
As you will know , the standardisation work is being carried out by an independent body , the CEN .
Like other foods , irradiated food is covered by the control directives , namely Directives 89 / 397 and 93 / 99 .
This means that Amendments Nos 9 , the second part of 11 , 13 , 27 and 32 to the framework directive cannot be accepted , nor can the corresponding amendments to the implementation directive , namely Nos 2 , 3 and the second part of 1 .
As far as the selection procedure is concerned , it should be remembered that any amendments of a political nature must be approved at this meeting .
So any criticism of the draft to the effect that the regulatory committee has too much influence on this directive is unjustified .
The Standing Committee can only take political decisions in cases where a Member State has implemented protective measures .
So the Commission must stand by the Council 's wording and reject Amendments Nos 8 and 19 .
To deal with technical questions , the recommendation states that the Standing Committee should have advisory status , as the Commission originally proposed .
To ensure that the directive is not blocked , although according to the White Paper , it should already have been adopted , the Commission has been forced to accept a regulatory committee .
It is therefore impossible to accept Amendments Nos 14 , 16 and 17 , which deal with the appointment procedure , or Amendment No 15 on the internal rules of the committee , which it passes itself .
As far as the obligation to consult the Scientific Committee on Food in Article 13 is concerned , this should not be confused with the joint decision-making procedure which the directive lays down for passing further provisions affecting public health .
Amendments Nos 6 and 18 are therefore unnecessary and are rejected .
As marking is now obligatory in all cases , consumers will always be able to make an informed choice between products which contain and do not contain irradiated ingredients .
Amendments Nos 5 , 26 and 29 , introducing a symbol to indicate food which has been treated , are therefore superfluous and cannot be accepted .
Many of the amendments are designed to supplement and clarify the text .
I am referring here to Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , the first part of 3 , 4 , 7 and 12 to the framework directive and the first part of Amendment No 1 to the implementing directive .
Amendments Nos 30 , 31 and 33 cannot be accepted , as there cannot be any doubt that the procedure is safe .
Amendment No 10 links the conditions for permitting irradiation of food to the obligation on Member States to provide the Commission with information .
There is no close connection between the two subjects , and so the proposal cannot be accepted .
The first part of Amendment No 11 is unacceptable as the question is covered by section 1 of Article 1 .
Amendment No 24 reduces the time available for withdrawing irradiated products which do not meet the terms of the directive from 24 to 12 months .
Such a short period would make implementing the directive very difficult , and the amendment proposed must therefore be rejected .
Amendments Nos 21 , 22 and 28 restrict the opportunities for using and exploiting the irradiation of food .
It is difficult to justify why consumers , who must finally decide what is beneficial or necessary to them , should not be able to take decisions for themselves , but have certain conditions imposed on them instead .
This amendment cannot therefore be accepted .
Thank you , Madam Commissioner .
I have heard the statements of several Members in connection with the amendments declared inadmissible by the President .
As I imagine that the matter will be raised tomorrow as well , I would like to remind you of its content .
Article 125 states that , " the President shall decide ' : Mr Lannoye , not the Presidency , but the President , in other words , not the President at the time but the President of Parliament .
The end of Article 125 states , " The President 's decision ... concerning the admissibility of amendments is not based exclusively on the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Rule but on the provisions of the Rules in general ' .
Article 72 states that , " The President 's discretion to declare an amendment admissible or inadmissible cannot be questioned ' , on which account the doors seem to be closed .
However , I would also like to read , just for information and out of curiosity , paragraph 2 of Article 70 , which states that , " In the light of the conclusions of the Conciliation Committee , Parliament 's delegation may recommend that consideration of the common position and any amendments tabled to it be resumed or , in consultation with the committee responsible , propose new amendments for consideration by Parliament in accordance with Rule 72 ' .
Naturally , behind this paragraph of the Rules of Procedure lies an entirely politico-institutional question relating to the conciliation procedure and the merits of the results of conciliation , but I still seem to sense a slight possibility there , at least in the Rules of Procedure , for later on .
I have also read these articles because I think I will have to chair the conciliation , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , on which account we will have to discuss this problem again .
Mr President , I am pleased that we shall be sitting on the Conciliation Committee together ; that makes me more optimistic .
However , I think that what the Commission has just told me is absolutely scandalous .
You are telling us you are accepting no amendments whatsoever !
You are saying that it is simply not possible .
To me , it is absolutely incomprehensible , scandalous and brazen that you can say straight to our faces that according to Article 100a we have no further role in the process .
That is exactly the point of Amendment No 19 , to make sure that Parliament still has a say under Article 100a when the positive list is received .
You have just denied that here , Commissioner !
That means that we will be mere spectators for the rest of the proceedings , that when it comes to the election campaign out there we will have to face the music for things fixed by wheeling and dealing in smoke-filled rooms .
I am telling you straight : I refuse to play ball !
It is simply not on .
It is outrageous !
We are supposed to have a share in decision-making .
This Parliament is supposed to have its rights , but these rights are constantly being insidiously undermined .
This whole business of irradiating foodstuffs is only any good for whiskey drinkers in the end , because it makes whiskey age quicker !
Are we supposed to defend all this ?
Up to now , I have gone along with this , because I have said there may well be good reasons for irradiation .
But now I have heard what the Commission has to say , I will not accept it . I will not accept it .
I will not accept it .
I have had enough ! Maybe you will put me right , maybe I have just got the wrong end of the stick .
Yet again we are being treated just like stupid children who have to clear up the mess when we do not even have a say in things .
I will not stand for it !
It makes a mockery of democracy , shared decision-making and the internal market .
Why should we get the stick for your actions ?
It is not on !
Or perhaps I have misunderstood .
You , Mr President , have given us some very good tips , but before tomorrow 's vote , I shall take the liberty of invoking Rule 62 , second indent .
I shall not quote it now , because it is already so late , but I shall refer to it tomorrow .
It states that amendments can indeed be tabled on matters not previously dealt with at first reading .
We can and will do that .
I know that it is not your decision ; you cannot help it .
You just have the misfortune to be in the chair now .
Many thanks for your patience , and goodbye !
Mr President , I would like to comment on the point about whiskey ; I find that interesting .
I have discovered this evening that whiskey can be artificially aged by irradiating it .
It is not your fault , but I would nevertheless like you to convey the mood of this House to the President , who is responsible for this matter .
I am referring to Rule 72 , not to the sentence that you referred to , but to Rule 72 , 2c .
It states that amendments are only admissible if they seek to amend a part of a text which was not included in the proposal submitted in first reading , etcetera .
I have checked with various colleagues on a cross-party basis , and they agree that the text does contain new points , because there have been developments in this field in recent years .
What we have before us today did not exist then , probably not even in people 's wildest dreams .
So it is not only logical or possible , but urgently necessary to allow these amendments to be tabled .
Everyone agrees on this , there is no dissent .
Please convey this to the President .
Secondly , I would like you to clarify what happens in a situation when the chairman of the Committee on the Environment decides , by virtue of his office and personal views , not to accept amendments , and the President then refuses to admit quite different amendments by virtue of his own prerogatives .
There is a mismatch , a lack of consistency .
What happens then ?
There is obviously a real muddle between these two gentlemen .
I would be grateful if you could clarify this .
What is the right thing to do now ? Do we have to have a total rethink ?
Thirdly , I would like to refer to Rule 125 , according to which the President has the last word and his decisions cannot be contested .
I ask you seriously , is there a limit to what cannot be contested ?
For example , is there a limit such as logic , intelligence or doing the obvious ?
Are there any such limits , or are we in that Grimm 's fairy tale , the Emperor 's New Clothes ?
The one where everyone says , wow , he looks great , the President has got brilliant clothes , until someone comes along - a little child - and says that the President is in the altogether !
Are there no limits to the inviolability of the President 's decisions ?
I am asking you , because I know that you are very democratic , Mr President !
Mr President , I do not want to strain your tolerance further . I think you are showing substantial tolerance - at least in listening , though not in your rulings .
What I want to say to the Commission representative and to you , as our representative here , is that if this proposal does not go to conciliation in which the view of Parliament is heard , including the views of those Member States who were not members of the Union when this proposal first came forward , then we make a mockery of our right to be consulted and to be absorbed into this discussion .
We have consistently counselled against amendments that simply allow Parliament to meddle .
For Parliament not to be consulted or not to have any appropriate say at the next stage of proceedings would be a total absurdity and I hope that this will be taken into account when you consider the rulings you are giving tomorrow and when the Commission reflects on what it said in removing almost all of these amendments from the book .
To conclude this impromptu debate , I have to add that I understand Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ' state of mind , because her previous comments have received a reply from the Commission that has certainly not been entirely accepted on its merits .
We all know what it means when the Commission does not agree to any amendment : the entire conciliation stage becomes more complicated for Parliament .
With regard to the Rules of Procedure in the strict sense , I would like to tell Mr Roth that President Gil-Robles is as democratic as I am , and that he will obviously be informed of the debate this evening .
It seems I should tell you that the issue raised by Mr Graenitz and Mr Whitehead should not be emphasized repeatedly because it is of no significance , other than of a general nature , and certainly not with regard to the Rules of Procedure .
New Member States have joined since then and this has not had any effect from the point of view of the debate we are holding on the Rules of Procedure : the Rules of Procedure do not change with each new accession .
You should remember , not for now but for the future , that a discussion is underway for the post-Amsterdam period . The Committee on the Rules of Procedure is already discussing its amendments to the Rules of Procedure after and as a result of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz has already pointed out that reference will be made to Article 62 , and there do not seem to be many margins ; however , it is obviously within her rights to raise this problem with the President tomorrow , when it is put to the vote .
I repeat , however , that the President will be informed of this debate to make the appropriate decisions , for which there are no limits , other than those of the Rules of Procedure , Mr Roth !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Landfill of waste
The next item is Mr Jackson 's report ( A4-0026 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Directive on the landfill of waste ( COM ( 97 ) 0105 - C4-0160 / 97-97 / 0085 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , the European Union 's waste policy is at an earlier stage in its development than European policy on air and water quality .
We see the characteristics of what is still rather an experimental policy in the landfill directive .
I must ask some rather fundamental questions about this directive in the hope of getting some answers from the Commission .
Firstly , it is important to recognize that this directive , if it is fully implemented - and that is a big ' if ' - would result in a switch of emphasis away from landfill as a means of waste disposal .
This is because it incorporates the progressive introduction of limits on the volume of biodegradable waste going to landfill set out in Article 5 .
This is a new section of the directive , new since its rejection by us in 1996 .
In many countries the limits will mean a switch to incineration .
My fundamental question here is whether a directive which would impel such a universal switch in emphasis fully respects the principle of subsidiarity .
I do not believe that it does .
The targets set out in Article 5 are very precise even if they are national ones and not designed to apply to specific sites .
One consequence of ignoring subsidiarity is that a universal solution is proposed for very different situations in the Member States .
Some countries now have sophisticated landfill systems and geological structures which make landfill a sustainable option and perhaps the best practicable environmental option .
In others unregulated landfills in inappropriate places are a health hazard .
For all its protests about local option , the directive removes far too many key decisions to the European level from the national and the local .
Secondly , it is important to recognize that the directive , if fully implemented , would mean that several Member States would need to spend very considerable amounts of money on finding alternative means of waste disposal and putting in place the systems of control that would enable them to prove they are abiding by the directive .
My fundamental question here is whether there is any hope at all that the Member States will be able to comply with the directive , as drafted , within the time limits set ?
The clear answer is no .
99 % of Ireland 's waste goes to landfill .
There is no prospect of any rapid switch to an alternative there .
54 % of Portugal 's waste goes to an ' unknown destination ' .
In Greece the Commission tells us that there are from 3 , 000 to 6 , 500 illegal landfills .
None of these countries will be able to comply with the directive as drafted .
If it is agreed as drafted , they will be pursued through the Court of Justice for years by the Commission .
In my own country , the United Kingdom , the Department of the Environment , Mr Prescott 's department , has estimated that as many as 70 waste incinerators would have to be built at a possible cost of as much as £ 7 billion .
Where will Mr Blair find that ?
As rapporteur , I have to report that my committee has supported the directive and in one respect has strengthened its detailed provisions by making the 2002 limits mandatory rather than optional .
If that were all , I might have had a problem in continuing to represent my committee 's point of view but the committee did something else .
For the first time the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has at every stage passed amendments to tie the Member States down to the commitment they will make by agreeing such a directive .
We want them to put their money where their mouths are .
In our amendments we want to use the directive first to make the Member States apply the existing law by shutting down illegal landfills which do not comply with existing directives .
We want to use the directive to ensure that the Member States report frequently on implementation of the law , in particular during the progressive application of targets to reduce the amount of biodegradable waste going to landfill .
We also want to make sure that we do not forget the exempted sites where the directive will not apply .
Information on them too should be sent to the Commission and hence made available to Parliament .
Finally , we should not forget that the Member States voted unanimously for the former version of this directive which effectively excluded 50 % of EU territory from its scope .
If it was acceptable to them then , how can we realistically hope that they will fully implement this much more stringent directive .
I do not believe that Parliament should connive at the passing of laws which are little more than the self-indulgent aspirations of environment ministers .
I hope Parliament keeps a very tight check on what happens to this directive and I look forward to doing so .
I also hope that at some stage Mrs Bjerregaard might actually involve herself in a debate on this directive , perhaps with us here tonight .
There is very little point in coming all the way to Strasbourg to act as a sort of sophisticated speak-your-weight machine , which is all we are getting from Mrs Bjerregaard when she simply reads out lists of amendments which are acceptable and not acceptable to the Commission .
This is a parliament and a parliament expects debate .
Mr President , we all know the significance of this proposal to the many industrial sectors within the economies of the states of the Union which is perhaps one of the reasons why we have taken so long already to reach an agreement about the provisions of the proposal and why we find ourselves at this point in the legislative process .
I do think , however , that we are near the beginning of the end rather than the end of the beginning .
The new Commission proposal meets many of the concerns expressed by Parliament the last time it was presented to Parliament .
It has risen like a phoenix from the ashes and Parliament must congratulate the Commission , in part , on the proposal .
At the same time , I would extend my congratulations to the rapporteur , Mrs Jackson , for the work that she has done on it .
In response to some of the points that she has made I would say , first of all , that European-wide standards that can be enforced are absolutely necessary to regulate what is , in truth , a European-wide business in many cases .
Incineration is not inevitable .
There are many other technologies available and , in particular , steps in the development of large-scale composting as an alternative to dealing with organic waste in the last few years have meant that this is a real and genuine alternative if energy and effort - and other resources - are put into bringing this into regular practice across the Union .
I have to correct her by telling her that the last time this proposal was dealt with by the Council of Ministers it did not vote it by unanimity , which was why when we rejected it in Parliament they could not reinstate it .
They agreed it by a majority .
This time , when you look at the political agreement they have arrived at - which looks astonishingly like a common position already - we will possibly find it harder to change it .
Nevertheless , I and the Socialists think that we need a set of practicable , sensible , enforceable Community-wide standards which will deliver us a landfill industry which gets rid of many of the evils of the past .
We should also recognize that this is not just an important economic directive , but also one that is important for the protection of the environment and public health .
In particular , the harmful impact of bad landfill practices on groundwater resources and on global warming by the emission of methane from landfills is , in itself , a very good and strong reason why we need to take the actions that we are proposing in this proposal .
I would urge Parliament to support the Environment Committee 's amendments that we will see in front of us tomorrow .
It is a step forward in what has already been a very long process , but it is a step forward towards what I hope to see will be a completed proposal before the end of this year .
Mr President , waste disposal must be based on a certain hierarchy , the Ladder of Lansink , as we call it in the Netherlands , as Mr Lansink , a member of parliament came up with the idea that this hierarchy must be actively applied .
This hierarchy comprises above all prevention , then re-use and subsequently treatment , and in this treatment phase landfill is the last option .
To achieve this and cut back the amount of biodegradable waste going into landfills , Mr Jackson 's report contains important targets .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has expressed its confidence in the original standards set by the European Commission .
This is the only way we can arrive at uniform European measures .
Some Member States will have some catching up to do if they want to meet these targets .
This is the only way we can offer the high environmental protection the European Union professes to aspire to .
Economic incentives are also a part of this .
All this does not mean , of course , that there may not be any exceptions .
Non-harmful dredged material is a good example of this .
Certain countries , including my own , the Netherlands , have very effective environmentally friendly treatments which make an exception possible .
To conclude , Mr President , we support the report .
Environmental policy occupies centre stage in European legislation .
This directive on the landfill of waste should most certainly form part of this .
Mr President , this proposal on the landfill of waste has taken a long time , but hopefully the end is in sight now .
Still , I think it has been worth the wait , because what the Commission has put on the table is a considerable improvement compared to the rejected common position of 1995 .
In all sorts of ways , new developments have been taken into account .
Separating biodegradable waste has been given a place , and the territory to which the directive applies comprises virtually the entire Union .
These are big improvements .
Likewise , the introduction of the cost aspect and after-care of landfill sites are positive points .
And now the reality .
How will it all work ?
The packaging directive contains incentives to stay as highly as possible within the waste hierarchy , but real life is often more unmanageable than the theory .
In other words , it will depend on the efforts of the national and local authorities whether prevention and re-use will be given genuine priority .
What concerns us particularly is the transport of waste to the cheap incinerators , and to the cheap landfill sites .
The introduction of new costings for landfills must get under way very soon in the Member States .
Although this directive looks a lot more pleasant than the earlier versions , we have to acknowledge the fact that billions of tonnes of waste are still dumped illegally , or are burnt with too many dirty emissions .
Implementation is therefore urgent , but there is still a big hiatus in the waste treatment chain .
In the very short term there must be a review of the directive for the incinerators with new standards for emissions .
My question to the Commissioner is : when will the proposal for this be ready ?
There is far too great an incongruity between incinerators .
It is pleasing to see the Council of Ministers taking note of the European Parliament 's amendments in its otherwise slightly doubtful political agreement .
The Commission 's original proposals exempted about half of Europe from the directive 's aims , which was rather absurd .
Dumps are well down in the waste hierarchy , and there are specific rules dealing with restricting dumping , restricting waste tourism and ensuring environmentally sound dumping if that is the only option available .
The Committee on the Environment proposes that groundwater is the main factor to consider when finding new dumping sites .
As groundwater resources are the drinking water supplies in some countries , it is essential that they be protected as far as possible .
In Denmark , about 90 % of drinking water comes from groundwater .
It is pleasing to note that the proposals include demands for processing biodegradable waste .
This can produce gas at landfill sites , and in fact this kind of waste should be sorted and some of it composted .
It is also pleasing to note that the proposals are now on their way through the decision-making process , as waste is one of the areas where legislative protection is still incomplete .
Mr President , the Liberal group favours reducing the amount of waste and making the treatment of waste safer .
There are two approaches to waste disposal : incineration where geographical conditions and population density mean that landfill is inappropriate ; and landfill itself .
Both have their problems .
Incineration can cause air pollution , landfill can cause groundwater pollution and the production of methane , a greenhouse gas .
But technology is minimizing those problems .
In my view this directive is biased in favour of incineration but it allows both approaches to continue .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has made it rather more one-sided and some of its amendments would effectively change policy to incineration only .
My group favours a gradual move towards incineration , particularly of waste which is not biodegradable .
But we do not wish to overlook the new , green growth industry which involves methane collection and the production of energy from waste .
The Commission document published recently on methane gas recognizes the importance of this .
The Liberal group will vote against certain amendments put forward by the Committee on the Environment : those which would effectively outlaw landfill ; those which we regard as over-prescriptive ; and those which we regard as impractical .
Nonetheless , we support the aims of this directive and the work the Commissioner has done on it .
We regret the position taken and the somewhat uncharitable remarks made by the rapporteur in this debate tonight .
We believe this directive constitutes a move forward for the Union in terms of disposing of waste more effectively and taking greater care of the environment .
Mr President , this directive is a fine example of how the European Parliament 's influence on environmental legislation is increasing ; our rejection of the original proposal led the Commission to amend it , for the better , and prompted the Council of Ministers itself to adopt a new approach and strategy .
The need for such a strategy was particularly pressing given that , as mentioned previously , in Member States such as Portugal , 54 % of waste until very recently went to unmonitored tips , approximately 10 % to controlled tips , and only 36 % to landfills .
Meanwhile , however , a new government has taken office , a new majority has assumed legislative power and executive power , and a new strategic orientation has been adopted , as the Commission is aware . This includes the submission of a national waste administration plan , which is currently being implemented and under which some regions of the country , particularly the Algarve - Portugal 's leading tourist region - will be depositing all their waste in landfills by next summer .
In connection with the proposal currently under discussion , I would like to draw attention to the objectives of reducing methane gas emissions , prohibiting the combined disposal of dangerous and non-dangerous waste and the pre-treatment obligation which I consider to be very positive aspects which deserve to be highlighted .
I would also like to emphasize the discrepancy between the position of the European Parliament which advocates a reduction of 25 % by the year 2002 , and the Council 's position which refers to the year 2006 .
Finally , I would like to draw attention to the temporary exemptions granted to the islands ; for example , in the Portuguese case , the islands of the Azores and Madeira which are exempted from the pre-treatment of waste in the main landfill on each island up to a ceiling of 15 , 000 tonnes .
But I would like to stress the temporary nature of these regimes because , since the islands constitute an immense natural heritage of great value for tourism and the environment , they have everything to gain from implementing environmental policies that are not based on dispensations .
The main landfill in the autonomous region of the Azores ' application to the Cohesion Fund constitutes a policy that could well serve as an example to be followed .
Mr President , I thought I would congratulate everyone tonight as well .
Let me start by congratulating the smiling Mr Bowe , whose courage in the last Parliament in rejecting the former landfill directive had to be experienced to be believed .
He did a very good job on that occasion in saying that we would not accept a defective directive .
He was right to do that .
I also congratulate the Commission as well .
They have come forward with something which is necessarily stronger than it was the last time round .
I congratulate Mrs Jackson .
I do not know whether she wants to be congratulated by me .
From the tone of the contribution she made at the beginning , I thought that there was some reluctance on her part in the presentation of the report .
However , it is right that she should be congratulated because she has accepted wholly now the principle of abolition of co-disposal .
That is something which is an argument made and accepted both in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and by Parliament as a whole .
However , it will mean in the United Kingdom a massive change in landfill practice .
One of the reasons why it is important to stress that is that the European Parliament , when this is finally seen through to a directive , will have been responsible for a change in domestic practice in the United Kingdom about which so few people yet know .
Therefore it is important when Mrs Jackson , in the explanatory statement , asks for a cost estimate for us in Parliament to provide that to those landfill operators and local authorities in the United Kingdom who are going to have to look at this as a progressive proposal .
Mrs Jackson tells us rightly that in committee we are always met with the response that it is a greater cost if we do nothing than if we do something .
Despite the uncharitable remarks made , as Mr Watson said , about the Commissioner being a speaking weight machine , I ask the Commissioner to be more charitable herself and tell us how much money there is in the landfill bank and what the cost of this proposal will be .
Mr President , in general let me say that in its present shape the directive on waste disposal at landfill sites is satisfactory .
There are , however , far too few proposals coming from the EU on how the targets can be achieved .
A separate waste tax or payment is a necessary device for consumers , whether small or massive producers of waste , to cut down on the amount of waste they create that has to be taken to landfill sites .
The tax or payment should be such that clean , sorted waste will be cheapest , and unsorted waste to be taken to landfill sites will be the most expensive to produce .
This will obviously mean that local authorities and other responsible bodies will organize proper methods of sorting waste .
The EU must go further and take examples from the more enlightened Member States .
We must support the use of landside waste , for example , as a source of energy or soil improvement agent , but at the same time new technology must be developed to ensure that the process will not harm the environment or health .
We must make sure that seepage from both old and new landfill sites is handled in such a way that it does not pose a threat to both groundwater and surface water .
I think it is very important that the proposals for amendments concerning the protection of water , approved in the Committee on the Environment , be carried in tomorrow 's vote .
Mr President , it gives me great pleasure to see that the European Parliament has put waste disposal on the agenda for today .
The Community should long since have passed a directive to ensure that waste is disposed of in an environmentally responsible way .
As has been mentioned , this is the second time we are dealing with a proposal for a directive on waste disposal .
The Commission put forward its first proposals in July 1991 , and as we remember and have been reminded during the course of the debate , the European Parliament rejected that proposal in May 1996 on the grounds that the level of environmental protection was not high enough and that there were too many exemptions .
The proposals we have before us today have been completely amended .
That was not a very easy task , but I think we can be satisfied with the results .
The new proposals contain a lot of new elements reflecting the developments which have occurred since the Commission 's last proposals .
There have been major changes in the procedures , methods and strategies for waste processing in many Member States .
In line with the Community 's waste processing policy , some Member States now believe that dumping should be the last resort when it comes to disposing of waste .
The main new points in the Commission 's proposals are as follows : reduction targets for disposing biodegradable municipal waste with a view to reducing the global greenhouse effect ; pre-treatment - that is , not incineration , but pre-treatment of all waste prior to disposal ; an increase in the costs of waste disposal - as proposed by Mrs Myller ; a ban on dumping toxic and non-toxic waste together , which was of course part of the previous proposals which Parliament criticized ; and finally more stringent conditions on existing landfill sites .
I am convinced that the new proposals will make it easier for us to prevent and reduce the effects of waste disposal on the environment .
And we need to take action in this field as soon as possible .
The many complaints which the Commission receives concerning the disposal of waste emphasize that the Community needs to act .
I have of course looked with great interest at the draft report which the Committee on the Environment adopted .
There are many important and useful amendments which will tighten up the Commission 's proposals and make the procedures clearer .
I am therefore pleased to be able to say that the Commission can accept 16 of the amendments .
But I must also admit that I am concerned about some sections of the report , and I will need to take some time over them .
I am pleased to see that the European Parliament is able to support our efforts to reduce the landfill of biodegradable waste .
We have established long-term reduction targets for Member States : these targets must remain unchanged , however , to ensure that Member States have the best possible conditions for planning and implementing alternative methods of dealing with this waste .
The Commission cannot therefore accept Amendment No 16 .
As far as Amendments Nos 12 and 31 are concerned , I would like to emphasize that the Commission does not believe it would be right to grant more exemptions than those already proposed .
I am particularly concerned about exempting underground disposal .
There are no environmentally responsible grounds for exempting this kind of disposal .
All landfill sites - whether above or underground - should meet the directive 's conditions and so be safe and controlled .
I cannot agree with the current approach in Germany where 1.7 million tonnes of waste , including 350 000 tonnes of toxic waste , was stored in old mines in 1994 .
In Germany , this is defined as recycling , not as disposal , and so waste disposal legislation does not apply .
This is not environmentally responsible practice .
I am not against storing waste underground in general , but I think we should be certain that the underground storage facilities in question are covered by the provisions of the proposals on landfill sites .
And so I cannot accept that exempting regulations should be introduced for underground disposal .
It was precisely because of all the exemptions that the European Parliament rejected the Council 's previous common position , whereas Parliament now wishes to introduce more exemptions .
In the case of Amendment No 13 , Parliament is trying to introduce yet another exemption .
I cannot at this stage accept that spreading limestone and gypsum should be exempted , but I can promise Parliament that the Commission will take a closer look at this amendment and consider the possibilities .
Today , the Community has serious problems with landfill sites which are not monitored : this is clear from the large numbers of complaints and applications which the Commission receives .
This situation must change .
Existing landfill sites must meet the new requirements of the Commission 's proposals and so obtain new licences before they can continue to operate .
The approval requirements of the old framework directive on waste are not in line with developments in this field and cannot ensure that waste is disposed of under safe , controlled conditions .
So the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 25 .
This brings us finally to Amendments Nos 27 , 30 , 33 and 36 , where the Commission believes that the provisions of the annexes should be laid down by the technical committee referred to in Article 16 of the Commission 's proposals .
As regards Amendment No 7 , the Commission cannot be obliged to forward Member States ' reports , but wishes to be able to produce reports based on information from Member States and pass it on to the European Parliament .
Some people may see this as being rather semantic , but we believe we can handle problems this way .
As regards Amendments Nos 2 and 3 on changes to the views that the Commission should present new proposals within a period of time to be specified , we already have plans to submit a proposal on incinerating non-toxic waste and we intend to produce a composting proposal as part of the work schedule .
I cannot however approve of the way in which this amendment formulates the Commission 's obligations .
There are a whole host of other amendments which ought to be commented on , but it is now late in the evening so I will leave it at that , unless there are any specific amendments which other Members of Parliament present wish to comment on in particular .
Ian White asked me if I could say anything about the overall costs , but I am not in a position to do so as yet .
That of course depends on developments in the Member States which are now under way .
And may I say to Mrs Jackson that I think the remarks she made at the end of her speech were particularly unkind .
Having been here in Parliament since 3.00 p.m. today , which I set aside solely for discussing with Members of Parliament , I fail to understand her comments at all .
Mr President , I wonder whether I could ask for your help on Amendment No 16 .
Amendment No 16 was one of those which Mrs Bjerregaard said she was not prepared to accept .
In fact there are two elements to Amendment No 16 : one is the question of the targets for 2002 , and Parliament and the committee would like to remove the words ' as far as possible ' so that the 2002 targets become mandatory and not , as it were , optional .
The other parts of that amendment deal with reporting .
There are two distinct bits to that amendment , I wonder whether Mrs Bjerregaard could clarify which bits she is not prepared to accept .
I think it is very sad if the Commission does not accept - even at this early stage - amendments regarding the reporting requirement where essentially , for once , I agree with her advisor , in other words that Parliament should reinforce reporting .
I would beg the Commissioner to accept that but if she will not accept it , I hope that Parliament will stick to its guns and go into conciliation on those points .
I would be grateful just for clarification on that .
I would like to ask the Commissioner , Mrs Bjerregaard , for clarification .
In fact , both Amendment No 16 and Amendment No 23 contain parts that relate to the altered texts .
I would like the Commissioner to clarify whether she is referring to the entire Amendments or to just a certain section , when she says that the Commission does not accept Amendments Nos 16 and 23 .
Mr President , in fact I was actually making a distinction , because I referred to Amendment No 16 twice in my answer .
As far as the reporting is concerned , I said that we were concerned about the way the question on reporting was worded .
But I will be happy to see if we in the Community can find some other wording .
As far as the question of making it mandatory in the year 2000 , we do not believe we are in a position to decide this at present .
We feel this would force Member States into a policy - in that sense , this is in line with the arguments which Mrs Jackson used herself - and we are not therefore in favour of making it mandatory in the year 2000 .
As far as reporting is concerned , we are support the idea , as has been said .
What was the Commission 's opinion on Amendment No 23 .
This is vital because these are the sites which would not have to comply with the directive .
It is very simple .
Does the Commissioner agree with Amendment No 23 or not ?
I hope that she does .
I am almost minded to take back my earlier remarks but I do not think I will .
I had already asked the Commissioner for her opinion on Amendment No 23 , but she did not have her headphones on , nor does she now , and so she could not hear me .
That was one of the amendments I missed out because I thought time was getting on a bit .
We can accept Amendment No 23 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I refer to pages 12 and 13 of the English version of the Minutes and matters that were raised subsequently .
This refers to the concern expressed by Members about the impact in the Chamber of the new arrangements for tying the payment of Members ' expenses to voting requirements .
I am not challenging this whole question of whether this is a proper system or not .
I do not think it is , but that is not my purpose .
Mr Falconer raised a number of points of order , and I was very concerned that the President in the Chair yesterday seemed to give him some kind of blanket exemption from the rules I understood had been decided .
Mr Falconer quite properly asked for the opportunity to state his intention before every vote in which he did not participate .
The President declared that should not be the case .
He gave him a blanket exemption , which would make nonsense of the whole system .
All I ask is that all the Vice-Presidents follow a consistent policy , observe the rules that have been laid down for Members and give Members an opportunity at every stage to raise the question of whether they vote or not .
If this system is to work , it has to be seen to be working properly and with the agreement of all the Vice-Presidents .
Mr Megahy , I would not want to begin a new discussion about yesterday 's debate .
You are a former Vice-President of Parliament and you can well understand that when a new measure is first applied , it is impossible for us to have sorted out all the details in advance .
What I can confirm , and I saw it yesterday too when Mr Jean-Pierre Cot was in the Chair , is that there is every intention to apply it in the best possible way .
Mr President , after the intervention of Mr Megahy and the events of yesterday I would like to ask you to take the opportunity to discuss in the Bureau how such occurrences can be prevented in future in the interests of the entire Parliament by using the agenda .
That would mean that the whole Parliament has to decide on a rule which prevents such occurrences .
I request sincerely that this should be moved forward very quickly .
Mrs Hoff , I have no doubt that the Bureau will look at the problem you have mentioned .
I hope it reaches the right decisions .
Mr President , I have one or two very simple corrections to the Minutes .
I refer to the first paragraph of page 12 .
I did not say that I did not intend to take part in the vote .
I agreed with Mr Falconer 's position but said that I might or might not take part in the vote .
On page 22 it states that I did not vote .
In fact I voted every time , except once when the machine did not work .
On page 11 , my name should be alongside Mr Macartney 's as abstaining in the roll-call vote .
I called to the attention of the Chair the fact that my machine did not work .
I got a nod and thought it was in order but , quite clearly , the nod did not mean that it was in order .
Lastly , on page 17 - which is a little more complicated - I am wrongly described in the last paragraph as requesting ' that the matter be referred to the Rules Committee ' .
What I said was that this change amounted to an amendment of the Rules and , therefore , would have to be referred to the Rules Committee .
I also corrected what the Vice-President said when he declared that we had a duty to vote .
I said that we do not have a duty to vote , we have a duty to understand what the votes are about .
We have the right not to vote or vote , as we wish .
I would like the Minutes to be corrected in that way .
Mrs Ewing , I take note of what you have said .
Mr President , it is important that we try to clarify this .
Everybody in this House , yesterday and this morning , has been desperately trying to shuffle off responsibility for what happened here yesterday .
I am not ashamed to stand here and say that I have been one of the group leaders , and every one of them in this room with me should perhaps stand up so you can see who we all are .
We have been driving the process of reform in this House .
We are not ashamed to say so .
Let us be clear how this reform came about .
The idea of linking attendance with roll-call votes came out of the working group established under the chairmanship of Nicole Pery .
That was where these proposals came from .
Every group in this House was represented on that working group .
The Conference of Presidents does not establish these proposals or the way in which they are carried out .
We kept pursuing the need for reform and putting pressure on the President and his predecessor , Klaus Hänsch , who have both been supportive of the process of reform .
That is our role and we stand here absolutely and take our political responsibility for insisting that reform is carried through .
Yesterday , Mr Killilea stood up on behalf of the Quaestors and said : ' It is not us , the Quaestors , the Bureau is responsible ' .
The Bureau , I understand , is trying to say it is the Conference of Presidents .
I accept my responsibility for the reform .
We did not lay down the detail of these proposals .
( Interruptions ) If the detail is wrong , it needs to be adjusted .
But I do not back down or retract one bit on the need for reform .
( Applause )
Mr President , I want to make it clear to the House that establishing the method for control and transparency is not a matter for the Conference of Presidents . We were invited to a meeting in Luxembourg so that we could give our opinion , but we did not stay in the room because we were invited to leave when Parliament 's Bureau made the decision .
And I have to say that in my group we do not agree with this system of control , which does not guarantee transparency or that Parliament will work well .
We are happy to sign in each morning and afternoon - that is the reasonable method of control that can be used in this House .
However , we do not wish to be demagogic .
The Bureau should have another meeting to think about this , and should take some reasonable measure that can be supported by a wide majority of the House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the working group mentioned by Mrs Green had spent a long time preparing this reform .
When Parliament 's Bureau had to take a decision in Luxembourg , it asked for our assistance .
The group leaders did indeed take part in the Bureau 's discussion .
We worked for and promoted a reform in anticipation of a statute for Members of the European Parliament .
It is clear that after what happened yesterday the concrete implementation of this measure ought to be discussed anew .
But I also wish to say that I was in favour of a reform in anticipation of a statute , and that this does not alter the responsibility which I have taken on this issue in the past , and which I maintain .
I also believe , and on behalf of our group , that after the events of yesterday , the system needs to be looked at again , adjusted and perfected , without detracting from the responsibility we all have to accept .
Mr President , it is obvious that the technical system which became operational yesterday , does not function properly , and it is provoking debates which damage the dignity and standing of this House .
It is therefore obvious that the concrete measures which were decided must be reviewed .
I would like to remind you that the deputy chairman of my group , Mr Haarder , made a proposal to the Bureau which was simple , transparent , clear and not bureaucratic , namely one check per voting period , and not an average of a number of checks .
I would like to ask the Bureau to have another look at this .
But I would like to say to the colleagues : the implementation of the reform must be reviewed , but not the principle of the reform measure .
This House does many things well .
We are having an increasing legislative influence .
Our delegation 's visit to Algeria was a success .
The committees of inquiry this Parliament set up into BSE and cigarette fraud were a great success .
But the media does not see us as an important , successful and authoritative Parliament .
Why not ?
Because the media quite rightly continue to reproach Members of this House who are somewhat casual in their financial mores .
We should have the courage to search our consciences .
We should have the courage to review matters that damage this House .
Yes , colleagues , that includes you !
Mr President , the details of the regulation should be reviewed .
But I refuse to bring the principle up for discussion .
This House must reform itself so that the voters can have the confidence that everything that happens in this House is correct and pure .
( Applause )
Mr President , the incidents of yesterday could easily have been foreseen ; and I would contest the method .
I think we could have avoided these incidents if we had proceeded differently , in other words , if we had sought a greater consensus within the House .
If the system had first been applied experimentally , we would have noted its shortcomings before putting in place a permanent solution .
Furthermore , I would suggest a joint meeting of the Conference of Presidents and the Bureau after the group chairmen have held in-depth debates within their groups , and that together we settle on methods which are practical , acceptable , transparent and which do not damage the image of Parliament .
Mr Pasty , I would like to point out that the President of the European Parliament will of course be informed of the views both of the leaders of the political groups and of the Members .
All of us here have listened very attentively to what has been said , and I have no doubt that we will look into the matter with the intention of reaching the best possible result .
Mr President , I admire this House 's form of elitism , when someone stands up to make a point arising from the Minutes and then leaders of groups are called into some kind of confessional in order to admit their sins .
Mrs Hoff made a point when she said : ' Let us look at the Rules to see if we can prevent what happened yesterday ' .
Well , let us look at the Rules to ensure that any changes which affect Members are brought to the Members and that Members have a right to vote on those changes .
That would prevent the nonsense that went on yesterday .
I return to the business of today - the Minutes .
Page 12 is wrong .
As far as I am concerned , I asked to be called , as Mrs Ewing quite rightly said , on each roll-call vote .
I was not given that opportunity by the President .
Page 22 states again that I did not vote .
I remind the President that I did participate in certain votes , particularly human rights .
I participated and am recorded as such .
The Minutes are wrong in both areas . I ask that they be corrected .
Lastly , if we are to have a rule that comes down on high from the Bureau , then it has to be carried through by the House .
The Bureau 's ruling was that , prior to each roll-call vote , the Members would indicate whether they wished to participate or not .
That is what I hope we will continue to do until such time as this House begins to grasp some sense of reality and reverts back to some normality .
Mr Falconer , I understand that the President in the Chair yesterday did not give you the floor every time you asked for it .
But it has been noted in the Minutes that you did not participate in the vote every time .
So , in practice , the result was exactly the same .
Mr President , I just wish to state that I was here yesterday but did not vote .
On page 22 , Mr Cassidy pointed out that the members of this group would not be voting in the final vote .
My name is not included in the list of Members in the Minutes .
I would ask you to correct that , please .
Mr President , one of the troubles with this procedure is that it draws attention to the fact that Members attend the votes because they are paid for it but they do not attend the debates .
I refer to the Minutes last night .
If Members had attended the debate last night on the final report , which was my report on landfill , they would have heard the Commissioner say that she was reluctant to give in full her speech with all the opinions of the Commission on the amendments tabled by Members of this House because it was late and she was rather tired .
That is not good enough .
Mr President , I would like you , if you could , to communicate with the Commissioner this morning to say that before we vote at 12.00 noon , it is essential that the Commission makes known to me , as rapporteur , to the committee chairmen and to all Members of this House exactly what its view was on the amendments tabled by Parliament .
It is not enough that the Commissioner should say that she was tired and therefore unable to speak to us .
Mrs Jackson , I take note of your comment .
You are of course aware - and there is no need for me to remind you , since you are an old and experienced colleague - that if we cannot have that explanation , it is open to you , as rapporteur , to react .
Mr President , on the same point in the Minutes .
As somebody who was there throughout the debate on Mrs Jackson 's report last night and who was the last person to leave the Chamber , I do not recall those words from the Commissioner .
I suggest to Mrs Jackson that if she is really doing her job as rapporteur , all she has to do is to ask for the Commissioner 's speaking note .
Mr President , it is an oddity of the system that the Vice-President was here yesterday and led the discussion , but cannot be paid because his name does not appear on the list .
I would suggest on his behalf that his name be added to the list of those present who did not vote .
Mr President , I request that my name be added to the list of those present .
Well , that is the best I have heard yet .
Mr President , I would like to make a suggestion .
It would perhaps be useful to add to the end of the Minutes a list of Members who do not meet the criteria , so that , on the following day , we are aware of what is before us and could justify any problem and sort things out .
This would mean that we would have the results earlier than the end of the month , or after several weeks .
Mr President , I have slept on the problem and think this is an excellent idea .
So I propose that at each desk we should install a little device and when we vote , coins would fall .
This would be very pleasant and would encourage us greatly .
Mr President , I asked if I could speak twenty minutes ago ; I pressed the button , and it is still alight , so I can prove it .
I would like the debate about money to stop , so that we can start with the debate on Iraq !
That is what we are here for this morning !
Secondly , I would like to say that I am 100 % behind what Mr de Vries said .
I have to conclude that the courage to put through reforms is lacking in this House , especially amongst the Members .
I note this with shame !
( The Minutes were approved )
Topical and urgent debate ( objections )
Mr President , I believe it is the first time in this House that a properly introduced motion was refused even during its introduction - in fact we originally wanted to introduce it as an additional point under human rights , and only one opportunity was granted to us to find an alternative in the case of these nuclear tests .
I think in the case of this point it is a question of Members and colleagues being frightened .
In my office in recent weeks , three colleagues have been attacked .
I have spoken with a large number of Members who have also been attacked and I believe we must discuss this subject .
It is not sufficient for us to draw a veil of silence over the matter but we must tackle this problem honestly and frankly .
For this we need to have a discussion in this House and I believe that the President 's decision not to permit this discussion here is no guarantee of the safety of our colleagues .
Mr Rübig , I must tell you , since you are one of our more recent Members , that this is not the first time an objection has been declared unacceptable . It has happened several times before .
The President of this Parliament informed me by letter that the question I submitted , also on behalf of our group , is inadmissible on the basis of Rule 47 ( 2 ) of the Rules .
The President adds : " I share your concern , and promise to take the necessary steps with the Belgian authorities to reach a satisfactory solution for the problem of security of the Members and the personnel of the European Parliament ' .
Mr Martens , in his letter to Mr Rübig , a copy of which I sent to President Martens , the President of Parliament did indeed say that he would make all necessary approaches to the Belgian authorities to find a satisfactory solution to the problem of security , and that he shares the concern of the Members who have raised the matter .
Situation in Iraq
The next item is the statements by the Council and Commission on the situation in Iraq , followed by the debate .
Mr President , thank you for the opportunity to address Parliament on this important issue .
The debate takes place at a crucial moment in the crisis with Iraq .
European Union Member States are united in being deeply concerned at this crisis .
The Presidency has ensured that Iraq has been covered frequently during European Union meetings .
Most recently the Foreign Secretary briefed partners during an informal session held in Panama in the margins of the European Union real group meeting on the 12 February .
On the same day the issue was discussed by European Union political directors at a meeting of the political committee .
Iraq was also discussed at political committee meetings on the 13 January and 3 February and at expert working group level .
The Presidency has also had contacts at a high level with many European Union partners .
The Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary have both been in frequent touch with their European counterparts to discuss the issue .
I have been in contact with my counterparts in other European Union states in recent days .
We will continue to promote discussion of the issue and will keep partners informed of developments at the United Nations .
European Union Member States are united in believing that Iraq must allow the United Nations Special Commission to continue its vital work as laid down in Security Council Resolution 687 which was the resolution that provided a ceasefire for the end of the Gulf War .
Under the terms of that Resolution , which Iraq accepted , the UN inspectors who form UNSCOM are given a mandate to remove all of Iraq 's weapons of mass destruction .
UNSCOM and the associated inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency have scored major successes in removing Iraqi weapons of mass destruction .
They have halted Iraq 's longrange missile programme which could have brought Europe within range of Saddam 's arsenals .
They have dismantled the nuclear programme which could have led to Iraq developing a nuclear bomb .
Through a process of inspection and verified destruction , UNSCOM has demolished more weapons capability than was ever destroyed by allied forces during the Gulf War .
However , there are other areas of Saddam 's weapons of mass destruction on which further work is required : namely , chemical and biological weapons .
Saddam 's chemical weapons include the VX nerve agent .
He has not accounted to UNSCOM for 600 tonnes of chemical precursors for that nerve agent .
One drop of the agent is enough to kill .
The victims die in agony by suffocation as their nervous system ignores the signals to breathe .
Saddam 's biological weapons include anthrax .
Experts say that 100 kilograms of anthrax released from the top of a tall building could kill up to 3 million people .
Saddam has also produced aflatoxin which causes liver cancer and clostridium which results in gas gangrene .
All of these weapons represent a serious threat to international peace and security .
Three years ago , Saddam Hussein 's sons-in-law , Hussein and Saddam Kamil , defected to Jordan .
They brought with them evidence of a coordinated and sustained programme of concealment by Saddam of his chemical and biological weapons .
Since then , UNSCOM has been working to uncover key points in the supply chain of the weapons programmes .
Saddam has been equally determined to obstruct their work .
In the last 20 months UNSCOM has sought access to 63 sites where it believed concealment was taking place .
It was obstructed and delayed from carrying out inspections at 38 sites and was flatly refused access to a further 14 sites .
Despite Security Council Resolution 687 , Iraq only permitted prompt access at 20 % of sites under suspicion .
We must remember that the only reason the UNSCOM regime and the sanctions to enforce it remain in place seven years after the Gulf War is because Saddam will not dismantle weapons of mass destruction , nor will he allow UNSCOM to do the job it has been mandated to do by the United Nations Security Council .
People naturally ask : why is this important ?
The answer I believe is clear .
Saddam Hussein has used weapons of mass destruction before .
He did so against his neighbour , Iran , during the Iraq-Iran war in the 1980s .
He did so against his own people .
Ten years ago next month , he dropped chemical weapons on a town in North East Iraq .
The 5 000 people in the town of Halabja , including many women , children and old men , were killed .
European Union Member States are united in their hope that a diplomatic solution to the present crisis can be found .
We surely support all initiatives aimed at achieving that end .
This morning , now the United Nations Secretary General has been given the backing of the Security Council for his mission to Baghdad , we all wish him every success .
But we know that until now , Saddam has not appeared to be looking for a diplomatic solution .
He persists in his obstruction of UNSCOM .
He persists in his obstruction of the wish of the international community .
He demands that inspections of so-called presidential sites must be one-off not continuing as required under Security Council Resolution 687 .
European Union Member States believe that any diplomatic solution must allow UNSCOM full and unconditional access to all sites as mandated by United Nations Security Council resolutions .
We believe that Saddam Hussein must comply with the relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions .
The present dispute over presidential sites exposes the Iraqi propaganda that it is sanctions that are the cause of the hardship and the suffering of the Iraqi people .
We reject that .
There are no sanctions , nor have there ever been. against the import of food and medicine .
These are items in short supply in Iraq because Saddam Hussein has consistently refused to spend money on his own people , preferring instead to spend it on his own comforts and on his weapons programmes .
The European Union is united in its concern for the humanitarian suffering of the Iraqi people .
European Union countries on the Security Council in New York have taken the lead in trying to alleviate the worst of this suffering .
The oil-for-food programme under which Iraq is allowed to export limited quantities of oil in return for humanitarian goods was first offered to Iraq in the summer of 1991 as United Nations Security Council Resolution 706 indicates .
It was not until five years later that Saddam Hussein was shamed into accepting UN Security Council Resolution 986 which set up the present oil-for-food programme .
Those European Union Member States at present on the Security Council have taken the lead in taking the recent recommendations of the UN Secretary General to more than double the amount of oil that Iraq can sell under this programme and turning them into a Security Council resolution .
I very much hope that this resolution will be adopted this week .
It will bring further humanitarian benefits to the Iraqi people .
However , let us not forget that it is the United Nations , not Saddam , that is responsible for this .
This is not surprising .
One does not need to look far for evidence of the brutality of Saddam Hussein 's regime .
I recommend that Members study the report of Max van der Stoel , the UN 's special rapporteur on human rights in Iraq .
During the last six years he has catalogued a terrifying list of human rights violations by Saddam Hussein and his clique .
Mr van der Stoel 's most recent report describes human rights in Iraq as ' terrible ' .
He concludes : ' The system of military dictatorship effectively requires that human rights violations occur in order to retain the position and privileges of those in power .
Murder is routine .
The price of criticizing the regime is execution .
Recently Saddam Hussein decided that his prisons were over-crowded .
His solution was to execute all those serving longer than fifteen years .
Over a thousand people were murdered . '
Let me reiterate that European Union Member States are united in their desire to see this present crisis resolved diplomatically .
This is the message that Kofi Annan takes to Baghdad on behalf of all of us .
Let us hope that Saddam responds and cooperates fully with the United Nations Special Commission .
Mr President , the Commission 's view on this conflict is that we all think the international community 's first priority at the moment is to be able to reach an agreement with the Iraqi Government within the next few days , in order to avoid military intervention which basically nobody wants .
There is no doubt that the correct authority for resolving the dispute is the United Nations .
Therefore , as the President-in-Office of the Council has just said , the Commission also fully supports the activities of the United Nations Security Council , and especially its Secretary General , in their efforts to ensure that the Iraqi authorities comply fully with the Security Council resolutions .
We hope the Secretary General 's current negotiations can prevent the conflict , so that UNSCOM can resume unrestricted and effective inspections in accordance with those resolutions .
Mr Marín , I have not seen so brief a statement for some time in this House . I think others too will be amazed by the European Commission 's brevity .
Mr President , my group is very aware of the responsibility it bears in this debate today .
Within this group we have Members of Parliament who represent nine socialist and social democrat-led governments in this Union , and these parties are in government in three more of the 15 .
We do not pretend that it is easy to find a common position , given the range of views which are represented not just in those 12 governments but also amongst the people of the European Union whom we represent .
But I want to pay tribute to my colleagues who have striven to find principles which are common to us all and which unite us in this , one of the most difficult life-and-death decisions this present Parliament has had to confront since 1994 .
Firstly , we must remember that we , in the European Parliament , do not dispose of armies , aeroplanes , bombs or aircraft carriers .
Let us be entirely honest ; we do not even have a common foreign and security policy worth its name .
We have made our criticism about the lack of progress of the CFSP quite clear in recent years and , particularly , our dissatisfaction at the provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty in this respect .
So I think we need to demonstrate a little humility when it comes to decision-making in this field , and show some support for those of our colleagues , of all political persuasions , who will be confronted with the decisionmaking on this issue in national parliaments ; those who will really have the awesome responsibility for the lives of their fellow citizens under arms and those of the many thousands of Iraqi citizens who are at risk .
With all of this in mind , my group has just three main strategic political points which it wants to make in this debate .
Firstly , we insist absolutely that Saddam Hussein must comply fully with the resolutions of the United Nations Security Council and allow the unrestricted and unconditional access of the UN weapons inspection teams to all locations on Iraqi territory .
There can be no compromise on this .
These UN resolutions on Iraq represented a real step forward by beginning the process of monitoring and verifying disarmament .
The UN showed what the future could hold in determining a safer world .
If we were then , and are now , serious about this work , we must not allow Saddam Hussein to flout the international community .
Secondly , my group believes that the only body legitimately responsible for this policy is the United Nations .
We want to give our wholesale support to the UN and , in particular , we thank the Secretary General for the hard work and commitment he has shown in his attempt to solve this crisis through diplomatic and political pressure .
We wish him well on his mission to Baghdad . We believe that it is the role of the United Nations Security Council to come together at this time to reconsider the Iraqi problem .
I must tell you that there are some in my group who believe passionately that the United Nations , and only the United Nations , should decide what happens next .
They argue against any military action without the sanction of the United Nations Security Council .
Whilst they do not represent the majority in my group , be in no doubt that they do not argue that case from any weakening resolve to enforce existing UN resolutions ; nor because they want to give Saddam Hussein any hope that he will be able to escape our determination to remove from him any potential to damn the region and the world with his weapons of mass destruction .
Rather , they argue the need for a fresh UN mandate because they fear to inflict death and destruction on Iraqi civilians , who are the real losers in this ; because they also fail to understand the objectives of a military strike against Iraq ; and because they genuinely fear that a precipitate military strike may initiate a conflagration in the Middle East that would kill and destroy on scale not seen for many years .
There is not one member of my group who does not share those dreads .
For the great majority , however , we believe that the United Nations-led drive for a political and diplomatic solution must be the focus for our parliamentary action at this moment .
Thirdly , my group is committed to the food-for-oil programme and the additional programme which Kofi Annan has proposed to support the Iraqi people .
I know that next Monday , 23 February , the General Affairs Council has the situation of Iraq on its agenda .
I hear you saying that the Presidency has kept partners in the European Union informed .
In our view , information is not enough .
Parliament needs the Council to find a common position for the European Union .
We recognize the difficulties ; we recognize the lack of precision and real competence in the Treaty on European Union ; but our Union is , if anything , a real model of conflict resolution .
Please use every ounce of strength and vision which the Presidency can muster to give the European Union a leading role in the world on this issue .
Give us a European Union of which its people can be proud .
And please show us that the European Union means more than words in a treaty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the brevity of the speech by the Commissioner Marín should perhaps be a symbolic expression of the fact that we have not much time left .
I believe Mr President-in-Office of the Council that we should not lose sight of one thing : if the European Union were able to work out a common position then perhaps the message to Saddam Hussein would be clear , that he cannot play around with the world community .
This is further proof that our inability to formulate common foreign and security policies does not lead to the avoidance of war but in fact makes it even more probable .
Therefore , a greater ability on the part of Europeans to take action on such questions would be a gain for peace .
I hope that will finally be understood by political directors and foreign ministers , so that sensible mechanisms can come into force for a common foreign and security policy .
We would all like to have diplomatic solutions .
A military conflict should be avoided .
Therefore my group , too , is totally convinced that the mission to be undertaken on Friday by Kofi Annan must receive full support , in order to render a military conflict impossible .
We wish him every success with it .
But it must be clear that this must result in all United Nations resolutions being complied with and that there can be no compromise in the implementation of inspections designed to remove all weapons of mass destruction from Iraq .
Iraq has biological and chemical weapons of mass destruction , associated with the development of rocket programmes which represent a danger not only to the immediate locality in the Middle East but in the medium and long term can be a great danger to ourselves and our peoples .
For this reason there is great interest in their removal .
We have the difficulty of choosing between options , not all of which are pleasant .
But in my opinion , to do nothing and to let Saddam Hussein carry on ducking and diving as he has done for seven years with the world community , would lead to the spread of weapons of mass destruction and we sit there like paper tigers , who have lost any claim to authority in this world .
For this reason it must be possible , if the resolutions of the United Nations are not fully recognised and implemented in the near future , to take further steps to compel Saddam Hussein to comply with the resolutions .
If this should lead to military conflict it will not be the responsibility of those who want compliance with the will of the international community but of those who do not comply with decisions of the United Nations , that is Saddam Hussein .
We should make this responsibility quite clear and stand behind these decisions .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to give an example of consistency , but also one of cohesion , by both emulating Commissioner Marín and confirming everything that has been said , word for word , by Mrs Green .
We have supported his resolution while preparing our own resolution on the same subject , because the appropriateness and validity of the things he has said are inevitable .
Moreover , on certain subjects , we in this House must be determined , informed and responsible .
Despite the exercises in dialectics and the ability we all have to provide our colleagues with comments and appraisals that certainly make the debate richer , at the end of our conversation there can only be one solution : to make everyone respect the resolutions of the UN Security Council .
I believe that Saddam Hussein 's violation of such a resolution would seriously jeopardize the balances of civilian life and would bring further harm to a nation that is already suffering restrictions and facing uncertainties : this is another aspect we need to consider .
On another occasion , we will have to assess such aspects , but at the moment , we should , above all , confirm that the resolutions of the UN Security Council will be respected by everyone .
The occasion of today 's debate and in-depth consideration of the matter also leads me to make an additional assessment that will not be the first and , unfortunately , I fear , not the last : the inadequacy , pointed out by Mrs Green , of our common foreign and security policy .
This is a serious deficit which our institution should be able to face up to , particularly on account of the complementarity evident within the Union .
We should invite each Registry of our Member States to reflect and to realize that this is a necessity , often highlighted for us by the events which occur from time to time .
So what should we do ?
On behalf of my group , I hope that the Annan mission will be successful and , above all , I hope we will reflect on how we can rectify this inadequacy .
We can reflect all the difficulties experienced by our continent , but we can also provide a significant , definitive example of what dialectics and , above all , peace and political and social cohesion mean .
Mr President , the Liberal group attaches great importance to respect for international rule of law , and to the opinions and resolutions of the Security Council .
This does not only apply to Iraq , but to other cases as well , in particular those near Iraq .
It should be made clear to Saddam Hussein , persuasively , that he must allow unconditional and unrestricted access to the inspection teams .
The integrity and independence of UNSCOM must be fully respected by Iraq .
Saddam must have realized - yet he still manages to get away with it after years of obstruction - that we have reached our limits .
The international community must act as unanimously as possible to give diplomatic pressure maximum effect .
It would be better if military intervention were avoided , but effective pressure on people or dictators such as the one in Iraq is not possible without a credible military threat , and it is this military threat which can make a diplomatic success possible .
Europe must play its part in this successful international approach .
I must confess that it is just a touch embarrassing to note yet again that Europe is deeply divided on this .
With all respect to the British Presidency , their role has not quite been played as we thought it should .
The General Affairs Council will not speak about Iraq until Monday , and up until now the Presidency clearly did not think it was necessary to make the Union the forum for this matter .
Of course , we still have not got a CSFP , and this kind of European unity might have made the difference .
In the meantime , Iraq and Saddam are laughing up their sleeve .
Let today 's opinion in this House be a first impulse towards a policy for joint European action which is propagated effectively and credibly , including within the context of the UN .
France and Russia will have to understand that we cannot wait indefinitely for Iraq concessions which are not forthcoming .
This undermines the international rule of law , creates a dangerous precedent , and saddles the world with large numbers of weapons of mass destruction .
That is why the Union as a whole must support the US explicitly , exert credible pressure on Iraq and provide a clear strategy and contingency planning in case of military intervention .
A longer term strategy therefore also requires that attention be focused on other countries in the region .
There is no need for a new UN resolution for such intervention .
Mr President , if the bombardment and invasion of Iraq by the United States and allied forces go ahead unilaterally as is planned this will be a multiple injustice .
Firstly , it will kill many Iraqi citizens who are wholly innocent of any offence against the United States or its real or imagined interests .
Secondly , if it is claimed that the dictatorial nature of the regime is the reason for military action , then there are significant numbers of other dictatorships against which action is not envisaged .
Similarly , if a failure to respect United Nations resolutions were the criterion for war , then there are numerous other states to which the same reproach would apply .
Thirdly , unilateral action will undermine and discredit the United Nations organization because only a Security Council decision can legitimate action against any Member State .
Selective unilateral punishment missions have nothing to do with the development of international law .
Further , the failure to explore the possibility of joint decisions by the European Union enfeebles and discredits the Union and exposes the institution of the Presidency-in-Office to serious reproach .
In this case , the Presidency has unilaterally chosen what to do regardless of any other opinions which might exist in other Member States .
All these serious problems are undermining the institutions of international law .
The GUE group has proposed a joint resolution with the Greens and why we are launching an appeal to members of other political groups in this Parliament and to political parties , civil associations , churches and cultural bodies throughout Europe to oppose this military escalation and to urge all EC Member States to refuse to support it .
Supporters of this appeal will be invited to come together to agree upon their plans to campaign for the condemnation of violent and illegal actions by individual states and to establish the sovereignty of the UN framework .
Mr President , during the Gulf War in 1991 , the USA and its allies dropped 277 000 tonnes of bombs over Iraq in 42 days .
That did not dislodge Saddam Hussein 's despotic totalitarian regime .
Over the following seven years , Iraq has been subject to a massive international blockade .
That has also failed to dislodge the military dictatorship .
On the other hand , according to UNICEF , these measures have led to 4 500 children under the age of five dying each month .
The infant mortality rate has increased from 24 to 98 per 1000 births .
Cases of diseases like cholera , polio and jaundice have increased several times over .
In a new survey , the Middle East Council of Churches says : ' The West wants to punish the leaders of Iraq , but the ones bearing all the burden are ordinary people ' .
Now the USA wants to hide its President 's domestic problems through a new bombing war against Iraq , a war which is going to increase the suffering of the civilian population without solving the problem of weapons of mass destruction , and without paying any regard to the UN , which the USA systematically sabotages .
Of course the Green group supports Kofi Annan .
Of course we think that Iraq should comply with the UN 's resolutions , but the same also applies to other states which are the subject of UN resolutions .
Of course we want weapons of mass destruction out of Iraq . They should be out of all other countries too .
We seek a just world order in which there may be a need for policing actions .
However , that should be done by the UN , not unilaterally by the USA .
How often have representatives of the party groups , which are now supporting the wishy-washy , war-mongering majority text , complained about the USA 's world hegemony ?
How stubbornly have they demanded an effective EU alternative ?
But now , when the moment of truth has come , when the American master whistles , Green and Brok , Bertens and the others obediently wag their tales .
That means that the EU is now helping the war of the civilizations : the West against the Arab-Muslim world , because that is what it is going to be .
The whole of the Arab world is now supporting Iraq , even its arch enemy Syria , not because they like Saddam Hussein , but because they see what is happening as an attack by the West against all of Arab-Muslim culture .
The EU could have played an important , strategic role for peace .
The EU could have come forward with a real alternative to the USA 's ' gunboat diplomacy ' .
But when it comes to the crunch , certain EU countries ' old colonial cloven hooves peep out .
The historical hatred of the Arabs wells up .
The stale religious prejudices against Islam reach out and transform the EU 's powerful elite into obedient slaves on the American triumphal chariot .
That also means that the EU 's good name - it has actually had a good name in the Arab world - will disappear .
The trust in the EU in Palestine , where we have made a constructive contribution , will be sacrificed .
The whole Mediterranean cooperation will be put at risk .
It is tragic , it is deplorable , it is shameful .
Support for the joint resolution from the Green group and GUE / NGL would be able to avoid all this .
Mr President , we are all aware that the political groups within our House are weighing up the exceptional responsibility they bear .
Parliament has real power to influence peace or war , and I want to tell you why the Group of the European Radical Alliance took the decision unenthusiastically , but in full conscience of the various implications , to add its voice to the resolution which four groups have already supported .
We have three motivating factors .
Firstly we reject the caricature description of the Iraqi dictatorship on one hand , and the American imperialism on the other hand and do not come out in favour of either .
Secondly , we believe that the European Union is not neutral in this conflict which has its beginnings in 1990 , and that the question of our basic conception of liberty is at issue .
Thirdly , whatever the cost to us , we consider that if Iraq does not fall into line with the UN resolutions as a result of diplomatic efforts , we should resort to military action , for if we do not , international law is no longer valid .
And yet we are reluctant to go down this road , as are a number of Member States , as well as the Arab and Turkish allies of the United States .
We know that those who are seeking to disarm Iraq were those who armed it in the first place , and that those who condemned the Iraqi exploits in Kuwait put up with the double protectorate imposed on Lebanon . We are also aware that the UNSCOM mission , in the eyes of many observers , is an American venture rather than a tool of the United Nations , that the current embargo and the future war influences or will influence the ordinary people much more than those in charge of them , and that the allies of the United States would suffer much more than America from a new international crisis .
We know all this and we also deplore the British Presidency for believing it could express , without even a formal meeting of the General Affairs Council , its national prejudices and thereby stress the vacuity of the diplomacy of the Union .
We know all this , but we take responsibility by voting for the resolution and insisting on the following points .
Firstly , the UN alone has the power to force Iraq to observe the resolutions it has made .
Secondly , any military intervention would only be legitimate if preceded by a decision by the Security Council .
Thirdly , the Union should wholeheartedly support the mission of the UN Secretary General and reaffirm the absolute priority which it accords to diplomatic efforts .
It is on the condition of these three points that our group will approve a text which explicitly includes the military solution as the only one capable of lending credibility to diplomatic pressure .
Mr President , nations must be respected and peoples must not be humiliated ; this is the basic rule of international life .
This should be applied to all , and particularly to more fragile and less assured nations which the international community should not set out to weaken or destabilize but rather to strengthen , and which , in the Arab-Muslim world , are the best counterweights which can be set against the development of Islamism .
Beyond the person of Saddam Hussein , the international community must take into consideration above all Iraq and its integrity , the Iraqi people and its sovereignty .
The international community must take care not to launch irresponsible actions which would be perceived as singling Iraq out with a suspect determination in a disproportionate violation of its sovereignty .
It would strengthen the bonds between the Iraqi people and a large part of Arab opinion surrounding Saddam Hussein .
It would provoke very hostile reactions towards the West from the Arab world and would risk stirring up the occupied territories .
These consequences would be entirely out of proportion with the objectives of the inspections which , moreover , would not be met by a military strike .
If , in fact , the real objective is the full application by the Iraqi authorities of the United Nations resolutions which call for the complete disarmament of the country , we must first note that Iraq today no longer represents a threat to the security of its neighbours .
It no longer has any nuclear capability and its ballistic potential is under control .
If the Security Council thinks it necessary to reinforce the inspections and controls to detect as far as possible any chemical and biological weapons which Iraq has in its possession , it should be possible to settle this residual question by political dialogue .
This does not rule out pressure on or threats to a wily and disturbing dictator who remained in power in 1991 , elements which could be useful in negotiations .
This pressure would be all the more effective if Iraqis were encouraged to cooperate positively with the United Nations . And how better to do this than by proposing to put an end in a structured way to the unhealthy imprisonment of Iraq , caused by an embargo which for seven years has hit the population hard and whose complete failure we would now do well to acknowledge .
The embargo has destabilized society , but not Saddam Hussein , nor the political and military elite of the regime .
It has destroyed production and trade channels and at the same time reinforced the links between Saddam Hussein and his people .
Lifting the embargo is essential and I am delighted that some European diplomatic efforts are proposing just that whilst they are actively participating in the political dialogue with Iraq . At the same time , they recall that it is up to the Security Council alone to judge the degree to which Iraq has adopted its resolutions and to draw the appropriate conclusions about this .
Of course , these diplomatic efforts do not all speak with one voice , but they speak loudly , and this is how Europe in all its diversity comes to be an important player in this crisis .
Europe makes itself heard and intervenes with the aid of its most active Member States in such a way as to be much more effective than if it had tried hard to define a common position for all .
Any such position would have risked being too weak and too slow to emerge when a crisis , such as the one we are facing at the moment , calls for a swift judgement and a rapid reaction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am sorry to have to point out that , once again , we are called upon to repeat a useless practice that risks , if it has not already done so , lacking any specific confirmation , owing to the total lack of a credible foreign policy common to the fifteen Member States .
We realize that it is not easy to make the political strategies followed by the states in past decades compatible , with histories and interests that are often different if not hostile , but we regret the absence of any effort to minimize differences on the basis of common , irrenounceable principles .
Firstly , as regards respect for international treaties and agreements , the American ally cannot be used when it is convenient and then discarded when appropriate .
There is a saying in Italian : " clear agreements and long friendship ' .
So , we need clear agreements with all our allies .
Secondly , we need to consider respect for human rights , a flower in the eye of Parliament . We should ensure that the bilateral agreements between individual states and countries which do not offer any guarantee to that effect , should no longer take place , particularly when they have to be made with countries such as Iraq that have destructive military arsenals which place the populations of an entire region in danger .
Thirdly , the UN should have an ever more significant and important duty , particularly at diplomatic level , to ensure that its prerogative remains intact and that its resolutions are accepted without any hesitation or delay by all those who have signed the accession .
Having said that , it is obvious that the National Alliance delegation can only hope for the successful outcome of the current diplomatic initiatives , particularly the initiative whose deadline is nearly up , led by the UN Secretary General , Kofi Annan , whom no-one can consider to be under any influences .
This is particularly so to avoid the catastrophic effects of a conflict that would force the civilian population into great discomfort , particularly the weaker sections - the children and the elderly - who are still paying harshly for the effects of the previous war .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Vice-President Marín , I believe that each and every one of us in this House feels revulsion for Saddam Hussein and his regime .
There can be no doubt about that .
Nevertheless , we must be clear , in view of the political climate , especially in the Arab world , when and on what conditions a military strike can be successful .
In my view , Europe must insist on three things , in solidarity with but certainly not in subordination to the policy of America .
Firstly , the aim of any military strike must be clear .
So far , it has not become clear to me .
We must be as sure as possible that after a military strike the situation will be better for peace and better for the development of the whole Middle East region .
Secondly , there is no question that the situation in the Middle East is not improving but deteriorating . This has been pointed out frequently by the EU and in particular Commissioner Marín , as well as the President-in-Office of the Council .
A few years ago it was still possible to organize as many Arab countries as possible in a coalition against Saddam Hussein , which is impossible today .
It is a fact that we have a policy of obstruction by the Netanyahu government ; it is a fact , without making comparisons , that even Israel does not recognise and does not implement a UN resolution concerning the Lebanon .
This produces a negative atmosphere in the Arab world and we must be clear that any strike which is not properly thought out , extremely well considered and well supported will make this atmosphere even worse .
Europe must bear that in mind .
Lastly , as regards the role of the United Nations , I would not like to say now that it is essential to have a Security Council resolution .
There are various legal interpretations there .
But we must all be clear about one thing : the weaker the consensus in the Security Council and the United Nations , the more negative any effects will be , particularly on the relationship between the West and the Arab world .
It must be Europe 's task to get America to support the United Nations fully , now in the case of this mission , but also in the Security Council , to ensure as broad a consensus as possible ; otherwise , the military strike becomes a slap in the face of the Arabs and ultimately also a slap in the face of the Europeans who seek a good relationship with this region .
Mr President , I would like to say how nice it was to hear the President-in-Office of the Council give us an informative statement on the situation .
We had already read this in the papers .
We would rather have heard a few different things , because the more important and more critical the topic , the less visible the Foreign Affairs Council is .
This is a dangerous situation .
When something does come out of the Council , it seems to be fragile compromises which may be different again tomorrow and which are not really shared .
As the world expects something a little better from the European Union since we are an economic giant , it is extremely dangerous that the Council is this invisible .
The European citizens , according to the opinion polls , think that the European Union is above all responsible for foreign affairs . This is a very logical thought , really , but sadly a misunderstanding , because the Foreign Affairs Council and the Union do not really accept this responsibility .
That is why the Council is usually not part of the solution , but part of the problem .
The British Presidency - from which we had expected a fresh , new approach - could have made an attempt to avoid this being part of the problem .
Unfortunately , the British Presidency has only acted nationally , and has actually forgotten its duty as leader of foreign policy of the Union .
Like a proud terrier , Great Britain is walking next to the American elephant , and is saying : listen to us making all this noise .
If there is anything that can contribute to avoiding war , it is a solid European Union action .
This can achieve something .
We need a solid European Union action that leaves no room for false hopes or manipulation by tyrants .
There was certainly none of this clarity in Bosnia .
The British position is clearer now ; oil is involved .
In Bosnia , British officers told me at the time , oil did not play a part .
That was a terrible position , but it is clearer now .
Thank God .
But only as the position of the country itself .
There is no European Union , or Council position regarding Iraq or regarding Algeria .
Parliament 's resolution must now add something to this unusual situation in order to fill the vacuum a little .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a euphemism , I believe , to state that the legitimacy of the Baghdad regime , suspected of crimes against humanity , crimes of war and crimes of genocide is doubtful at least .
In a more general context , it is a fact that Saddam Hussein is trying to justify himself in the eyes of world public opinion , and the developing countries in particular , as a symbol of the combat against American imperialism , and Western imperialism more generally , in a black and white view of the world that belongs to another era .
The point should be made that no-one in Europe wants or can want war with Iraq .
The diplomatic solution to the crisis is certainly far more preferable . But it is for this precise reason that it is absolutely necessary , as already confirmed by several parties , that the European Union and the individual Member States should make up for the guilty and self-interested inertia of some authoritative members of the international Community with all their authority .
At the same time , the European Union should not leave the United States and the United Kingdom the monopoly on handling the crisis on the Western side .
For this reason , the elusive nature of the General Affairs Council and even the brevity of the declarations made by the representative for the Commission amaze me somewhat .
Politics , particularly international politics , abhors a vacuum ; we will not contribute towards creating it . Otherwise , if this vacuum is occupied by others , we will have to deal with it ourselves .
Mr President , we are all quite clear that Iraq must comply with international resolutions .
However , I would like to know whether we also share the view that the United Nations should be the only ones to make that happen , and whether we also agree that they should do it peacefully , through political and diplomatic means .
Of course , we support the efforts of the United Nations Secretary General , Kofi Annan , but I hope those efforts do not end up being the victim of friendly fire .
In other words , Mr Annan 's trip to Baghdad might end up being the excuse for US military action , which is unacceptable from every point of view , both because of the consequences it would have for the civilian population and , of course , because of the effects it would have on stability in the Middle East .
The role of the European Union in this matter is quite frankly regrettable .
The British Presidency is embarking upon an exercise in confusion in order to guarantee their national policy which , quite frankly , is to do what the White House says .
And what can we say about other Member States of the European Union , beginning with my own country , Spain , where the Head of Government has witnessed his citizens receiving an explanation of Madrid 's participation in a hypothetical US operation via Tony Blair through the CNN ?
The Union should of course have a common position on this matter , which should include opposing any unilateral US action and , of course , lifting an embargo which is causing indescribable suffering to the ordinary citizens of Iraq . They are being punished twice over : they have to endure a brutal dictatorial regime , and they lack the foods and medicines to cope with daily life .
We should support the democratic opposition in Iraq , of course .
And this Parliament ought to make sure that if Clinton undertakes a military operation without the support of a United Nations Security Council resolution that he will not be able to end up finding support in a resolution from this Parliament .
What a sad state of affairs that would be !
Mr President , let me first make it clear on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament that we hold no brief for Saddam Hussein .
Some of us were opposing him when Britain and the US were arming him .
This includes the chemical and biological warfare which Doug Henderson spoke about this morning .
We know they have it , we sold it to them .
Let us end all chemical and biological warfare and destroy all weapons around the world .
Let us inspect all sites around the world including those in the USA and in Britain which still exist .
Let us be clear what this crisis is about .
It is not about the threat from Iraq .
It is about Mr Clinton 's domestic problems .
This is the war of Mr Clinton 's penis , designed to bolster his image in the face of allegations about his character back home .



How ironic then that Mr Clinton 's main backer is Mr Blair , Mr Clean the Christian socialist , and how disgraceful that Mr Blair , the President of the European Union , has made no attempt to represent the views of Europe but seeks to impose the views of Mr Clinton on Europe .
How sad and pathetic it is to watch Robin Cook , the British Foreign Secretary , instead of travelling around Europe to help stop the war , trailing around the Gulf States to persuade them to let the US and Britain bomb Baghdad .
What an end to a man who made his name as a CND and peace campaigner !
The Financial Times this morning reports that Foreign Office officials brief that Britain is prepared to use nuclear weapons against Iraq if Saddam responds .
Let this Parliament speak clearly against this unnecessary war .
The joint resolution of the EPP and the PSE does not go far enough .
I understand that Pauline Green has been privately critical of Mr Blair 's belligerence over Iraq .
Let us be openly critical of the British failure to act as the President of Europe rather than the fifty-second state of the US .
Let us say that bombing Baghdad will not work and is morally unjustifiable .
The Green amendments to the joint resolution will say all these things .
I appeal to the Socialist group , and especially to the British Labour Members ; forget your fears about reselection , listen to your conscience , follow the example of the British MPs who voted against the war at Westminster last night .
Remember that not only will your Labour party members judge you , but history will judge how you vote on this issue .
I appeal to you to vote for peace , for a diplomatic solution and against the war .
Mr President , it seems as though the United States of America is preparing quite imperturbably to lead a new war in the Gulf and to strike Iraq , against international law , against the United Nations Charter , against the resolutions of the Security Council and particularly resolution 687 which refutes their mandate to do so .
What can justify this sudden , unilateral , arrogant and cynical policy ?
And why now when the situation seemed to be improving ?
Is Mr Clinton trying to forget the Paula Jones and Monica Lewinsky affairs , where the shocking and the sordid have competed for our attention ?
Or is it on orders from Mr Netanyahu , whose disregard for the Security Council resolutions does not arouse any emotion from you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council ?
Or again , is it a question of preserving the profitability of American oil-wells , half of which would have to close if , as forecast , Iraqi oil came back onto the world market ?
In any case , contrary to the official lies , one thing is sure : these threats are not justified by the danger which Iraq would represent .
No prima facie evidence on this subject has even begun to be provided .
This country with 20 million inhabitants has been methodically starved for seven years .
There are no more spare parts .
For seven years , no aeroplanes or helicopters have taken off .
Industry is paralyzed .
To get to the capital , you have to cross 900 kilometres of desert in terrible conditions .
There are no more electric bulbs , there is no more bread , there is no more milk .
Pencils have even been confiscated from schools because it is said that Saddam Hussein would make atomic bombs from graphite mines !
The most upsetting thing about it all is not the American lies , but your servility , Mr President of the Council .
Let us at least get rid of your loathsome morals .
Let us get rid of your alibi .
Let us get rid of the political and media montages which took place during the Gulf War .
If you wish to go to war with your American friends , go ahead , but go without us !
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am sorry that the British Government has unilaterally and immediately declared that it is prepared to take part in a military action , without consulting the European governments and seeking a common position .
At a time when it is responsible for the Presidency of the European Union , this is a harsh blow to the role and credibility of the Union .
The joint resolution of several political groups calls us to this responsibility today ; it calls us to define a common position , to support all diplomatic means , particularly the missions of the UN and its Secretary General , and its proposal of oil in return for food directed at the population .
Finally , and this is the central point , the resolution asks for any further action that is not diplomatic to require the formal decision of the UN Security Council , the sole interpreter .
This is an essential point .
We are convinced of the extreme danger Saddam Hussein poses and the need to force him to observe the UN resolutions . However , the Security Council has to decide how and when , assessing the situation which is different in both military and political terms today than it was during the Gulf War .
The situation is different today as regards military resources .
I can give two examples of this : what effects will striking chemical arms deposits have ?
Minister Primakoff talks of devastating effects over the entire region .
This is a point that should be assessed .
Another example is that UN sources indicate that Saddam has hidden chemical missiles and arms in Algeria , Libya and Sudan .
If that is true , what does he intend to do with those countries and how can it help to bombard Iraq ?
The situation is also different in terms of politics .
All the Arab countries , and first and foremost our allies , are against this .
Why ?
We can take action against them , but with what consequences throughout the Middle East ?
The Security Council should assess all this and then its decisions will be applied .
Each of us will then do our parts .
Madam President , Kofi Annan 's trip to Baghdad gives us a glimpse of rationality and hope : rationality because , in the last few weeks , war has been considered inevitable on almost all sides , in view of Saddam Hussein 's unacceptable arrogance .
As Clinton said yesterday , war is never the first option , even if it may be the only option in certain situations .
Thanks to the persistence of some countries , to the attitude of UN public union , to the strong calls from the solitary moral authority of the Pope in Rome , to the worrying and foreseeable agreement between Russia and China and to the resistance of the Arab countries , the policy seems to be taking over its responsibility very recently .
Unfortunately , we cannot thank Europe for this because , once again , Europe , which is preparing to become a monetary power , is not managing to become a political power , not even when faced with a crisis that could provide it with more than we believe today .
For this reason , I am joining all those who have criticized the inexplicable and unacceptable behaviour of the British Presidency in these circumstances .
Let it be clear that no-one doubts the need for the Baghdad dictator to be forced to observe all the UN resolutions . However , the usefulness and effectiveness of the methods used to achieve the result , the balance of foreseeable human costs and the simulation of subsequent political scenarios can never be considered indisputable and inevitable .
When the alternative is war , indisputable limits to the patience of diplomacy and politics cannot be invoked .
This is not a weakness , but is the strength that shows us the old moral and political wisdom of this ancient continent and the only serious lesson left behind by the century that is drawing to a close .
Madam President , we cannot but express astonishment and dismay about what we have heard today , particularly from the British Foreign Office gentleman .
We read the same papers he reads about the weapons of mass destruction , British-developed anthrax and the inflated threats against humanity .
We also know the role his government has played , first to block , then to hinder the mission in Iraq of the Secretary General , Kofi Annan .
We learn that the use of incredible force to produce a diplomatic solution has long ceased to be a threat to achieve anything at all , as the juggernaut of American military power moves inexorably and with devastating force against the Iraqi people : there are one and a half million victims of the embargo , an embargo that somebody in this House wants to prolong forever .
On this side of the House , we nurture no sympathy for the Baghdad dictator .
We still hope that Mr Annan might perform a miracle .
We deplore , in the strongest terms , the veil of hypocrisy and mystification drawn over this pre-planned massacre , over this tragedy of major proportions and , more than anything else , over the attempted use of this Union to support blind instruments of Anglo- American military and foreign policies at their worst .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is totally disgraceful to claim that Iraq would really threaten its neighbours with what remains of an arsenal which has been voluntarily overestimated by Israeli-American disinformation .
There can be no doubt that this country , if it were to launch a war of aggression , would suffer dreadful destructive reprisals from Israel and the United States immediately .
Having led Saddam Hussein into the trap of recapturing Kuwait , the United States hammered the derisory Iraqi army with their might .
And since then , they have been starving the Iraqi people and causing the deaths of children by the hundreds of thousands , soon to reach two million , using a procedure which constitutes a crime against humanity . It is all the more terrible in that it is perpetrated coldly , calmly and clinically and has operated down the years under the cover of moral pacifist motivations which claim human rights as their inspiration .
We know that the reality is that with cynicism covered in a thick layer of hypocrisy , Mr Clinton is obeying first and foremost the cold interests of oil mercantilism which Iraqi production must not threaten , not to mention his own murky personal motivations .
Finally , and above all , if Saddam Hussein did not exist , he would have to be invented .
Israel and the United States think they need a constant virtual enemy and a war which might always break out .
Today Saddam , tomorrow someone else .
Comprehension of this is the key to the whole situation , but it also brings understanding of the danger for world peace .
So who could negate the legitimacy of Palestinian exasperation and the rising anger of the most moderate and responsible Arab movements ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in my contribution I would like to say something about the role of the European Union and our House in this conflict .
The question is , do we play a part at all , or do we do it justice ?
The fact is that we do not play an active role , but nevertheless I think that our debate and the joint resolution which we present today are an important contribution , for we in the European Parliament will reach a decision before the Council and the Commission have been able to work out a common position .
This is the umpteenth time that the Council and the Commission have not been able to find a common position and if the Commission , as we have heard this morning , limits itself to wishing and hoping then the Commission appears to be in a bad way .
In our resolution we demand a common position on a common foreign and security policy , but we also say in this resolution how we view this .
In any case , it involves a resolution put forward by a majority in our House and , as already mentioned , adopted before the Council and the Commission are in a position to put forward some kind of common text for discussion .
I would like to make a comment on the UN resolution . The Americans hold the view that we must intervene if all diplomatic efforts fail , and that we shall intervene .
In our House , and this has been said , there are some who dispute this .
It is to be hoped that further measures against the dictator will be supported by the whole international community .
It would also be desirable for the UN Security Council to confirm such a measure .
But this effort must not lead to some members of the international community , such as Russia and China , bringing the Security Council into a position whereby the pressure on Saddam can be reduced , which would mean state terrorism being victorious in Iraq .
We do not want that .
We want , if possible , a peaceful solution , and hopefully a common one , which will mean that all those things indicated some time ago by the British Presidency disappear from the world .
Chemical and biological weapons cannot be accepted anywhere in the world , and certainly not in a country where there is state terrorism .
Mr President-in-Office , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the refusal of Iraq to comply with the decisions of the UN can only be condemned firmly and without ambiguity by any country or parliament .
Respect for international law is the condition for peace , all the more so because in this case we are dealing with highly dangerous weapons .
But who could refuse or regret exhausting all possible diplomatic and political efforts before using force to put these weapons out of action to prevent them causing harm in case negotiations failed ?
I congratulate and approve of the efforts of those who push negotiation to its limits , especially the French government and the Secretary General of the UN .
We could already make a number of observations about this crisis .
Firstly , was Iraq capable of manufacturing these terrible arms on its own , or was it aided by other members of the UN ?
Secondly , once again Europe is incapable of adopting a European position .
In terms of international politics , Europe does not exist , and this shortcoming can only be compensated for by the Member States .
They do this in the light of their individual histories and respective sensibilities , and these are not identical .
And so they are forced to draw up policies , not in terms of their common analysis , but which relate to those of the United States .
Your attitude , Mr President-in-Office , that of your government , was of particular significance in this respect , and I would like to know what you have done in your role as President of the European Council , and not as the British government , with regard to the Arab countries , with regard to the Soviet Union , with regard to China , with regard to the UN and in general within the European Union .
Thirdly , must we go to war with Iraq every ten years , or will we learn from the first Gulf War and from the present situation to reflect on the issues of the balance of forces in the region , the law of each country and its security , the role of oil in this crisis , the influence of blocking the peace process on the general situation in the Middle East , the use of an embargo on Iraq , and the situation of the Iraqi population which is hostage both to its dictator and to the West ?
If Europe existed , it would certainly have been able to do something to direct the situation during the past ten years in order to avoid the current tragic deadlock .
But we persist in deploring our impotence without taking decisions which are of the same order as the stakes .
Do you not agree , for example , that the election of the President of the European Council for a period of four years would be a first practical step in drawing up a real common and foreign security policy ?
Madam President , Mr Clinton has lit the pipe of war , and , accompanied by the drumbeats of the armaments industries and the oil multinationals , he is doing what he wants .
I fear that we are talking too much here and looking for excuses that there is no common foreign policy , and that is why there is none or rather , through the current Presidency , that it is a party to Clinton 's war games .
Madam President , I think that notwithstanding the above , this Parliament could pass a resolution which firstly categorically opposes any military intervention in Iraq - regardless of the situation , whether reprehensible , etcetera - and secondly , defends in the same integrated way a political and diplomatic solution .
Instead of that , however , the four groups have a resolution which in one way or another very cunningly creates the prerequisites for its use as a fig-leaf for military intervention by the Americans . Meanwhile , the resolution by the Greens and our own group totally condemns , in fact , any military intervention and supports a political and diplomatic solution , which is the best form of support for Annan in the mission he has now undertaken by going to Baghdad .
Madam President , the hope kindled in these last few hours does not lessen the gravity of this Iraqi crisis and I believe that , as it is impossible for Europe to have a common policy as such , the duty of the European Parliament is to express the requirements and needs of our nations , which seek reassurance on many points .
This is worrying , a very worrying crisis !
Just think that seven years ago Saddam Hussein could have been calmly removed from power and yet the power that could have done so did not do it ; things have progressed over the years and now we are in this situation .
We have the duty to reassure our nations that there will be no ecological disasters ; we all know how bombardment starts : it is hoped to be surgical but then becomes devastating .
We cannot even hold a nation hostage in the hope that this nation will cause the dictator to fall , because this is not the right way of seeing things .
Unfortunately , there are too many people like Saddam Hussein and the dictators who oppress the rights of their nations in the world today .
In this specific case , as well as the risk of bacteriological or any other type of warfare , Saddam also has the grave responsibility of holding one-fifth of the population of his country , the Kurds , under a humanely unacceptable regime .
I ask Parliament to declare this and , with regard to the people I represent , the people of the Po Valley , we are against the use of any base that is situated in our territory .
From this House , I warn the Italian government not to use bases in the Po Valley for attacks which we cannot accept .
Mr President , it is a good thing that the European Parliament is defining its position on the Iraq crisis .
It appears that the Council has not really managed to do so .
The starting position as regards Iraq is fairly clear .
We have a pariah state which does not take any notice of the international community , and refuses to meet UN declarations which demand that the weapons of mass destruction be inspected and destroyed .
This is simply unacceptable .
It requires international action : that is what we are discussing here .
What action is the world taking to rid Saddam Hussein of his deadly arsenal ?
This issue concerns everyone , not just America .
The compromise resolution before us deals with a number of fundamental questions .
Should you threaten violence in a situation like this ?
Should it be used as a last resort , if diplomacy fails ?
Yes .
Should you use all peaceful means for a solution ?
Again , I believe so , and I am also glad that there is agreement about a last attempt by Kofi Annan , the United Nations Secretary General .
Should you be prepared to use violence if a diplomatic avenue does not lead to the concessions demanded of Saddam Hussein ?
My answer is , albeit reluctantly , yes .
Should the Security Council approve such an action ?
It is desirable , but not an absolute condition .
The Security Council should play a part , but there is a difference of opinion about the interpretation of the UN resolutions on Iraq .
Saddam Hussein should not be allowed to benefit from the confusion .
The compromise resolution before us is a perfect expression of this notion .
Our aim is not war , but there are limits to the international community 's patience .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say first of all that I find it extraordinarily regrettable that Commissioner Marín has already left the House .
In any case , he was here for the commentary .
He could easily be here and speak in somewhat greater detail in a final speech on certain humanitarian measures and suchlike ; I very much regret that he did not feel that this was necessary .
On the other hand , I am of course very happy that the discussion is being held here today , since it is simply high time that we in Europe speak with one voice - I am very happy , Commissioner Marín , that you are again with us - , that we speak with one voice on a subject that has already been described by CNN as the " showdown in the Gulf ' .
I sometimes wish that this one voice were rather more harmonious and somewhat louder .
Nevertheless , it is good that it is actually happening .
I am also sure that many colleagues present yesterday saw two things on television which were interesting : on the one hand , the permanent members of the Security Council dispatching Secretary General , Kofi Annan , and the good advice which he has taken with him ; and on the other hand , the speech which President Bill Clinton made to officers in the Pentagon , in which he very clearly threatened Saddam Hussein .
We must be clear on one point : the journey of this Secretary General must undoubtedly not turn into a flop like the one made by the Secretary General in 1991 , which was practically the introduction to the Gulf War .
I can only hope that lessons were learned from these mistakes .
We should also make our opinion clear in the sense that only on the basis of clear concessions can we really exhaust all diplomatic possibilities of preventing this war .
However , we must make quite clear our attitude to those states which are using biological weapons .
Here I would point out that Iraq itself has anthrax at its disposal as its main weapon .
Anyone who has observed in our own continent the effects of anthrax over 50 years ago in Scotland on Anthrax Island , understands that it is really necessary for us to speak with one voice here , because we cannot foresee these effects , nor do we want to foresee them .
Madam President , coming from Northern Ireland as I do , I have to say that there is hypocrisy in both President Clinton and Prime Minister Blair .
They tell the IRA terrorists in my country that they can hold on to their weapons which have murdered my constituents , both Roman Catholic and Protestant , and be welcomed at the White House and Downing Street .
Yet they tell us today that Iraq must have its weapons destroyed .
I want to put on record that none of us dare forget that Saddam has proved by the murderous slaughter of his own people that he would use mass destruction weapons if he had the chance .
I do not know whether an air strike can take out all these weapons , but for us to start again without finishing would be disastrous .
That is what happened before .
It must not happen again .
Madam President , after " Desert Storm ' here we are again on the brink of a new intervention in Iraq led by the United States of America .
The Iraqi dictator is flouting the international community once more .
He refuses to comply with the UN resolutions .
He has brought about plans for a formidable threat to the region .
There my parallel ends .
In 1990 , the UN authorized force to be used under Chapter 7 .
Intervention was implemented by a broad coalition which included in particular neighbouring Arab countries and also many non-aligned countries .
And Europe as such was present , active notably through the voice of the Presidency and of the troika which did not carefully handle its efforts and turned up in Baghdad in spite of certain reservations shown particularly in this Parliament .
Today I note that Europe has been obliterated , as spectacularly indicated , Mr Marín , by the terseness of your remarks earlier .
I note especially the obliteration of the British Presidency , Mr President-in-Office .
Prime Minister Blair is doubtless very active and omnipresent , however President Blair has disappeared .
It seems as if the common foreign and security policy no longer exists when things become serious .
I would add that the coalition comes from the West alone and that the United States seems to have decided to act without any mandate from the UN , despite a half-hearted blessing given to the last chance mission of the Secretary General of the UN , Kofi Annan , which we obviously hope will be fruitful .
Under these conditions , an intervention would indicate a serious weakening of the authority of the United Nations and of the presence of the European Union , which has become a negligible quantity in world terms .
Some of us are not prepared under these conditions to give carte blanche to the United States of America for this operation .
Madam President , it is quite clear that there is a consensus emerging in the Chamber , which gives me no pleasure , and that is the criticism of the Presidency .
We have just heard from a leading French socialist the sort of words I might use myself .
There is confusion .
I remember the last time we debated Iraq in substance during the Gulf War .
At that time , all but six of the Labour Members signed a resolution condemning the military action in the Gulf .
This time , only six would sign up to one .
So , this is the sort of changing pattern one sees on the socialist side of this House .
It is regrettable and deplorable that , so far , the Presidency has failed to arrive at a common position .
But it reflects the lack of certainty in foreign policy , both in Washington and London , and , I regret , elsewhere in Europe .
The sort of certainty that was so evident in the days of Mrs Thatcher and President Bush ; the sort of certainty that was brought to the European Union by Douglas Hurd , when he was Foreign Secretary ; the sort of certainty we actually need today .
I regret , therefore , that Robin Cook has not found it possible to come here , although he spent the whole of yesterday afternoon in the House of Commons .
These are shifting sands .
We do not know how the next few days are going to turn out .
We know that in that part of the world there is little to choose between two despotic regimes , one in Iran and one in Iraq .
Criticism has been made of the supply of material to the Iraqis .
In the case of the United Kingdom , that stopped in 1988 .
But we are dealing here with a dictator , who has at his disposal weapons , some of which were invented as far back as the First World War .
It is First World War technology with a barbarian mentality , and this needs to be dealt with by the international community .
Therefore , we feel that the present diplomatic mission by Kofi Annan needs every support .
We understand the position , reflected here on my own benches : by Mr Castagnetti and Mr Bernard-Reymond , from Italy and France , and other Mediterranean countries in particular are deeply concerned about the dangers of the present situation .
But we cannot allow Saddam Hussein to continue to have the ability to threaten not only his own people but those neighbouring his country and even much further afield with the technology he has been trying to develop .
We deeply sympathize with the people of Iraq .
We hope the humanitarian efforts will continue and if it is necessary in the coming days to take further measures , as enjoined by the resolution we are about to adopt , then I believe the House here and the people of Europe should stand behind those forces , as I do , whether they are American , British or others , if the time comes - and the time is coming - when we must finish the job we began in 1991 .
Madam President , in my nine years in this Parliament I have never before heard a speech of such distorted , selfindulgent drivel as that which Mr Kerr gave a short while ago .
I now know that care in the community in the United Kingdom does not work .
I ask this Chamber to consider for one moment the effect of just one Scud missile with chemical weapons aimed at Israel .
The conflagration in the Middle East resulting from that Scud missile is beyond imagination .
We must be clear in this Chamber that international law must be adhered to .
There should be no comfort for Saddam Hussein in our debate .
He is the person not adhering to UN resolutions .
It is no good claiming that in other areas the UN has been less rigorous .
Two wrongs do not make a right .
I am also perturbed by the weeping and gnashing of teeth by Members of Parliament over the CFSP .
CFSP does not mean , as Mr Bertens says , that we should be united on every issue .
It means that we should have a common strategy towards common threats to the European Union .
It is clear that the European Union has been moving in that direction .
The common text we have before us is united in making sure that Saddam Hussein is clearly identified as being in the wrong ; that there has to be implementation of UN resolutions .
There has to be an exhaustive search for a diplomatic solution .
We have to support the UN Secretary General in his mission .
Can Mr Henderson confirm that , in fact , that is also the common position of the Council ?
Could he also confirm that the Presidency has acted entirely in conformity with Article J.5 of the Treaty on European Union and , in addition , that the British government has adhered to its obligations under Article J.5 , paragraph 4 , as a member of the Security Council ?
We must be clear : Saddam Hussein must be stopped .
We must have a diplomatic solution to this problem .
But at the end , if there is no possibility of a diplomatic solution , the military option must be considered as a very last resort .
Madam President , Saddam Hussein has inflicted vast suffering on huge numbers of people .
Full pressure must be maintained to deprive him of all weapons of mass destruction .
It would , however , be a massive mistake for the United States to bomb Iraq .
It is not certain to eliminate the weaponry ; it could inflict casualties and further suffering on innocent civilians ; it would alienate supporters , divide the European Union and inflame Arab opinion , already aggrieved at the different standards applied to Israel ; fundamentalism and terrorism will gain and could escalate .
No military action should be taken anyway without the explicit and full agreement of the United Nations Security Council , which must meet again on this issue .
We also need to increase food and medical supplies to the Iraqi people by extending the oil-for-food programme .
The European Union must formulate its own foreign policy , not supinely follow the United States , particularly when the United States is wrong .
Madam President , I welcome the mandate of the Secretary General of the UN to seek a peaceful solution to this dangerous conflict .
Any attempt to restrict this mandate , as is happening on the part of the USA at the moment , must be rejected .
The task and the obligation of the European Union , and specifically of its British Presidency , will be to strengthen the Secretary General 's hand and to show confidence in his negotiating skills .
The military option must really remain the undesirable ultima ratio and this only when the following conditions apply : firstly , a military strike must not be a punitive action and must offer the guarantee that all weapons of mass destruction will be eliminated by this strike ; and secondly , the formal discussions in the Security Council must lead to an appropriate resolution .
Mr President of the Council , in recent weeks I have admired the determination with which your government has demonstrated its solidarity and loyalty towards the USA .
This strengthens me in my hope and desire that the other 14 members of the European Union will soon be able to count on this same solidarity and loyalty .
Madam President , please permit me one more point of order .
I very much regret that this morning I did not have the opportunity to speak on the roll-call vote and its financial implications .
Then I would have also had one and a half minutes speaking time like my 15 colleagues who this morning took away half an hour from this important debate on Iraq in order to talk about the new regulation and the roll-call vote .
Madam President , I welcome the joint resolution supported by my group which is before the House today .
It gives a clear signal to Saddam Hussein that Europe is united in its condemnation of Iraq 's failure to comply with UN Security Council resolutions .
This House seeks a diplomatic solution to the Iraqi crisis and welcomes the work Kofi Annan is undertaking to resolve it .
But Iraq should know that if it does not allow UNSCOM to continue its vital work , the real threat of military action will remain .
Saddam must destroy all remaining stocks of chemical and biological weapons and the potential to develop other weapons of mass destruction , including nuclear weapons .
This includes some 31 000 chemical weapons and 45 missiles unaccounted for .
Saddam has used these weapons before , as we have heard , both against his own people and Iran .
He must never be allowed to use weapons of mass destruction again .
Madam President , countries should be founded on law .
That also applies to the international community .
International law must be respected by everyone , not just by some .
Saddam Hussein should , of course , comply with the Security Council 's resolution .
The UN Charter permits the use of force as a last resort , but only after a resolution by the UN Security Council .
Therefore , it is important that no green light be given for any military bombing by the USA .
Every intelligent general should ask himself this question : what is the objective ?
Is it to remove weapons or to remove Saddam Hussein ?
Will this be achieved through bombs ?
The answer is certainly no .
What will happen after the bombing ?
What will happen to Iraq 's population ?
Will Saddam Hussein 's position not in fact be stronger after a bombing ?
It is excellent that all five permanent members of the Security Council support Kofi Annan 's journey to Iraq and diplomatic solutions .
Diplomacy works slowly .
The UN has removed a lot of weapons and will also be able to do so in future .
We must , as former President Carter said , have patience , patience , patience .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the unfortunate matter we are discussing should lead us to reflect on certain things . It is true , none of these things are particularly useful as regards the actual situation , because it is not in our power to decide , or almost not even to comment .
However , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I think there is one aspect which we should be very concerned about : the way we Europeans have acted so ineffectively in regard to this serious issue .
In your speech , Mr President-in-Office , you spoke several times of a united Europe .
There can be no doubt that this has been a disunited Europe .
I have the impression that the Council , under its worthy Presidency , has not taken the necessary steps to achieve a certain common position , far less a joint action .
And it seems to me - and to many other Europeans - that this has been a wasted opportunity in that respect .
It would have been perfectly feasible to have formed a common opinion because the interests of all Europeans are largely the same , apart from the natural entrepreneurial exploits which may sometimes be inspired by lust for Iraq 's oil , for example .
I think the Council - its President - should take advantage of this opportunity to analyse why , when faced with such dramatic and urgent circumstances , it was really not possible to formulate a rough outline which a truly united Europe - that united Europe you have mentioned so often , Mr President-in-Office - could have used to respond to the crisis situation we are all so worried and upset about .
Madam President , thank you for the opportunity to reply to this very important debate .
I would firstly confirm that our Presidency has fulfilled its obligations under Article J.5 ( 4 ) in the Treaty of Maastricht in that we have kept other members of the Union fully informed of positions on which we have expressed a view and , where it has been possible to identify European Union positions , we have defended those positions in our representations .
Secondly , I confirm that many actions have been taken by the Presidency to try to build a common position within the European Union .
In my introductory address I outlined a number of initiatives which have been taken , including those by the Prime Minister , the Foreign Secretary , myself and many of our officials .
That process has taken place over a period of time in the build-up to this week .
In Panama last week the Foreign Secretary , in his capacity as President-in-Office , held a meeting with other Member States who were represented there .
This informal meeting was to go over the ground where a common position could be identified .
As it was not a formal Council , it was not possible to have formal conclusions but the Presidency , in representing the European Union in the various forums where the problem of Iraq has been discussed , has stuck to the text which was agreed at the end of that meeting , as one on which the Presidency could express a common view .
If one had listened to this debate from outside Parliament , one might have the impression that there were huge divisions among European Union states on how to deal with Iraq .
One might also have the impression that there are substantial divisions within this Parliament .
But it is worth identifying the very large areas of common ground among the European Union states and in this Parliament , as is identified in the joint resolution which will come before Parliament at a later stage in the proceedings .
That resolution covers the same ground which has been identified as important common ground by European Union members of the Council , such as the need for international law to be upheld .
Otherwise the whole order in the international world comes crumbling down .
That is a crucially important objective where we all agree .
In that regard , Security Council Resolution 687 has not been adhered to and that is a clear breach of international law .
Further , we agree that Saddam Hussein has very many dangerous weapons of a biological and chemical nature and that those dangerous weapons are a danger , not only to neighbouring states in the Middle East and to the international community , but also the people of Iraq .
Any settlement must include unconditional and unrestricted access for the representatives of the United Nations through UNSCOM .
And , importantly , every effort must be made to try to seek a diplomatic solution to the problems we face .
That is a very large area of common ground that will be shared not only by the European Union members of the Council and the Members of this Parliament but will be seen outside by the peoples of Europe as a very important , reasonable position in trying to face up to the dangers in Iraq .
I want to conclude by mentioning the other important common position , namely that we all recognize the crucially important role that Kofi Annan will play on behalf of us all in taking the backing of the Security Council to Baghdad to identify all those common positions and to say to Saddam Hussein that we want to negotiate a diplomatic solution .
Nobody wants war but if a solution is to be achieved , there has to be movement by the Iraqi government to guarantee those important points which I have identified and which I know are included in the backing Kofi Annan has from the Security Council .
I hope by the time the General Affairs Council meets next Monday we are able to see that real progress has been made .
We will then be able to understand how important those common positions were in achieving what I hope will be a settlement .
In accordance with paragraph 2 of Rule 37 , I have received seven motions for resolution .
Madam President , if the President-in-Office has a strong standpoint as the representative of the Council , why does he not publish it ?
Everybody is asking for a strong standpoint but it has never been seen .
Madam President , I asked Mr Henderson to make a statement on whether , as the Foreign Office officials reported in The Financial Times today are saying , that Britain is prepared to use nuclear weapons in Iraq .
Would he give a confirmation on that ?
Madam President , Mr Chairman of the Council , I would also like to know what concrete proposals the British Presidency has presented within the European Union to support the mission of Kofi Annan and not to undermine it .
Madam President , there are a certain number of issues on which we would have liked the President-inOffice or the President of the Commission to speak .
Why this conflict so suddenly now , when we are told that it is some three years since a son-in-law of the Iraqi president revealed the existence of these armaments ?
Why did an American minister appear on American television with a box of sugar to say that a box of this kind would contain enough germs to destroy an entire town ?
Does this mean that we must forever inspect every cupboard in Iraq ?
What proof , what hint of proof do you have of the existence of the weapons which are said to have been discovered now ?
These are the questions of interest and on which we would have liked some clarification both from the Commission and from the Council .
I am very happy to try to deal with the four questions which have been raised .
In relation to the last question raised by the Member opposite - why now ? - the answer to that is because it is now seven years since the commitment was given by Saddam Hussein in 1991 that he would honour the terms of the UN resolution that concluded the military activity .
UNSCOM have been trying to do their work .
They have been obstructed .
There is all this evidence that I referred to in my opening address , and other evidence , that there is a great danger that those large stockpiles of very serious weapons could ignite a problem . Therefore , action has to be taken .
I hope that a diplomatic solution can be found to it .
In relation to the point raised by Mr Kerr , the Foreign Secretary - in his British capacity - made a statement to the House of Commons ruling out any use of nuclear weapons in the context that was raised .
I would have thought that Mr Kerr might have been aware of that .
Regarding Mr Oostlander 's very valid point , it would have been preferable to have had a text after the Panama meeting but because of the nature of the informal Council , it was not possible to have a binding text .
That will be possible from Monday 's GAC .
I hope that the basis , which was understood and recognized at Panama can form some of the substance of what might be agreed on Monday .
Events are moving very quickly .
On Monday , many of us will be concentrating our minds on Kofi Annan 's mission and how that has resulted .
Regarding the question by Mr Wolf on which specific points arising out of Panama have been raised by the British Presidency at the United Nations , the answer is that all of the points which were covered are part of the British position in the United Nations .
As I said in my winding up , I believe that we have honoured our obligations under the Maastricht Treaty in that regard .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to have your full attention .
As you know , this morning we have a sitting and vote which is rather difficult to manage in that , as announced , we must break at midday precisely to welcome the President of the Republic of Portugal and then resume afterwards .
It is all the more difficult since , as you are aware , we have a number of highly sensitive votes .
So , in order to organize the situation as well as possible , I would like to take up the proposal again which I made this morning and which has been amended very timely by the considerations which some Members have forwarded to me .
So , for this morning and this morning only , I repeat while we are waiting , we should reorganize things - I am sure everyone is aware that this is necessary and , furthermore , the suggestion made by a colleague this morning that the group chairmen and the members of the Bureau meet to review the whole situation is an excellent one . So before we reorganize things , I propose that this morning only , following the votes - I hope you are all listening - that those among you who believe in their heart and conscience that they do not need to participate in some of the votes should indicate this quite simply in the course of the day to the Clerk 's Office .
This would allow us to vote in a dignified way on this morning 's very important reports .
It goes without saying of course that if Members prefer to indicate their intention at each roll-call vote , they have every right to do so and I will respect this right .
So again , the aim of my proposal is to allow us to work as effectively as possible this morning .
Madam President , I can understand your desire to speed up the agenda , but my problem is that if we accept what you are proposing then it will be a set precedent for the future .
I do think that the Bureau , in its wisdom , after hearing this confession this morning would wish to reconsider these matters .
We would like an assurance that this would be for this session only and that we would have the right to return to the Bureau 's previous guidelines .
Secondly , we would like an assurance that the Bureau will not wait three months to review these matters but will review them within the next three days .
That would be another assurance which I think would go a long way to pacify this House and allow us to proceed .
Mr Falconer , I thought it was clear , but thank you for giving me the opportunity to clarify once more .
The proposal which I made to you , whilst I am aware that it is not perfect - although no system is perfect - applies only to this morning , and also , taking into account the exceptional situation this morning , requires us to interrupt our votes for half an hour for the reasons everyone is aware of .
Madam President , you are absolutely right , there is no point pursuing the debate but there is a very easy solution to this .
You can remind Members who feel that they cannot vote in favour of or against a particular proposal that we do have in fact a third button on our voting machine that they can press , namely the abstention button .
It is very easy to reach out and press this button , it should not be difficult for any Member .
No , Mr Corbett , abstention and the fact of not participating in the vote do not have the same significance .
I think this is very clear , and everyone should be aware of this .
Madam President , I wish to speak about the events of this morning , during which our emergency resolution on crime in Brussels was rejected .
The fear of Members , employees and the public should be taken seriously .
About 50 Members have signed for this motion to be dealt with in Parliament .
It was rejected .
I therefore ask the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities to concern itself with this matter in order to evaluate how this situation is to be assessed .
Thank you , Mr Rübig .
I am happy to formally record your motion .
( The President noted that there were no objections to her proposal )
Votes
Madam President , we submitted a request yesterday to vote on the Hautala report first .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have received a request to amend the order of votes on the Lange and Hautala reports .
I will put it to the vote .
The Parliament is sovereign .
( Parliament gave its assent to changing the order of the votes )
Madam President , I wanted to inquire if the fact of having listened to the excellent speech by the President of Portugal can be taken into account when calculating allowances and how the Presidency intends to deal with this .
For example , those who applauded will be registered as being present and those who did not applaud will not .
Mr Dell 'Alba , I am sorry , but we have exactly twenty minutes to hold some very important votes .
Madam President , during the speech by the Portuguese President , telephones rang within the Hemicycle on at least two occasions .
One of them even rang nine times .
I think this is disgraceful . It is a lack of respect for this House to allow phones to ring while it is deliberating .
Mr Valdivielso de Cué , you are absolutely right , to the extent that I can tell you that the Quaestors have already made a recommendation to all the Members .
They heard what you said and will certainly repeat this recommendation even more firmly .
Madam President , I apologize for wasting your time , but as one of the two telephones was mine , and I am therefore one of the guilty parties , I wish to apologize to the Chamber .
I left the Chamber temporarily because I was called out urgently and I had left my bag here ; I was not here when the telephone rang .
Normally , when I go into Chamber , I switch it off , but this morning , unfortunately , I had not done so .
I apologize again .
Thank you , Mrs Marinucci .
I think I can say your confession has been heard and you are pardoned .
Madam President , you will not have expected otherwise than for me at this point to make the sharpest possible protest , not against you , dear Madame President , but against our President , because I regard this procedure as absolutely unacceptable .
I shall explain why .
I quote paragraph 2 © of Rule 72 : " An amendment ' , and that is what we are talking about here , ' shall be admissible if it seeks to amend a part of the text of a common position which was not included in - of differs in content from - the proposal submitted in first reading and which does not amount to a substantial change within the meaning of Rule 62 . '
Allow me to refer to the fact that firstly , we are in fact at the second reading of the Framework Directive , but that there has never actually been a first reading , because at the time no framework directive was even on the table , That is the first thing .
Secondly , if we had at the time introduced amendments to the implementing directive on spices , containing the stipulation that the irradiation should be analytically provable or that we would have to have standardized methods , then everybody would have been justified in thinking we were stupid . And they would all have said - I was also the rapporteur at the time , of course - that that Blottnitz woman had gone crazy , for at that time , eight and a half years ago - and many still think so today - these methods did not even exist .
Consequently , we cannot demand them .
It is absolutely necessary that we demand them today ; it is a Framework Directive .
We cannot allow irradiation to take place without then stipulating analytical test methods . Why do we need a label if we cannot check whether there has been irradiation or not ?
This is extremely important .
For spices it is not important , but it is important for the positive list which will be established after the Framework Directive is drawn up , and which will then apply .
It can never again be rectified , whether they protest now or not .
It is a question ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , we have heard what you say and everyone understands the problem we face since the Council took several years to produce the common position following our first reading .
I think this is where the difficulties started and we are all well aware of it .
I would like to hear the President of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , Mr Kenneth Collins , if he is in agreement of course .
Madam President , I must say that one cannot but admire Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz 's tenacity .
Without going into the substance of the matter , the problem lies in Rules 72 and 62 .
The relevant part of Rule 62 states : ' where , through the passage of time or changes in circumstances , the nature of the problem with which the proposal is concerned substantially changes ' , then we take a particular course of action .
It was my judgement in committee that the nature of the problem had not changed between the first reading and now : we still have problems with radiation , we know what these problems potentially are , and we need a directive in order to control this .
So the nature of the problem did not change .
Then we come to Rule 72 , which concerns amendments to the Council 's common position .
We are not allowed to take amendments that did not receive majorities at first reading unless these are new items that are raised by the Council in reaching its common position .
It was my view in committee that , sad though it might have been for Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , the amendments she was seeking to table did not receive a majority at first reading , were not reintroduced , were not introduced freshly by the Council , were not relating to changed circumstances or changed problems since the beginning and , therefore , they were inadmissible .
Mr President , I wish to draw the House 's and your attention to one of the most wonderful sentences in the Rules of Procedure .
The very end of Rule 72 ( 2 ) states : ' The President 's discretion to declare an amendment admissible or inadmissible cannot be questioned . '
I commend that sentence to the House and to you .
Madam President , I do not wish to delay proceedings but having heard both speakers before me with regard to the problems associated with the amendments and so on , I propose to the House that we refer this report back to the committee until such time as they come up with a proper text that we can all accept .
Mr Crowley , I have not received any request of this nature .
( The President declared the two common positions approved ( as amended ) )
We support the initiative to increase checks on foodstuffs in production and at the place of destination .
The focus here should be on consumer safety ; but it is essential that these checks do not replace border controls .
Border controls are important , as the BSE affair has shown amongst other things ; they cannot be replaced by checks during production or at the destination .
Recommendation for second reading ( A4-0038 / 98 ) Hautala
We Swedish social democrats welcome the initiative to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which the whole Auto-Oil package represents .
The outcome is of the utmost importance both for human health and for the environment .
Both the Commission 's and the Council 's decisions on limit values for the sulphur content of petrol and diesel are a long way from what is possible and desirable .
It is therefore with disappointment that we note that Parliament 's rapporteur , Mrs Hautala , has felt obliged to compromise with the values proposed by the Council .
We would have preferred Parliament to stick to the decisions made at first reading .
In addition , we think that the very strict proposals on aromatics , which are unchanged in spite of the compromise on sulphur content , are very misleading .
We consider the limit values for sulphur to be much more important and fear that Parliament 's decision gives the wrong signal to the oil industry . This is not the right priority when considering the question of health and the environment .
I have studied in detail the report by Mrs Heidi Hautala .
I would congratulate her on the broad scope of her work .
However , I am inclined to distance myself from certain clauses which I consider to be a little maximalist , despite the fact that I consider the protection of the environment to be very important .
And so I do not agree with the examples given by the rapporteur since the cost borne by industry would be much too great compared with the environmental benefit gained .
I am convinced that there are other solutions .
So what we must do is keep the proposals made by the Auto-Oil programme , as they set out a restrictive framework for the short term .
What is most important is to implement them .
We must take into account the impact of these measures on the oil industry , which , although likely to adapt to the initial requirements , could run into difficulties if Parliament toughened the provisions of the programme .
It is not a question , as far as I am concerned , of accepting the use of employment as blackmail , but only of confirming a desire to preserve industrial competitiveness in a sector which experiences fierce global competition .
I believe we must take into account three factors : cost , effectiveness and competitiveness , and it would be best to apply these within a fixed time frame .
Furthermore , we must not lose sight of the fact that the result depends greatly on the number of cars on Europe 's roads , and that if extra expenditure is to be made , the priority would be to increase the proportion of newer cars on the road .
Regrettably I cannot support all the recommendations on this report because of the cost implications for Irish consumers .
The original Commission proposal supported by the Council was acceptable but , as amended by this report , would increase the costs by a factor of six .
I should also point out that Ireland is already operating well within current target limits , although I am certain we will still want to improve upon this provided the financial burden is not too heavy .
I fail to understand the vote from one of the southern parts of the Union , since nobody put forward a single line of reasoning in support of this negative position during last night 's debate .
That position was notable for its absence .
Why ?
My vote agrees with the opinions expressed yesterday .
On the request of the European Parliament and the Council , the Commission adopted the Auto-Oil programme to improve air quality by reducing pollution from road traffic in the years to come .
With this in mind , the Commission presented two directives which aim to reduce car emissions and to improve the quality of fuels .
At first reading , the European Parliament adopted a large number of amendments which aim to strengthen the standards proposed by the Commission .
The Council retained some of these but did not go so far as to go back to the restrictive clauses demanded by the European Parliament for 2005 .
At the moment we are at second reading and trying to work out an agreement on the common position of the Council .
The Committee on the Environment , which thinks that the Council 's progress is still not sufficient , has repeated almost all of the amendments adopted at first reading by the European Parliament .
I am in favour of strengthening the measures to reduce pollution and improve air quality , but I think that some of the amendments by the Committee on the Environment do not sufficiently take into account economic and social factors .
The application of these amendments runs the risk of having a high cost and bringing with it job losses .
In my opinion , the Council 's common position represents a fair balance between the need for better protection of the environment and safeguarding jobs ; measures which are overly restrictive and expensive risk compromising this .
I also propose that measures are taken to speed up the replacement of the oldest cars and to increase research , notably on engine design , engine improvement and maintenance and the use of new fuels .
It would , of course , have been best for the environment and for the inhabitants of the EU countries and the world if the European Parliament 's proposals at first reading had been adopted .
Unfortunately , the Council and the Commission yielded to pressure from the oil industry and did not accept these necessary requirements .
At second reading , the rapporteur has also been forced to modify a number of the requirements , particularly under pressure from the conservative party groups in the European Parliament , in order to be able to achieve the required majority in the House .
Therefore , the proposal is not absolutely ideal from our point of view , but it is still quite acceptable .
Today 's vote clearly showed that the compromise has a lot of support in the European Parliament .
Hopefully the outcome will also encourage the Council and the Commission to abandon their opposition to the European Parliament 's proposals .
We assume that in the Council of Ministers the Swedish government will support and vote for the European Parliament 's demands .
The improvement in the quality of petrol will have immediate and major effects on the environment .
Mrs Hautala 's proposals will reduce pollution from cars by more than 20 % .
We cannot accept what large oil companies say when they try to make their employees believe that they will close refineries because our organizations are exacting ambitious standards .
The assessments these companies have carried out are clearly overvalued .
All the studies and ministers concerned considerably reduce the inferred costs .
But one thing is certain : the large companies have made substantial profits which enable them to make investments to modernize refineries , which at times were left to become more or less obsolete , in response to environmental needs .
They also know well that , from now on , the global petrol market will not be able to escape these developments - they are already underway in the United States .
All too often our fellow citizens see Europe as being too distant or too restrictive .
Today , in dealing with a subject of the future which affects all our daily lives , Europe can bear the hope of the people , the well-being and the progress of the majority .
We must vote for the Lange and Hautala reports .
In this way the European Parliament will mark its place in history .
This matter involves the same political situation as in the question of emissions from motor vehicles . The Commission is putting on the brakes while Parliament wants to press on towards more long-term sustainable environmental requirements for petrol and diesel fuels .
The same situation also applies to industry . When requirements have been tightened for reduced emissions and additives , such as lead in petrol , these have quickly been met by the petrol and oil industry .
The Commission 's proposal is not sufficiently far-reaching and needs to be strengthened .
We need better quality standards for fuels , tough requirements for urban traffic and different tax rates which encourage the use of electric cars and new , environmentally friendly fuels like ethanol .
As Mr Lange 's report stated , the limit values and times must be obligatory for the year 2000 and 2005 , and exceptions should be very strict .
Requirements for limit values should be as tough as possible .
For sulphur it should be 30 mg / kg for both petrol and diesel .
I consider the rapporteur 's proposal to be realistic and entirely feasible , which is why it could have great significance for environmental policy .
French and European public opinion is very sensitive to the effects on health of pollutant emissions from cars .
In order to reduce this pollution , we must both improve the technique of engines and strengthen the standards set for fuel .
A real reduction in the contents of sulphur and aromatic compounds permitted must be encouraged through the introduction of oxygenated compounds which come amongst other things from biofuels .
The addition of biofuels enables immediate reduction in pollution thanks to their zero sulphur compound content and their capacity to improve combustion .
The production of renewable raw materials destined for the production of biofuels is providing an important channel of diversification for the agricultural sector , thus facilitating the use of rural areas .
For these reasons I have voted , like most of my colleagues , in favour of strengthening the standards set for fuels , thus allowing the development of biofuels , on the condition , of course , that the European Union accepts that the Member States can adapt their indirect taxation in order to promote cleaner energy .
If we are to combat air pollution from cars , we must act both on the technical standards for vehicles and on the composition of fuels .
Putting vehicles into service which meet the new technical standards will only have staggered effects in the medium term , and means the progressive renewal of all vehicles on the road in the Member States of the European Union .
However , the use of fuels which meet standards which are more respectful of the environment will have an immediate effect .
In this light , a real reduction in the levels of sulphur and aromatic compounds - notably benzene - allowed in relation to the levels currently recorded must come top of the research list .
The introduction of oxygen from fossils or plants should also be encouraged , given its positive and immediate effect on air quality .
As a source of renewable energy , biofuels or oxygenated compounds from plants - ester from vegetable oil incorporated in diesel oil , or ethanol derivative incorporated in petrol - can provide a suitable response to the problems of pollution immediately , particularly in sensitive urban areas , whilst limiting the greenhouse effect whose effects were highlighted at the Kyoto conference in December 1997 .
Finally , the agricultural sector can benefit from this important channel of diversification by producing renewable raw materials for the production of biofuels , and this could contribute to preserving an important use for rural areas .
The production of renewable raw materials should be considered as an economically viable activity for agriculture and can contribute to changing the negative image some people may have of agricultural activities in terms of respect for the environment .
The development of biofuels will respond to the needs of the cities , whilst also favouring the expansion of agriculture which is more respectful of the environment .
Madam President , it is essential to have tough targets for reductions in car emission limits .
Rapid and real progress must be made to protect the environment .
Whilst the modern car is 40 times cleaner than its equivalent in the 1980s , air quality will be greatly enhanced by the implementation of the proposals before the House .
Improvements to car standards and cleaner fuels are a necessity .
Along with my two colleagues from Northern Ireland , I recently brought a representative of a company in Northern Ireland to meet Commission officials about a new product which can significantly reduce emission levels now , with the additional benefit of reducing overall fuel consumption .
This shows the concern in Northern Ireland to ensure action is taken on this issue as quickly as possible .
I welcome the initiative of those in my constituency who are proactively working on developing a product to meet the necessary stringent demands of European legislation .
The report by Mr Lange is interesting from more than one point of view .
This report will really shed light on the technical progress of the European car industry , especially in the area of engine output .
These developments have undeniably had an impact on the reduction of harmful emissions , both for diesel and internal combustion engines .
Our desire to legislate in this area is legitimate .
However , we should be careful to avoid the pitfall of wanting to do too much .
As regards air quality and emissions from new vehicles , most of our work is done .
There is the risk of eventually heading towards a reduction in air quality by wishing to impose standards for emissions which are too severe .
An increase in these standards would lead to a rise in the costs borne by the consumer . This , in turn , would decrease the chances of the renewal of cars on the roads today , which are already too old throughout the world .
This additional ageing would have a negative impact on the environment and would oppose the fixed objectives which we all agree on .
So when we have set new standards , we must reach them before proposing more .
We must also devise a financial plan of action to increase the proportion of younger cars on the roads throughout Europe : this would benefit both employment and the environment .
These two reports set out the European Parliament 's view of the Auto-Oil programme drawn up by industry and the Commission .
The point of this programme is to determine the best possible fuel mixture together with secondary technical measures in the manufacture and maintenance of car engines in order to maintain clear air .
In the EU at this time , there are about 200 million cars of all different varieties .
They represent an enormous burden on the environment , now as well as in the future , and they reveal the great economic concerns which have arisen with the vehicles .
There has therefore been intensive lobbying activity relating to Mr Lange 's reports , particularly by the car industry and the fuel producers .
In my opinion , these reports represent no acceptable compromise between environmental policy and economic interests .
Mr Lange rightly emphasizes the need for coherent exhaust gas legislation , Euro-3 , with the deadline of 2000 for the first stage , A , and 2005 for the second stage , B. Industry is said to be complaining about the excessively high costs of conversion to new higher values ; not included in these are of course the entire economic costs and the harmful emissions which are bad for the health of the people .
I am also convinced that high environmental standards present technical and economic challenges to industry .
Since 8 % of the overall motor vehicle fleet is renewed every year it is of course going to take years before the innovations to engines and exhaust systems take full effect : hence the necessity for an immediate improvement in fuel quality which has a direct effect on the whole stock of motor vehicles .
As for the specific problems of the on board diagnostic systems , there is a concern that such systems could be used by the vehicle manufacturers to restrict , by means of secret codes , the maintenance and repair of cars to those who have access to these codes .
This would seriously restrict the maintenance and repair market , which have called , for instance , service organizations like those of the Luxembourg Automobile Club into action .
Here too the European Parliament wants standardized and free access to the OBD systems , which I fully support .
This report shows a strong political opinion in favour of tightening emissions from new cars .
Here the Commission represents the old world which supports the vehicle and oil industries , while Parliament is making environmental and sustainable demands of the companies and industrial products of the future .
Earlier requirements on industry , such as in the introduction of catalytic converters , clearly showed that if the requirements are clear , industry adapts to the reality and converts its production to meet the requirements .
That is also going to be the case for emission requirements for new vehicles .
It is therefore very important that the requirements are clearly given in figures and years .
In this case , demands for binding legislation are justified .
Financial means of control , such as tax concessions to support the production of vehicles with low emissions , are positive , and controls and monitoring in the Member States are necessary for the regulations to have their desired effect .
This is one of the areas of environmental policy in which EU decisions could have a major impact .
This is a welcome report which underscores our endeavours to reduce pollution .
Reducing environmental destruction is one of the priorities of the British Presidency and so it is timely that we are discussing this report now .
In Parliament there is a broad consensus , representative of the views of the public , that damage to the environment caused by vehicle emissions must be severely reduced .
The motor industry themselves accept that there must be improvement and it is a welcome sign that their arguments have moved on to the detail of time scales for reducing pollution .
The Union should be as proactive as possible in encouraging the development of means by which pollution by emissions can be reduced .
One way of doing this would be to make the Commission more user-friendly towards organizations and individuals who feel that they can contribute to the battle against pollution .
I have recently been involved in assisting a Northern Ireland organization , which is trying to develop a European market for an emission-reducing additive , in finding its way around the maze of Commission bureaucracy .
The additive is widely used elsewhere and has recently been positively assessed by experts at Queen 's University , Belfast .
We are well aware that the Commission cannot approve or endorse any individual products but I believe that means should be sought whereby it can be made easier for those working in this field to have their products assessed with a minimum of bureaucracy .
Recommendation for second reading ( A4-0038 / 98 ) Hautala and ( A4-0043 / 98 ) Lange
These two reports are absolutely inextricable since there is a close technical connection between engines and fuel and this explains my joint explanation of vote .
How could we build vehicles with a " clean ' engine which would have to operate using pollutant fuel ?
I cannot imagine it .
The European Parliament must be consistent and strengthen its vote from first reading .
It is essential that fuels are " depolluted ' and that the sulphur content is reduced .
We must go further than the Council 's common position and demand mandatory , not indicative limits for emissions in 2005 .
This is what will improve air quality .
In line with this , we must call for a similar effort from car manufacturers .
From the year 2000 , all cars must be equipped with on board diagnostic systems , whilst manufacturers must also monitor the conformity of services .
These are heavy demands and we are aware of the efforts required , but we have waited for too long . After all , this affects the future of our planet and our children !
I am in favour of the two reports by Mrs Hautala and Mr Lange as they represent a coherent and ambitious response to the problem of car pollution .
It is a matter of great urgency that we combat the greenhouse effect and atmospheric pollution in our towns .
It affects our planet and the health and quality of life of millions of Europeans .
Our developed societies must put into use all their scientific and technological know-how and make available the necessary financial means in the name of this cause .
At first reading , Parliament rightly indicated its intention to toughen standards by the year 2000 , both for petrol and for exhaust gas emissions , along with its commitment to establishing a restrictive framework for 2005 .
This position of our House enabled the Council to improve the Commission 's initial text .
But the technical situation and social and environmental urgency enable us to go further ; it is up the European Parliament to go one step further within the framework of codecision .
As all too often is the case , a certain number of voices were raised in the name of defending employment and competitiveness against standards going as far as possible .
But in this case , these arguments have no foundation .
Looking first at the car industry , which is of great importance for employment and our economies , technological innovation is imperative and it also represents an opportunity .
Moreover , we must pay tribute to the efforts and the results which have been achieved for some time now by the manufacturers .
They know that environmental quality will be a decisive stake , as much in terms of world competition as in terms of the expectations of buyers .
The car industry in Europe is faced with the relative saturation of the European market .
So it needs the rate of renewal of the cars on the road to accelerate .
But this can only really be justified by a significant technological change of course towards cleaner and safer cars .
The demanding and restrictive standards for new vehicles proposed for 2005 in the Lange report provide a definite form for this movement and allow research measures to be implemented straight away - essential developments given full knowledge of the facts .
The clarity of the framework and of the objectives acts as a guarantee for manufacturers .
European institutions must give greater attention to the pollution caused by the number of old cars on the road .
So in this sense , a meaningful improvement in petrol quality is an important point , and the proposals in the report by Mrs Hautala alone would bring about a reduction of over 20 % in car pollution .
Improvements in petrol affect both new and old vehicles .
But I believe that the European Union should also look into the support which the Member States could provide to help get rid of old vehicles on the road which are severe pollutants .
Owners of these dilapidated vehicles often only have a modest income , so it is essential to find effective solutions which do not penalize them , such as a scrap subsidy .
I would genuinely like to see the European Parliament committing itself to promoting this type of proposal .
During the conciliation which could take place following the vote , we should also closely examine the two questions of the durability of the standards imposed and monitoring in use , taking into account the prospect of an accelerated renewal of cars .
The new procedures we have retained will also help create jobs in sectors such as chemistry , catalysis , etcetera .
This phenomenon has already been observed with the introduction of standards for lead-free petrol and the catalytic converter .
I am in favour of the Lange report .
With increasing numbers of cars in Europe and increasing air pollution , the reduction of exhaust gases is quite definitely in the interest of consumers .
Both reports seek to address two aspects of this complex problem : fuel quality and the reduction of exhaust gases .
The improvement of fuel is rejected by the oil industry on the grounds of cost .
Against this it must be said that a few years ago the industry resisted the catalytic converter , but these are to be found in all new cars .
The reduction of exhaust gases , however , is also significantly influenced by the technological equipment in the vehicles .
In this , the on board diagnostic systems ( OBD ) will play an important role by checking the exhaust emissions and drawing the owner 's attention to defects .
It cannot be sufficient to buy years of freedom from environmental worries by purchasing a new car with a catalytic converter .
The OBD systems will require greater discipline on the part of the consumer , who must keep his vehicle constantly in tiptop condition .
If the OBD discovers a defect in the exhaust system , the fault must be removed .
As a countermove the marketing of this technological progress must be so regulated that no hidden monopolies can be created which harm the consumer . We must prevent the encoding of diagnostic systems precluding independent workshops from carrying out maintenance and repairs .
In addition , these systems must permit the incorporation of parts which are not made by the car manufacturer but which meet their quality standards .
This will guarantee that the consumer will have the choice of having his vehicle maintained at a favourable price and to a high standard in the interests of the environment .
Atmospheric pollution has become a political issue quite simply because cities and the large European metropolises have experienced or are currently experiencing this type of problem .
Now the most visible enemy and the one which everyone points the finger at immediately is , of course , the car , forgetting in that instant factory fumes , aeroplane discharges and so on .
I do not want to deny the problem - it is a real one - and Mr Lange and Mrs Hautala were right to take a firm line regarding the car and oil industries , both at first and second reading .
Car manufacturers and oil magnates were quick to draw our attention to the effects which these decisions could have on employment .
But they must also understand that in responding to the expectations of public opinion on pollution , they will benefit from a better image and this could lead to them gaining new sectors of the market .
This is why we will defend the emission limits proposed by Mr Lange .
This is why we will also support the standards proposed by Mrs Hautala .
Taking the example of diesel , it is clear that its commercial success in certain countries in the Union condemns it to reducing its pollution levels simply in order to preserve its image and its sales .
For example , the injection technique ought to resolve this type of problem .
It has also been proven that diesel oil has an important role to play in reducing exhaust emissions from diesel engines .
Car manufacturers who were not much in favour at the start have decided to make considerable efforts to respect emission standards .
It is true that there is still some disagreement particularly concerning durability : it is unrealistic , even irresponsible , to raise the durability of vehicles from 80 000 to 160 000 km , and I would like to make clear my formal opposition to this .
This represents a much too stringent requirement on top of the implementation of the necessary limits and will generate additional costs .
Other contentious points include on board diagnostics and service monitoring .
I think it may be possible to resolve this type of issue in the Conciliation Committee .
I am aware that oil magnates are very unhappy with last week 's unanimous vote from the Committee on the Environment last week .
Clearly this sector is suffering from an overcapacity for refining and the ageing of its production equipment .
But this difficult situation is not at all due to environmental standards .
I have to say that the use of employment as blackmail has not succeeded , simply because Parliamentary representatives , just like public opinion , are highly mobilized .
We must not wave the red rag on this issue , but should first inform opinion about the consequences of the measures we are recommending would have , and especially on the following subject : in people 's minds for some time now as well as in the press , even diesel causes pollution which causes asthma or causes cancer .
This was true of old diesel , but , with these new measures , diesel will be less polluting than lead-free petrol , thus turning the whole situation on its head .
Lastly , and I will end here , the key point which Parliament must deal with is the issue of increasing the proportion of newer cars on our roads .
This is the most effective way of greatly reducing the degree of pollution in Europe .
Estimates indicate that 20 % of the cars on the road cause around 80 % of the pollution .
Any measure aimed at speeding up the process of renewal would have an immediate effect .
What we must do is think of both the original measures and of new ones which have not been one of the long line of errors made in France .
It is not a question of dressing up a way to facilitate the purchase of a new car , but a way of replacing an old one , all of which would be financed at national and European level .
This will be the subject of future discussions .
In my opinion , the European Parliament , which always tends to go further than the other European institutions , is going too far this time with the measures aiming to reduce road traffic pollution .
In their reports , both Mr Lange and Mrs Hautala call for more restrictive clauses for the protection of the environment .
But my difficulty is when Parliament 's Committee on the Environment goes further , much further than the common position of the Council .
Of course I , too , am convinced that the critical thing for Europe is to find a balance between the various proposals for cleaning up the air and their real impact on the environment , and with this in mind , I have to say that the European oil industry has done a great deal to improve air quality up to now .
But we must recognize that in order to reach the fixed objectives for cleaning up the air , the European Parliament 's Committee on the Environment is proposing standards which are certainly amongst the most ambitious in the world .
But if we consider the costs of the different proposals , ECU 11.5 billion for the Commission , ECU 20 billion for the Council and ECU 60 billion for the European Parliament , I think that in the current state of affairs , it would be unreasonable to go beyond the measures in the Council 's common position .
I agree on supporting the Commission 's second Auto-Oil programme , which must serve as a basis for establishing limits for fuel emissions for the year 2000 . However , I think that car drivers in most European countries already do enough via the high rates of taxation on using their vehicles , and we must stop once and for all increasing taxes or constantly inventing claimed new ecological costs for cars .
This Parliament has always responded very sensitively to the problems of climate change and the need to limit emissions and achieve healthier air for the people of Europe .
Nevertheless , when it comes to taking concrete measures , the European Union is less resolute .
It is not easy for the Members of this House to adopt a position .
The situation we see is complex and not reassuring .
All our cities , both large and small , are full of traffic jams .
On some days , certain European cities exceed all the health safety limits .
On the other hand , fuel quality is essential for engine performance and to reduce vehicle emissions .
In Parliament we have always defended the view that economic development and the protection of the environment are not two opposing objectives , but are complementary .
However , the automobile and refinery sectors seem to do little to help achieve these objectives .
We must demand the greatest possible technical effort in order to protect the health of our citizens .
Otherwise , there will be a blatant clash of citizens ' interests .
Faced with this situation , the governments have reached a difficult common position , showing that changes are not easy at the moment , as Mr Lange has confirmed .
The European Parliament does not have many alternatives left .
All we can do is hope that the Council is on the right track on this occasion and that it will look on this common position as a temporary stage on the way towards stricter measures .
Recommendation for second reading ( A4-0042 / 98 ) Bloch von Blottnitz
Madam President , I must say that today we have done a great disservice to the cause of consumer protection .
It is really incredible what has happened in this House .
I would just like to read something which a section of the House has rejected .
Afterwards , I do not know how we will be able to take part in an honest election campaign in which we keep saying : Europe is working on behalf of consumers .
I would just like to tell you what has been deleted . The treatment of goods with ionizing rays , we have said , must meet completely the requirements of human health .
Their use must be absolutely safe in terms of health and may not act as a replacement for health and hygiene measures or for good manufacturing or agricultural methods .
That is surely the minimum and the most logical requirement .
We have not even stated in the document that there must be no loss of nutritional value or loss of vitamins .
It is already bad enough that this happens .
But we have demanded the simplest solution and it was not accepted .
Nor has it been accepted that analytical control procedures must be carried out .
I wonder , why are we bothering to insist on compulsory marking ?
This is utterly monstrous ; what are we supposed to tell our people .
It is not even true to say that the Standing Committee on Food meets in public ; it meets far more undemocratically behind closed doors .
I ask you : what are they up to ?
We always say that we want the best , and most of all we want to protect health .
We spend huge amounts of money on better health provision and then we make mistakes concerning the most basic matters !
For a start , legalistic nitpicking drives normal motions into secondary importance , in other words , they become inadmissible , and this then leads to the most logical proposals being rejected .
So I really do not understand the world .
I cannot tell you how embarrassing that is or how we are going to go into a public election campaign .
They will all keep saying : Europe makes everything worse , it makes our food worse , etcetera .
I must admit , when I see something like this , I unfortunately have to agree !
Madam President , although I am of the opinion that the irradiation of food is to be avoided in principle , I have made up my mind to vote for the Bloch von Bottnitz ' report , so that in the Single Market there can be better information , better monitoring and thus better protection of the health of consumers .
I am extremely sorry that not all colleagues have followed this path and that the required majority has not been achieved .
I am afraid that we have thereby done a great disservice to the consumers of Europe .
I am in favour of the very restrictive conclusions of this report , which will allow the irradiation of foods exclusively as a method of preservation for spices .
In Luxembourg , the irradiation of food with the aim of preservation is actually forbidden .
In only three countries - Belgium , the Netherlands and France - may irradiated foods be sold .
Whereas the EP , since it was first concerned with this problem , that is , since 1987 , has been determined to gradually ban completely the irradiation of foods , the Commission has tried to regulate jointly this kind of preservation .
A compromise has thus become an opening to more foods being allowed for irradiation .
For the present common position , the European Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has drawn the abovementioned conclusions , which are similar to the Swedish position in the Council ; consequently , food other than spices cannot , in principle , be irradiated .
I share this view , which I already put forward in this House in October 1989 and in December 1993 .
I am deeply concerned about the plan contained in the common position of the Council and the Commission to issue both a framework directive and an implementing directive containing a positive list which is gradually being extended - it currently includes only the aforementioned aromatic herbs and spices .
In this way , under the guise of regulating something positively , we are simultaneously allowing for the possibility of extending radiation to as many foods as possible .
The excuse that no regulation is worse than a minimum regulation is unacceptable , for the regulation we have before us will gradually lead all the EU countries to tolerate irradiated foods on their markets .
The report by Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz accepts a limited use of irradiation for certain foodstuffs , including dried herbs and certain spices , with a suggestion of a further increase in products .
It is appropriate that it is stressed that irradiation cannot be used as a substitute for good , hygienic handling of products , but irradiation of foodstuffs in general cannot be accepted .
To start with , I am against treating foods and food ingredients with ionizing radiation .
So it is good that Parliament 's requirements for approval are so stringent that the positive list will be limited to spices and roots where no other method of preservation is available .
We must ensure that fresh foods are preferred and so restrict irradiation to the absolute minimum .
Because the European Parliament takes the same sceptical approach to ionising radiation , I am in favour of Parliament being given the authority to assess any extension of the positive list of foods which may be irradiated .
It should also be possible for individual Member States to impose tighter rules .
I cannot support the Committee on the Environment 's amendment to approve an analytical method of control only .
There are a number of different methods available and it is essential that the method used depends on what is to be examined .
On the other hand , it would be beneficial to limit as far as possible the number of different methods of irradiation .
This would make controls easier .
Finally , I would like to emphasize that the marking of the foods irradiated must be transparent .
If we cannot ban irradiation completely , we can at least ensure consumers have a proper opportunity of selecting these products .
The environment has gradually taken on an increasing importance in the construction of the European Union .
Regulation ( EEC ) 1210 / 90 , which is to be amended through this report , had allowed us , in this respect , to comply with the initiative taken in 1989 by Jacques Delors to create a European Environment Agency .
Today 's report must present us with the opportunity to debate what lies at the root of all changes in European legislation on the environment , that is , the collection and distribution of objective and accurate information gathered in all the countries of the Union .
Established in 1995 , the EEA has until now undertaken valuable work concerning the environmental situation in the countries of the Union in terms of the collection and distribution of objective data and perfecting techniques to aid forecasting and prevention .
I am therefore taking the opportunity that this report has presented to congratulate the Agency on its progress in fulfilling its duties .
The Agency has notably drawn up reports on problems such as climate change and taxes on the environment , and has established several networks to collect and distribute information in this field .
But the Agency cannot work alone !
As the rapporteur points out , the Agency has still changes to make and it must move towards greater cooperation with all of the Community institutions , in particular the European Parliament . This would improve the transparency of information among the different countries of the Union , thereby showing the Agency to be a true instrument in helping to make political decisions in this area .
Moreover , in future , the Commission should systematically ask the Agency for reports before implementing even minor new Community policies .
In this sense , I agree with my colleague , Mr Collins , who , wondering why there is no mention in the Commission 's report of the importance of Parliament 's role in the legislative process , asks that the obligation to report its results to Parliament be included in the draft revision .
The European Environment Agency must also , within the framework of its duties , take into account other aspects such as forests , waste products and chemical products on the one hand , and on the other , the Union 's future time scales , particularly its enlargement and the environmental problems that this will undoubtedly entail .
Finally , I would like to highlight the fact that while some people are discussing the dismantling of environmental standards or clauses on the planet under the draft Multilateral Agreement on Investment ( MAI ) , to the benefit of multinational companies , I , on the contrary , am defending the enhancement of environmental cooperation with third countries .
I welcome discussion on this report .
Obviously the Committee agrees with the Commission assessment that it would be unrealistic to allocate the European Environmental Agency any major new tasks at the moment .
The Commission is nonetheless proposing to extend the scope of the Agency 's activities with a view to establishing a European Environment Information Centre .
It is also important that greater cooperation is achieved between the Agency and Member States and of course applicant states .
I would hope that there will be a positive response to the rapporteur 's proposal for a closer working relationship between the Agency and the Commission and also for the establishment of a data register by the Agency which would include legislation and information to improve the enforcement of EU environmental policy including a cost / benefit analysis .
Finally it is important that the Agency 's multi-annual work programme should be complemented by a multi-annual budget in order to enable the Agency to plan its work more effectively .
Madam President , I have asked to speak on a point of order , as follows : yesterday , at exactly this point of the proceedings , I submitted an explanation of vote in writing , specifically on the Blak report .
Madam President , today , with great surprise , I saw in the Minutes that there is no mention of my written statement .
As I consider that explanation of vote to be particularly important , I ask you to look into the matter .
We will indeed check that , Mr Papakyriazis , and if , as you say , this was not done , we will insert your explanation of vote in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Mr President , before the debate starts I need to put on record a rather banal matter , namely that I was not able to vote at all this morning - and the new Rules presumably apply - the reason being that my plane was due to leave at 7.55 a.m. from London Airport and , in the event , it left at 10.30 a.m. , so I arrived just as the vote was finishing .
But I feel sure that you , Sir , as a distinguished member of the Bureau , having taken a most wise decision , will find it possible to adjust the situation to meet cases like mine , and that is why I rather expanded on the position .
Thank you , Mr Moorhouse .
You may rest assured that the Bureau has taken note of what you say and that it will take the necessary steps to ensure that you do not suffer any disadvantage .
Nigeria and Burma - UN Human Rights Commission
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0012 / 99 - O-0009 / 98 and B4-0013 / 98 - O-0010 / 98 , by Mrs Maij-Weggen and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Council and the Commission , on the EU 's attitude to Nigeria ; -B4-0020 / 98 - O-0028 / 98 and B4-0122 / 98 - O-0029 / 98 , by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , to the Council and to the Commission , on the EU 's attitude to Nigeria ; -B4-0123 / 98 - O-0030 / 98 and B4-0124 / 98 - O-0031 / 98 , by Mr Müller and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the European Union 's attitude to Nigeria ; -B4-0127 / 98 - O-0035 / 98 by Mr Carnero González and Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Council , on relations between the European Union and Nigeria ; -B4-0128 / 98 - O-0036 / 98 and B4-0129 / 98 - O-0037 / 98 , by Mr Macartney and Mr Hory , to the Council and to the Commission , on the European Union 's attitude to Nigeria ; -B4-0134 / 98 - O-0042 / 98 and B4-0135 / 98 - O-0043 / 98 , by Mr Andrews and Mr Girão Pereira , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Council and to the Commission , on the European Union 's attitude to Nigeria ; -B4-0137 / 98 - O-0046 / 98 and B4-0169 / 98 - O-0051 / 98 , by Mrs Kinnock and Mr Vecchi , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Council and to the Commission , on the situation in Nigeria ; -B4-0014 / 98 - O-0011 / 98 and B4-0015 / 98 - O-0012 / 98 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Council and to the Commission , on human rights violations in Burma ; -B4-0018 / 98 - O-0026 / 98 and B4-0019 / 98 - O-0027 / 98 , by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , to the Council and to the Commission , on human rights violations in Burma ; -B4-0126 / 98 - O-0034 / 98 by Mr Pettinari and Mr Vinci , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Council , on relations between the European Union and Burma ; -B4-0131 / 98 - O-0039 / 98 by Mr Dupuis , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Commission , on human rights violations in Burma ; -B4-0133 / 98 - O-0041 / 98 by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Commission , on human rights violations in Burma ; -B4-0136 / 98 - O-0045 / 98 and B4-0141 / 98 - O-0050 / 98 , by Mrs Kinnock and Mr Vecchi , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Council and to the Commission , on the situation in Burma ; -B4-0139 / 98 - O-0048 / 98 by Mrs van Bladel , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Council , on the human rights situation in Burma ; -B4-0011 / 98 - O-0182 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , to the Council , on the EU position at the 54th session of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva ; -B4-0125 / 98 - O-0033 / 98 by Mr Carnero González and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Council , on the United Nations Human Rights Commission ; -B4-0130 / 98 - O-0038 / 98 by Mr Dupuis , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Council , on the EU 's position at the 54th session of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva ; -B4-0132 / 98 - O-0040 / 98 by Mrs Aglietta and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Council , on the EU 's position at the 54th session of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva ; -B4-0138 / 98 - O-0047 / 98 by Mrs van Bladel , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Council , on the 54th session of the United Nations Human Rights Commission ; -B4-0140 / 98 - O-0049 / 98 by Mr Barros Moura , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Council , on the EU 's position at the 54th session of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva .
Mr President , with increasing frequency the European Union is acting in a divided manner towards the outside world in crucial foreign policy issues .
This is unfortunate .
We saw it in the Iraq affair which was discussed at length here this morning , and we are seeing it again in a number of human rights issues . Again , this is unfortunate .
Last year , during the annual meeting of the UN Commission on Human Rights we saw a terrible display of 15 EU nations towards China .
Whilst the Netherlands as President rightly tried to get European support for a critical stance , four EU countries pulled out .
It was a sad spectacle of disagreement and Europe was exposed .
This is why we are making an urgent plea to the United Kingdom to be very active during the coming weeks , so that the ranks of EU Member States will be united in Geneva in March , and so that serious violations of human rights will not be sacrificed to the golden calf of economic interests .
We wish to draw particular attention to two countries , Nigeria and Burma .
On the subject of Nigeria , the elected President has been overthrown and put into prison during a military coup .
It was followed by massive intimidations and a great deal of violence during which the supporters of Abiola , relevant politicians , soldiers , officials and other citizens were tried in often secret tribunals and killed , or treated so badly in prison that they died subsequently .
We all know the story of Ken Saro-Wiwa , and we also know that Adua died in similar circumstances .
Now there is another general standing in front of a secret tribunal , and we all know how that will end .
Meanwhile , the rulers get rich at the expense of the ordinary people , and the number of people living in absolute poverty in Nigeria has increased from 35 to 44 million .
50 million people are illiterate , and 70 million are without drinking water .
The average life expectancy has fallen from 54 to 47 .
Mr President , we believe that Nigeria needs a firm approach , and in spite of all earlier statements we are asking that we should steer towards an economic boycott .
This is the wish of our group - and we are no radical left wingers - and is the wish of a large section of this Parliament .
As regards Burma , Mr President , there , too , a President who was elected by 80 % of the population was removed by military force .
There , the opposition was also imprisoned and killed .
There , parts of the population are also terrorized and - worse still - sections of minorities are used for slave labour .
Mr President , the United States have introduced an investment ban .
Dutch companies , such as Heineken , have also withdrawn , but we are seeing , to our annoyance , that other firms , such as Total , are establishing themselves in Nigeria to fill a gap in the market .
Here , too , we are asking for tough action , and as far as we are concerned for an economic boycott , and most definitely an investment ban .
Mr President , I would like to conclude by saying that we believe that the European Union should speak with one voice on human rights issues .
We believe that the Presidency should do its utmost to get the Member States into one line .
We also believe that those countries that do not wish to cooperate should be seriously called to account on this .
We do not wish to see a repeat of last year in the next session in Geneva , and we hope that the British Presidency will manage to see to it there is one line , and to see to it that there is tough action , especially as far as the two countries mentioned earlier are concerned .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has far too often been accused , not entirely wrongly , of being strong with the weak and weak with the strong , in other words , of energetically pointing out the violations of human rights in countries of little geopolitical significance and of closing its eyes to the violations of the stronger countries .
This is certainly not the case with Nigeria .
This is a great regional power with economic and military strength ; and so , if possible , it has greater responsibilities towards the other States in the region .
We should not forget that Nigeria is constantly seeking to assert its political weight on the other countries in the region , and on the developing countries in general , to oppose the constant appeals of the international Community to restore democracy , an independent legal system , the lawful state and respect for human rights .
It is therefore impossible to remain silent in view of the arrests of those opposed to the current regime , the most authoritative members of the civilian society of that country , nor can we tolerate lightheartedly the fact that several international oil companies are still working in the Ogoni region , despite the violations of human rights and environmental pollution .
As I said this morning , politics , particularly international politics , abhors a vacuum .
The European Union and its individual states cannot fail to exert strong pressure on the Abacha regime to make it perform a serious about-turn , not hesitating , in the extreme , to deprive the current military junta of its principal financial means , by applying a total embargo on the oil trade of that country .
Faced with extreme situations , such as that of Nigeria , we can only use extreme measures .
Mr President , I would like to echo the points made by colleagues and it is good to see the House uniting .
Mrs Maij-Weggen said that her group was not radical , my group is called the Radical group and naturally we associate ourselves with radical policies .
I think what is important is that we have compromised to produce a joint resolution which I hope the House will pass overwhelmingly .
I also agree totally with the remarks made by my colleague Mr Fassa .
We have to remember sometimes just how big the prize of Nigeria is or how big the challenge .
This is the giant of Africa , the country with one hundred million people which dominates the continent .
As my colleague Mr Fassa has just said if we ignore the giants and pick on the pygmies then people will conclude that the European Union is not serious about its foreign policy .
We have all been exercised about the problems of Iraq and the dictatorship there , but it would be a lot easier to bring about the overthrow of the Abacha dictatorship than that of Saddam Hussein .
Sanni Abacha overthrew the elected government .
He rules with a ring of steel around him but he is not supported by the people of Nigeria .
They are looking to us for a lead to see in what ways the European Union is prepared to put democracy first and its own economic short-term interests second .
In the long term , I think we have an interest in a free , democratic Nigeria with which we can trade as a full member of the ACP Lomé Convention .
In the meantime , we have set out in this resolution a series of practical steps which the European Union could take and I hope that the Council of Ministers will respond to this and see whether they will go along with each of these .
This is a very carefully calibrated practical series of proposals from this Parliament and I think that they are a very fitting response to the challenge .
But at the end of the day the final sanction which has got to be contemplated , and this Parliament has already supported it in the past , is an oil embargo .
That is the one thing which Nigeria above all fears .
It is the one thing which could bring down the regime so we have to keep that up our sleeve as the last resort and in the meantime put the pressure on the regime to transfer to democratic government which is what the Nigerian people deserve .
Mr President , Burma and Nigeria are obviously , geographically , thousands of miles apart .
However , the people in those two countries both endure the most tyrannical military juntas and suffer systematic abuses of human rights .
Unfortunately , as others have said , Europe 's response is often perceived as being guided too much by our own commercial advantage , rather than the need to respond to the misery of the people in those countries where we risk undermining the very credibility of any claim that Europe is , in fact , genuinely committed to human rights .
Democracy and good governance and our commitments to those two issues are also called into question by people in Burma and Nigeria who say that fine words will not , in themselves , assist their struggles .
Should we not respond to the calls that have been made repeatedly by Aung San Suu Kyi for political and economic isolation of the SPDC .
Is it not time other Member States followed the initiative undertaken by Britain , that has at least outlawed trade promotion in Burma ?
Would the President-in-Office of the Council please give me some information as to whether it has made any progress on this matter ?
Also , will he report to me whether the European Union is doing anything about the large numbers of Burmese people who are being forcibly repatriated into Burma , from Thailand , as a result of the financial crisis ?
Similarly , on Nigeria , will the Council give us a commitment that it will implement the measures already agreed in the common position , particularly on visas , which have been regularly flouted by generals ?
The sports boycott has been flouted due to pressure from the French government to allow the Nigerian football team to take part in the World Cup in June .
That is an extremely regrettable initiative .
The President-in-Office will be aware that at the Commonwealth Conference the foreign ministers agreed that if the promised return to civilian rule in Nigeria was not credible , then a mandatory oil embargo , a ban on airlines , an arms embargo and a freezing of financial assets would take place .
Will the President-in-Office confirm that the Council will take similar actions at such time ?
Will he spell out the terms and the timetable on which the proposed transition would be acceptable , including the unimpeded registration of genuine political parties , the release of Chief Abiola and other detainees and international monitoring of elections ?
Would the President-in-Office agree with me that if the Council were to set these clear benchmarks , which we have laid out in our resolution , then we would avoid risking acquiescence in the process which Abacha is so clearly engaged in and that will result in a civilian glove covering the military fist that Abacha has applied for so long ?
Mr President , the regime in Burma may have changed its name , but the policy has stayed exactly the same .
The State Peace Development Council , as it is called now , continues its policy of suppression .
It is the same old story .
I invite the British Presidency to make it clear that human rights policy is a joint policy , and that it forms an important part of their political thinking .
How does the President-in-Office of the Council think he will do this ?
How does the President-in-Office of the Council think he will respond to Premier Oil 's decision to invest in Burma ?
What instrument does ASEM offer this situation ?
The Liberal group hopes that the President-in-Office of the Council will stick to the Union policy not to invite Burma to London .
Only what I would like to call pariah treatment will have effect .
How are the ASEM partners responding to this ?
How does the President-in-Office of the Council think he will convince the ASEM partners of the need for a policy which is based more on respect for human rights ?
Finally , has the dialogue with ASEM countries yielded any results yet , and will this be brought up during the coming meeting of ministers ?
Mr President , we asked for this debate with the Commission and the Council on topics of major importance concerning the specific principle the Community institutions and the EU countries should adopt in the presence of countries which are very seriously violating the most fundamental human and democratic rights of their citizens .
The case of Burma is certainly today one of the most serious in the world .
The " list ' of problems is , unfortunately , sadly known and runs from generalized political and social repression to the exploitation of forced and child labour , from drugs trafficking to violation of human rights .
This situation is constantly deteriorating and the government is not showing any signs of finally wanting to begin a process of democratization in the country .
In the Burmese State 's budget for 1997-98 , defence costs officially amount to 43 % of the total .
These resources are used for internal repression and in the interests of the military establishment in power .
The Burmese civilian society has shown its desire for democracy on numerous occasions that have always received our firm support , as shown when the Sakharov Prize was awarded to Aung San Suu Kyi several years ago .
However , the amount the international Community can do , starting with the EU and its Member States , becomes a deciding factor .
For this reason , while supporting the measures already adopted by the Commission and Council , we ask for pressure to be increased on the Burmese government , accentuating its political and economic isolation .
It is from within Burma itself that the EU is asked to block any economic relations with the government , ending investments , trade and tourism and taking restrictive measures on entry visas , as well as strictly controlling the embargo on arms sales .
The attitude of the large private companies , with numerous direct or indirect interests in Burma , is decisive .
A pressure policy should be applied to these companies to freeze their business in the country , business that is only beneficial to the Government .
The opinion the citizens of Europe and those of the rest of the world will have on the European structure also depends on the firm and responsible way in which we manage to deal with the Burmese question and the other democratic emergencies throughout the world .
Thank you , Mr Vecchi .
Meanwhile , the Bureau has noted that Mr Telkämper , whom I had said was absent , has just entered the Chamber and it is therefore with great pleasure that I invite him to take the floor , if the House has no objection .
My questions relate to Burma .
We have presented and discussed various resolutions on Burma and we were usually in agreement with the Commission and the Council that we must do everything to push forward the democratization process .
This , however , has just not happened .
My question is therefore how the British Presidency intends to present a common foreign policy position on Burma and perhaps to get this process in motion .
The question relates in particular to how the Presidency intends to deal with adherence to the ILO Convention on slave labour .
We know that slave labour prevails in Burma .
How can we ensure this directive is successfully implemented ?
I also have a specific question concerning the oil company Premier Oil , which in September 1997 announced its intention to buy the shares of the US firm Texaco from a natural gas company .
Will the British Presidency support that or do you advise them , on the basis of resolutions passed here to desist from doing so ?
The third point is that , as we have said , whilst the circumstances in Burma remain as they are , we will be against Burma being included here , on the basis of the treaty arrangements between the European Union and the ASEAN countries . This is because , as we of course repeatedly emphasize , human rights must be respected and this is also a condition or a part of the treaties .
What will be the attitude of the British Presidency in the continuation of relations between the EU and ASEAN ?
Mr President , as a member of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , I must confess I am more familiar with human rights violations of the fundamental rights within the European Union , which , as you know , come under the authority of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , rather than human rights violations outside the European Union , about which my colleagues know a lot more than I do .
But as I know the region quite well , including Burma , I was suddenly asked to speak .
I have tried to catch up on human rights violations outside the European Union , because situations in my own country prompt me to a certain degree of modesty in this respect .
If you consider that the Netherlands had been denounced by the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg for not having an independent judiciary , for not having a perfectly organized defence system and for not having properly functioning freedom of speech , then I say that I am quite willing to consider human rights as a problem , but rather as a " we problem ' than a " you problem ' .
This is my first point .
When Burma joined ASEAN , I immediately paid a visit to Rangoon for strictly personal reasons , and used the opportunity to lay a wreath at the British war cemetery for those who died on the railroad during the Japanese occupation .
I was very impressed with how civilized the people in that country were - and I can fully see why the British considered it as one of its most advanced colonies , when it was still a colonial power . I therefore went back over Christmas , and I also visited the Anglican Church - and I can recommended this to my British colleagues - where the war chapel has a handwritten record of all the British people who gave their lives for the freedom of this country , and for my own church , the Anglican Church .
And I am now delivering to you a plea from the bishops of the Anglican and Lutheran Church , regarding the fact that all economic measures affect first and foremost the poor members of the population .
That is the message I wanted to pass on .
It has to be said , and this struck me yesterday during my intensive research of human rights violations , that we apply a kind of selection process - and I must ask my expert colleagues about this - , because a country like Brunei , which has no parliament at all , one of the nine ASEAN members , has never been on our hit list .
I have one last comment , Mr President , and that is that religious beliefs , which do exist , as I experienced in Burma , are always judged harshly by this Parliament .
These are my last words ; maybe we can pay some attention to this from within Christian circles .
Mr President , I only want to point out that the country 's President elected by 80 % of the population asked for economic measures .
I think that should suffice .
Thank you , Mrs Maij-Weggen , for your clarification .
I will give the floor once more to Mr Bertens and I would take this opportunity to explain to the House that , as I am sure you are aware , we are conducting a joint debate on a number of oral questions .
That is why Mr Bertens appears on the list of speakers a second time , and indeed , he will be taking the floor for a third time later on .
Mr President , Mrs Maij-Weggen already made the point at the beginning of the debate that the UN Commission on Human Rights , which took place when the Dutch held the Presidency last year , was a black page in the Union 's human rights history .
Unfortunately , international attention was focused on how extremely divided we were ; this division was chiefly based on economic advantage .
The Council promised better , and why not in fact ?
The Union , acting jointly at UN level in this area , might achieve something .
This applies especially to larger countries , and in this respect , I would like to mention China .
The balance between open and silent diplomacy is right , but what will the result bring ?
I do not think we should be obsessed with China .
We must also remember Nigeria , Burma , Cambodia , Sudan , Afghanistan , Algeria , and perhaps Cuba , because the Pope does not sanctify everything .
UN resolutions should be followed up to the letter .
My question to the Council is : does he think he might achieve a better system for monitoring UN resolutions and for strengthening the follow-up structure ?
This year the opportunity to reinforce the UN position must be seized , since it was fifty years ago in Lake Success that the United Nations was founded .
Any attempts to not take the United Nations resolutions seriously will obviously achieve the opposite .
How does the President-inOffice of the Council think he might give the decisive push for the realization of a powerful UN declaration on the protection of human rights defenders ?
After all these years there should at last be a powerful agreement on this .
Defenders of human rights deserve a declaration as an appreciation of all their work , and the Member States are morally committed to that in this important year for the UN .
I hope that this Presidency will interpret that in the right way in any case .
Mr President , as the chairman of the delegation for relations with China , I am the first to admit that it is not easy to know how to influence this huge country .
We often discuss that within the delegation . We are even going to have a special seminar about it .
It is clear that we should not break off relations . And it is clear that we should continue to strengthen our contacts and continue with dialogue .
But should we really stop criticizing China completely ?
That seems to be the Council 's view , since it is now going to dispense entirely with proposing a resolution in Geneva .
It is true that things have happened in China .
It is true that certain laws have been changed .
It is true that a convention on social rights has been adopted , or at least signed . It is true that Mary Robinson has been invited there and it is true that the Sakharov prize winner Wei Jingsheng has been released .
But is that really enough to give China approval ?
Human Rights Watch does not think so . Nor does Wei Jingsheng , whom I had the occasion to meet in Brussels a while ago .
They think that pressure should be maintained too .
I would like to ask this : is it really the case that the Council has a strategy for human rights in China ?
Or is it just commercial considerations that have led to this new passive approach ?
Mr President , this Parliament resolution is important .
I have the same doubts as Mr Gahrton as regards the Council 's desire to adopt a position which I hope will be Parliament 's position tomorrow .
There are certain precedents , particularly that of the past year .
I also have some doubts as regards the Commission .
There are some issues concerning China which are quite worrying .
Some projects have been blocked for two years and I have just learned that , following a restructuring of the services of the Commission , the projects which DG VIII had examined and organized were transferred to DG 1B . This will force us to restart the whole process and lose more precious months .
Some projects have been blocked for two years .
The Council may have reservations , but so too has the Commission .
There is one point as regards the United Nations resolution on which I absolutely do not agree : that of " Algeria ' .
This morning , Parliament succeeded in adopting a dignified stance on Iraq although this is not the case for other institutions .
Thanks to the subcommittee chaired by Mr Soulier , in Algeria 's case , Parliament is moving in the right direction towards adopting a dignified position , so it will not contradict itself by adopting a paragraph which demands that an international committee of inquiry be set up on Algeria tomorrow .
It was a huge job to get Parliament to move on this ; I hope and I am fairly convinced that we have succeeded .
Now we must try to influence the Council and the Commission .
Parliament will not go back on its word by calling for an international conference ; that would be absurd .
Mr President , sadly , I could fill the minutes allocated to me listing countries which flagrantly violate human rights , but I will mention a few which are not often highlighted .
Firstly , I would like to mention Angola .
The government rules over the largest part of the country now and , sadly , murders of the opposition leaders are increasing , including in the Cabinda region .
The international community is doing nothing , tempted by oil and the generous sale of arms to the country .
Secondly , I would like to take the case of Cuba .
Seven prisoners have been released , who incidently were forced to leave the country immediately , but that still leaves 500 political prisoners .
Because of the internal split in this Parliament , we rarely discuss this .
No Cuban dissident has ever been important enough to this Parliament to receive the Sakharov Prize .
This is incredible and selective , Mr President .
Apart from looking critically at this Parliament , I also want to look critically at the Council .
How has the Council put into effect the human rights resolutions which were accepted in the UN last year ?
What has been done to promote and guarantee the work of the special rapporteurs ?
How is the Council going to organize a strong and cohesive EU position for the coming 54th Session of the UN ?
Is the Council prepared to give clear signals during the Session to countries like China , Mexico , Nigeria , Syria and Cuba , countries which are totally obstructive during the negotiation and decision-making process ?
Will the Council not let itself be influenced by China 's one step forward , two steps back policy ?
Does the Council really see the exclusion of Burma at the coming ASEM summit as a useful contribution to compliance of human rights ?
To conclude , for over a year some resolutions in this Parliament and some political factions have been calling for an oil boycott in Nigeria .
Is the Council truly prepared and does it intend to raise this with the Security Council ?
Because otherwise we are sitting here producing hot air , and that is not what this Parliament is here for .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the honourable Members for their questions and their interventions .
I am pleased to address the questions they submitted .
I would like to deal with this in three parts plus an addendum .
The first part will deal with Nigeria , the second with Burma , the third with human rights and I will then make an announcement in relation to Azerbaijan on human rights .
Firstly , on Nigeria , the Council has been following the situation in Nigeria with concern since the annulment of 12 June 1993 presidential elections .
It has had measures in place against the Nigerian regime since then as a mark of its concerns about the lack of respect for human rights and democratic rule .
This concern intensified throughout 1995 which saw the trial and harsh sentencing of 43 alleged coup plotters , including former Head of State General Obasanjo and a number of other high-profile civilians , Abacha 's announcement of a three-year transition to civilian rule and finally the execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa and his eight co-defendants after a flawed judicial process .
The two common positions adopted on 20 November 1995 and 4 December 1995 strengthened the European Union measures to include , among others , visa restrictions on members of the Nigerian regime and their families , including those in possession of long-term visas , a full scale arms embargo and a sports ban .
As the honourable Members have noted , on 28 November 1997 the Council of the European Union extended the common position on Nigeria of 4 December 1995 until 1 November 1998 .
At the same time the Council reiterated its concern about the abuse of human rights in Nigeria , including the detention of political prisoners as well as the slow pace of democratization .
It also underlined its willingness to support the transition process .
Since then the Council has followed with considerable concern developments in Nigeria , including the tragic death of Shehu Yar 'Adua in detention , the further arrest and detention without charge of journalists and pro-democracy activists , plus the arrest on 21 December 1997 of General Diya and a number of others in connection with an alleged coup attempt .
On 26 December 1997 , the Luxembourg Presidency issued a declaration on behalf of the European Union appealing urgently to the Nigerian authorities to treat those arrested in accordance with the legal principles corresponding to international standards .
This declaration also made clear that the European Union could not accept a repetition of the events of 1995 .
The Council has noted that a seven-man military tribunal has been constituted under the chairmanship of Major General Malu to try 26 people held under suspicion of coup plotting .
On 14 February the press were allowed to witness the inauguration and see the accused but we understand that the proceedings will be held in camera .
The European Union successfully co-sponsored further critical resolutions on Nigeria at the 1997 sessions of the United Nations Commission for Human Rights and the United Nations General Assembly .
The UNCHR resolution led to the appointment on 16 October of a special rapporteur on Nigeria with a mandate to make contact with the Nigerian authorities and people and report on the human rights situation in that country .
His first report will be submitted to this year 's Commission .
We will be pressing for a further tough resolution based on his report .
I want now to move to Burma .
I applaud the sustained interest which Members of the European Parliament continue to take in the appalling human rights situation in Burma .
The Council strongly shares Members ' concerns .
Its working groups at all levels regularly discuss ways in which to promote change in that country .
The Council 's message on Burma is simple .
The people of Burma have expressed democratically their wish for a fairer deal and their voice must be heard by their government .
To reinforce that message and encourage reform , the European Union has introduced a package of tough measures against the Burmese regime .
The common position on Burma first adopted in October 1996 includes a full-scale arms embargo , a ban on the issuing of visas for members of the regime and their families , a ban on defence links and aid except for humanitarian aid and a ban on high-level official visits .
The European Union has also suspended preferential trading terms for Burmese exports to the Union of agricultural and industrial goods .
Some Member States have introduced additional measures on a national basis .
The Council regularly reviews whether there is a consensus for them to be adopted by all Member States .
There is no question of any relaxation of these measures without a substantial improvement in the human rights situation in Burma .
We are conscious that in some circumstances such sanctions can hurt the very people they are designed to help .
To help relieve the suffering which Burmese government policies cause to ordinary Burmese people , the European Union partners are considering a package of positive measures to strengthen civil society in Burma and to reinforce the excellent humanitarian work which is already being done there .
I want to pay tribute to the many European and other non-governmental organizations which work tirelessly to improve conditions on the ground .
The Council is working with non-governmental organizations to tackle the problem of Burma 's refugees from both sides of the border .
European Union ambassadors in Bangkok are in touch with the government of Thailand about the need to provide shelter and protection for refugees .
We continue to monitor the situation closely and stand ready to take swift further action if necessary .
We also work to promote improvements in Burma through close coordination of policy with our international partners .
The Council keeps Burma high on its agenda for intergovernmental discussions .
We firmly believe that governments in Asia have a particularly important role to play in using their influence with the regime to press for reform in Burma and we continue to urge them to do so .
Our international partners cooperate closely in the UN .
For example , the United Nations General Assembly in December adopted by consensus a tough resolution on human rights in Burma .
Several European Union Member States were co-sponsors , and the text is stronger than last year 's resolution in key areas .
We look to the Burmese authorities to respect their obligations , as a UN member , and implement the resolution immediately .
The Union will also introduce a resolution on Burma at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva next month .
The Council has taken concrete measures to address human rights abuses in Burma .
It is keeping the situation under very regular review and stands ready to consider further measures , positive or negative , as the situation on the ground demands .
I should like to move on more generally to human rights .
From mid-March to the end of April the Presidency will lead the European Union at the 54th session of the UN Commission of Human Rights in Geneva .
Those rights are an issue for the whole year , not just for the annual sessions of the Commission .
But the Commission is certainly the most important single opportunity in the international calendar to demonstrate our commitment to human rights and to work towards a realization around the world .
We are conscious though that the Commission is not always an easy environment : many different viewpoints are represented .
There will be those present who will seek to hamstring the work of the international community to promote human rights .
Many countries automatically oppose intrusive mechanisms and the realization by their citizens of their inalienable rights .
We will do our utmost , with other like-minded countries , to ensure that such disruptive and indefensible opposition does not prevail .
A major focus of this year 's Commission will be the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
The Declaration established universal standards of human rights .
Fifty years on , the standards remain as relevant as they were when the Declaration was adopted .
But we remain a long way from their full realization .
The 50th anniversary is a time for implementation of those standards .
It is not a time to unpick existing texts , and we will resist firmly any attempts to do so .
We will pay particular attention at the Commission to ensuring that it takes effective action to promote the rights of children .
So often children 's rights are forgotten or ignored .
Children 's rights must be a cross-cutting element in all the work of the Commission .
There is near-universal ratification of the Convention of the Rights of the Child , and the time has come for implementation .
Another key cross-cutting issue for the Council is the human rights of women .
We will ensure that women 's rights are given their due place in the work of the Commission , not just in the resolutions which specifically cover women 's rights , but in other Commission action .
The EU will play a full role across all the work of the Commission .
In particular there is already agreement within the Union that the Presidency , on behalf of the Union , will table resolutions on Nigeria , Burma , the Democratic Republic of Congo , Israeli settlements , Iran , East Timor and Iraq .
We will also take the initiative on Colombia , where the welcome decision to set up a human rights office in Bogota stems from Union action .
The Union will , in addition , make an intervention setting out our position on other countries where we have major human rights concerns .
The Council is still considering how to address other countries ' situations at the Commission , including China .
We regret the breakdown of the European Union consensus on a CHR resolution in 1997 .
We are still considering action at the Commission on Human Rights .
But it will depend on developments and progress made in the bilateral and European Union human rights dialogues .
We expect to make a decision shortly .
We have concerns about the human rights situation in China and are seeking to address these in a cooperative way with the Chinese government .
China has demonstrated a willingness to discuss human rights with us and the European Union as a whole .
China has also entered into a dialogue with others .
These discussions have produced results , information on individual cases and agreement on technical cooperation programmes .
The Presidency will also make interventions in debates on racism , democracy and development , detention and rule of law issues , women 's rights , advisory services , the rights of the child , human rights ' defenders , as well as on Israeli settlements .
We will support the Commission 's various independent mechanisms , including special rapporteurs and working groups .
They play a crucial role in monitoring violations and advising governments on human rights improvements .
The Council , as you may imagine , does not expect an easy session .
But we know what we want to achieve : real progress towards the realization of all human rights for all people , and we will be working hard to make sure that we achieve it .
As I indicated at the beginning of my contribution , I can today , as a result of pressure by the Union , announce that Azerbaijan has abolished the death penalty .
I believe it is a helpful step forward in promoting human rights , and we call on other countries to follow that example .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Bureau has received a number of requests for the floor from Members who have already taken part in the debate .
Given that some ten more speakers are already down for this joint debate , the Bureau 's criteria will be to avoid disturbing the normal course of the debate .
The Members who have now requested the floor in connection with the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council will be able to put their questions at the end , because I do not think that this will be the last time that the President-in-Office of the Council takes the floor .
Therefore , he will have an opportunity to answer any questions later .
Mr President , can you assure me that the President-in-Office will be here if we want to ask him questions because I specifically wanted to ask for an answer to a very specific question that I asked .
Mrs Kinnock , it seems that you did not hear what I said earlier .
Like yourself , others have requested the floor in response to the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council .
Moreover , we have a list of speakers and a series of speakers who have not yet had the opportunity to take the floor , and who have as much right to receive answers from the President of the Council and from Commissioner Marín as those who have already spoken .
Therefore , I would ask for your understanding and ask you to present your question to the President-in-Office of the Council when the debate has ended , because we still have another ten speakers on our list , and we cannot favour any Member to the detriment of others .
I hope you understand that I cannot proceed in any other way .
Mr President , in general terms the Commission completely accepts the position expressed by the British Presidency with respect to Nigeria and Burma .
I just want to explain a few points .
It is true that Nigeria is at a critical juncture because presidential elections are due to be held in the next six months , and we hope they will lead to the installation of a civilian government in that country , under a civilian president .
So there is a lot at stake .
If , for whatever reason , the process of democratic transition were to founder , it could result in a reappearance of the spectre of violence and bloodshed , which could perhaps spread to other countries , with very serious human and economic consequences .
We are convinced that the Nigerian people would not peacefully accept another military regime .
On the other hand , the many questions which Members have raised about the Nigeria issue show the concern within the European Union to see the democratic process firmly established in that country , and the economic benefits of its resources finally distributed fairly amongst the population , which is increasing all the time and becoming poorer and poorer .
As has been said , Nigeria is too big and important a country , both within Africa and globally , to be marginalized .
Let me state quite categorically that the Commission will do everything within its power and the limits of its authority , to assist and mobilize the necessary resources to strengthen Nigerian civilian society , and particularly its most vulnerable groups .
Twenty-seven years of successive military governments have left an indelible mark on Nigerian civilian society , which will take a long time to disappear .
The apathy and fatalism which characterize a large part of civilian society should be reversed somehow . We are convinced that Nigeria 's well-known spirit of enterprise and dynamism can be reawakened for this purpose .
Finally , I want to say that the Commission intends to continue its efforts towards dialogue with the Nigerian government , giving special priority to measures designed precisely to combat human rights violations , strengthen the independence and training of the courts and the legal professions , improve governability and assist the process of supporting democracy .
As for Burma - and this is not the first time we have discussed these matters in Parliament - the Commission wishes to clarify the following points : to the best of our ability , and following the common position adopted by the Council , we have tried to establish what is known as " critical dialogue ' with the military junta .
Apart from the ASEAN meetings at the United Nations in New York , our attempt at critical dialogue has not worked and is still not working , for the simple reason that it has been rejected .
At the moment there is no significant contact between the Commission and the military junta .
It is true that the common position calls on us to initiate that political dialogue but , I repeat , with the military junta this has not been possible .
With the democratic movements it is a different matter , and we have set in motion a whole series of decisions .
I do not understand how Mr Dupuis can talk about delays .
That is not true .
The Commission has set in motion a programme of support for the opposition , for the Burmese dissident movement which has been established in Europe , and in that sense we have launched a project with the aim of strengthening the democratic movements and training members of the opposition and future leaders .
We have opened a Europe-Burma office in Brussels .
In other words , we have made contact with the opposition and with the dissidents within that opposition living in Europe , and we are helping them .
As for the military junta , I cannot tell them anything , for the simple reason that we have no form of contact with them .
The only chance is the forthcoming visit by Kofi Annan 's special envoy , Mr Álvarez Soto , the aim of which is precisely to attempt that critical dialogue , on behalf of Kofi Annan .
Finally , the European Union 's position on the ASEAN question is very clear .
Firstly , the fact that Burma has been accepted into ASEAN 's regional framework is a matter for ASEAN itself .
They accepted that country in the belief that by means of what they call " constructive engagement ' - which turns out to be the English version of the Asian translation of " critical dialogue ' - they would demonstrate that dialogue really has been strengthened .
As far as the Commission is concerned , I first want to point out once again in Parliament that Burma is not included in the 1980 cooperation agreement which was extended to Brunei and Vietnam .
In any case , the Commission does not intend to propose to the Council that the ASEAN-EU regional cooperation protocol of 1980 should be extended .
In that sense , we are maintaining our position , apart from the fact that it was confirmed in the Council 's common position .
Furthermore , Burma is also excluded from all the cooperation programmes being implemented with ASEAN .
So there is no need to worry , because as things stand and until such time as the common position changed , we are strictly complying both with what the Council called for in its common position and with what this Parliament has so often called for .
That is the latest news I can give you on these two problems .
Thank you , Commissioner Marín .
I have received twenty motions for resolutions , submitted pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , over two years since the execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa , when his son , Ken , came to Brussels three days later and generated total and absolute support from every part of this House for a return to democracy and human rights in Nigeria , we are forced once again to ask the European Parliament to condemn the Abacha regime 's continuing disregard for these principles .
Abacha 's presidential candidacy from four out of five parties and the continued house arrest of Chief Abiola do not constitute a transition to civilian rule , Commissioner Marín .
The arrests of alleged coup plotters last December , threats against journalists who report them , and the arrest of 30 perceived activists preceding the Ogoni Day celebrations last month are all testimony to the abandonment of even token efforts by the Nigerian government towards democratic transition .
I ask the Commission and the Council to respond to Mrs Kinnock 's points about clear benchmarks for this transition process .
We say again , today , that oil sanctions remain the only instrument available to the international community which will guarantee change ; oil earnings , which account for 96 % of all Nigeria 's export earnings , with 40 % of all federal government revenue provided by one European company : Shell .
The European Parliament should condemn the Nigerian government for its announcement this month that it is seeking to resume oil operations in Ogoniland by force .
We should join calls on Shell to publicly denounce this .
Last year we held discussions with Shell in this House on their business principles .
We accept that they have the potential to be a force for good in Nigeria , but they must accept greater responsibility in response to the latest crisis .
Batom Mitee , brother of the acting president of the Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People ( Mosop ) told The Times : ' Farmers are struggling for land and space with oil exploration .
They do not see the government .
They see Shell .
They want Shell to show some concern . ' On 3 January this year , Batom 's car was stalked and searched by members of the same internal security force set up to repress anti-Shell protests .
A report about the struggle against Shell was found on the back seat .
Batom was dragged out of his car and severely beaten .
He was detained and severely tortured , denied food , medical care or access to a lawyer .
Ken Saro-Wiwa believed he would die ' all for Shell ' .
Let us , let Shell , let every Member State who trades in oil act now to save the life of Batom Mitee , of the thirty others arrested with him , and of all oppressed Nigerian people who they represent .
Mr President , as one of the co-authors of the resolutions on Nigeria and Burma , I am particularly pleased that we are having this debate this afternoon using the oral question with debate rather than the normal urgency procedure .
I am grateful to the President-in-Office and to Mr Marín for their respective statements which I think probably take the matter as far as possible , bearing in mind in particular that the President-in-Office has , so to speak , to represent the fourteen other Member States .
On Nigeria , he referred to the sports ban .
This has to be considered somewhat ironic in view of the fact that Nigeria has been given the go-ahead to take part in the World Cup .
It tears a hole in the whole system and allows a number of Nigerians to come to Paris and other places to take part in the World Cup .
I do not know whether he is able to offer an explanation but it is an illustration of how one Member State can drive a cart horse through the whole system .
On Burma , the only point I can make in one minute , since I was not able to be present this morning for reasons beyond my control , is the extent to which investment is still going on there .
A company like Total , for instance is making substantial investments . We correspond with them and they send an arrogant reply that they will have nothing to do with us and give no information whatsoever .
I wish that the President-in-Office could ask some very pointed questions of certain Member States and of certain companies .
There are a lot of others involved as well .
I have made my two points concerning the World Cup and the extent of investment in Burma .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I listened attentively to what Commissioner Marín had to say , albeit in a cool manner , and attentively because this shows , once again , how Europe is totally powerless on two contrasting issues - Nigeria and Burma .
What is happening in Nigeria ?
The military power of this bloodthirsty junta - for it was called a junta by Commissioner Marín , rather than a dictatorship - with a president who had been elected and of whom we know nothing , with Ken Saro-Wiwa and other Ogoni representatives who have been executed , is now extending to other African countries .
And now we have news that the Nigerian military have invaded Sierra Leone ; refugees are already escaping from their land on account of this military intervention , brought forward under the pretext that they , the Nigerians , are the peacemakers in Africa .
I have not heard you say anything about this , Mr Commissioner .
I would like to know whether , in this critical dialogue the Commission intended to hold with Nigeria , the possibility that Nigeria may become the peacemaker with the arms of Africa and the African region is also implied .
The second question relates to Burma .
It is true that we cannot allow this country to join the ASEAN , and therefore there is no dialogue between Europe and Burma , but it is also true that there is a creeping legitimization of the Burmese dictatorship , although it has wiped out , tortured , incarcerated and summarily executed the opposition , while putting Nobel Prize winners under house arrests and so on and so forth .
We have not had much reassurance on this either , Mr Commissioner , from you or from the Commission .
Mr President , I am just back from Algeria where I went to discuss human rights . This is a country in the grip of terrorism , and I would like to pay my respects to all the victims of the barbarous acts there .
Clearly , I do not agree with Mr Dupuis . I am not at all reassured as regards the fate of the numerous people who have disappeared , nor as regards the practice of torture and the secret detention camps .
I call on the Council and the Member States to list Algeria amongst the priorities for debate at the next session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights and remain convinced that sending a special rapporteur does not represent a punishment or a condemnation of this country .
On the contrary , this mechanism , which was provided for by the United Nations and used for countries where the situation is less worrying than in Algeria , will enable us to shed light on the situation and break the deadlock .
Algeria is really on the road to democracy - we have noted this before .
So it should be able to accept that transparency is brought to those areas which remain opaque , at least for the moment .
And it is also up to us to encourage this country to accept the promotion of universal values and respect for individuals .
In clarification , the joint resolution does not mention the call for an international committee of inquiry , contrary to what Mr Dupuis says .
Mr President , Nigeria is a particularly bad apple in a basket of not too sound fruit .
Democratically elected presidents are deposed and political opponents imprisoned or hanged .
The Nigerian regime is also active outside its own borders .
Under the ECOMOG flag , Nigerian soldiers are fighting against the military junta in Sierra Leone , supposedly to reinstate the democratically elected president , but Sierra Leone 's diamond fields must be the primary reason .
The question is , what can the EU do against the regime in Nigeria ?
In November 1995 , the Council suspended military cooperation and development aid .
In December of that year these measures were strengthened .
Now that three years later these measures have had not any effect , some people in this House are arguing for an oil boycott .
This would hit the regime hard , because oil exports account for 90 % of its income .
However , the experience we have gained with boycotts of this kind shows that it is above all the people who suffer , whilst the regime the boycott is targeted at , is often able to keep its position for years to come .
Because of the largely poor majority in Nigeria , I question the use of an oil boycott .
That is why I am investigating the feasibility and consequences of an oil embargo .
After that , it can be decided whether an embargo of this kind should be imposed .
I do believe that the existing sanctions the Council introduced against Nigeria should be closely observed .
Mr President , the people of Burma deserve a vote in favour of the statement being debated here today .
The Burmese regime is one of the most unpleasant dictatorships in the world .
The people are being brutally suppressed , and the military dictatorship has not the slightest respect for human rights .
Burma is the centre of the Asian narcotics trade : it produces more than 2 000 tonnes of raw opium a year , and another 250 tonnes of heroin , which are exported to the West .
The dictatorship uses the income to tighten its grip on power .
The proposal we are debating here today demands in very clear terms that foreign companies stop investing in Burma immediately and that the EU introduces economic sanctions against Burma as soon as possible .
Aung San Suu Kyi , who was awarded the European Parliament 's Sakharov prize , has called on the EU take this action .
During the era of apartheid in South Africa , it was again those who spoke for the oppressed who demanded that the rest of the world should put economic pressure on the regime , but business in the West fought against this .
Now business is making profits in the country where the anti-apartheid movement has gone furthest .
People must understand that investing in Burma amounts to direct support for the military regime .
It would be better for the Burmese if this regime were overthrown and economic sanctions have proved to be more effective in the past than critical dialogue with someone who does not understand the meaning of the words .
I heard Mr Marín say that critical dialogue has failed , so I am expecting a statement from the Commission saying that , now that we have totally failed in this area , economic sanctions will be applied .
That would suit both the Commission but also , in particular , the Council because I think Mr Henderson 's answer on Burma was rather meaningless .
Mr President , I have a preliminary remark to make .
I would like to ask the Bureau to try to arrange even joint debates as thematically as possible , for it is rather complicated to trace a common thread of meaning between Burma , Nigeria and the 54th session of the Human Rights Commission in Geneva .
I say this in view of the fact that we have an audience .
But allow me to say something about the 54th session of the UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva .
For many people it represents hope , but it also disappoints many people .
For us , however , for the European Union - and therefore I would like to underline this very clearly here - it is a test case , to show to what extent the Union is serious about its own human rights policy and how it converts its own theories into practice .
Many countries , particularly Denmark , were all the more dismayed when some states of the European Union no longer supported the resolution on China introduced with great difficulty a year before .
Of course , no country is prevented from improving the situation of human rights in their own territory .
If that is really the case then we shall not be the last to confirm it .
This year , too , another proposed resolution is before the European Parliament , which calls on the Council to define joint priorities in Geneva .
The list of countries criticized because of their human rights policies is still very long , much too long , in fact , and just a few examples are Algeria , Iraq , Iran , Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of Congo .
In addition there are problems such as the international trade in human cargo , namely in women and children .
Nevertheless , we are not abandoning hope that the European Union will show a common strong front , for only then can we do anything .
This is directed equally at the President of the Council and the representative of the Commission .
Given , in particular , the enlargement towards the east of the European Union , we should take these questions very seriously and measure our own attitude against the criteria which we apply to other countries .
This applies above all in the year of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which we want to see extended by an international Court of Human Rights .
In my opinion it is an exhortation to ourselves .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have so often taken up the question of crimes against human rights perpetrated by the military junta in Burma , but we must return once again to the subject .
We are not alone in our criticism .
Both the United Nations and the USA along with many other countries have recently made renewed protests in this respect .
Aung San Suu Kyi was democratically elected by an overwhelming majority of more than 80 % , but is being prevented from taking over responsibility and is still under house arrest .
Many politicians are in prison for political reasons and are being denied their democratic rights .
Political meetings are banned and there are continued attacks on ethnic minorities . Among other things , 400 villagers were killed in May and June last year .
There is also a strong link between the military regime and drugs producers : most of the world 's heroin comes from Burma .
On several occasions , Aung San Suu Kyi has asked the international community to introduce political and economic sanctions against Burma , which is something President Clinton decided on in May last year when new investments in Burma were banned .
But multinational oil companies , including European ones such as Total , continue to support the military regime .
The oil companies ' investments account for the largest amount of foreign exchange in the country .
Therefore , it is important that Parliament again strongly condemns the dictatorship in Burma and demands that human rights are guaranteed so that Aung San Suu Kyi is released from house arrest and the UN 's inspectors can unconditionally carry out their assignment .
It is appropriate that the Council has decided not to accept Burma 's participation in the meeting between the EU and ASEAN until the human rights situation has improved in Burma .
But Parliament now demands that the Council respond to Aung San Suu Kyi 's call for economic sanctions against the military junta by breaking off all trading and tourist links between the EU and Burma , and by stopping investment in Burma by European companies .
The Council 's representative , Mr Henderson , said earlier that the Council was prepared to adopt further measures .
What initiatives is the Presidency prepared to take for effective economic sanctions and to promote democracy in Burma ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , here in the European Union we are neither the government of the world , nor the policemen of the world .
At this particular moment in time , this government and policing falls to another union .
But , within our bounds , the European Union and , more particularly , the European Parliament have contributed a great deal to the policy of defending human rights .
However , this policy has not been coordinated in such a way as to represent a consensus of the parties of the European Union during the United Nations debates on this subject .
Often , a chorus of small voices carries less weight than a single , stronger voice .
This is not the example that has been given by the European Union .
Moreover , the United Nations resolutions are frequently flouted , which often detracts from the credibility of its decisions .
This attitude is exemplified by the current situation in Iraq and Portugal 's own historical case of East Timor .
I could cite dozens more , but you are better acquainted with this subject than I am .
I consider that the European Union has the right and , indeed , the duty to work actively to enhance the prestige of the United Nations , by drawing attention to these facts .
The questions submitted by some of my colleagues to the Council and to the Commission have that positive end in view .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , what effect do European Parliament debates on human rights actually have ?
Do they just make people aware of problems and then disappear into archives or do they emphatically pursue attempted solutions far beyond the shores of Europe ?
Do they prosecute regard for human rights , do they contribute to the elimination of deplorable situations , do they offer any encouragement at all to those forces whose humanitarian , ecological or economical work needs to be supported ?
The abuses of human rights in Burma continue unabated .
There is illtreatment , imprisonment , enforced labour and slave trading .
The woman who won the democratic elections over 9 years ago , winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , Madame Sun Kyi , is still de facto under house arrest .
Burma is today probably the biggest producer of opium in the world and is miles away from cooperating with other countries in the fight against drugs .
I can therefore only repeat the demand I made in my speech of March last year : cancel the tariff preferences for Burma .
Even if this measure is financially very small it must be extended for the fourth time . But it will not be enough on its own .
The European Union is and remains a Community of values .
The maintenance of democracy and human rights is one of our highest principles .
We are not a movable object which allows itself to be misused for tactical ruses .
Anyone who gets involved in the battle against the abuse of human rights is in no way subject to the law of non-intervention in so-called internal affairs .
We must use economic pressure to exert political pressure on the revolutionary government .
We must impose more far-reaching sanctions .
Like the Americans , the Europeans must get companies to stop investing in Burma .
This gives rise to three questions to the European Commission .
Commissioner Marín , firstly , what chance do you give such an embargo on investment ?
Secondly , in your view , are firms in Europe ready to take such measures ?
Thirdly , what possibility do you see of preventing European firms from filling the vacuum caused by the withdrawal of American firms ?
Thank you , Mr Thomas Mann .
As agreed , I will now give the floor to those who requested it although , since this is a relatively novel process , I would ask Members kindly to frame simple , concise and clear questions relating preferably to matters that the Council has not yet addressed .
Mr President , I would just like to ask the President-in-Office if he would please be so kind as to answer my question regarding the importance of benchmarks by which we will judge the transition process in Nigeria .
I enjoyed the history of what has occurred but I would really like to know what the Council intends to do next .
I know that the Commission is very keen that we have these benchmarks , and I wonder if the Council supports this view .
I would also like to ask the Commission whether it understands what it means to say we are going to have a great deal of new NGO activity in Burma .
I find that deeply worrying and I would like the Commissioner to explain exactly what that means .
Mr President , the President-in-Office has attractive surveys , facts , figures on the countries we have discussed , but he has not given any answers .
I hope he will read the Verbatim Report carefully , and , having done so , will respond differently .
I think it is a shame that it all ended somewhat unfortunately this way .
The specific question about Burma I did not receive an answer to was : what is the Presidency intending to do with the invitation to the ASEM countries for the ASEM ministerial meeting ?
Or at least what he is intending to do with Burma in this respect ?
My additional question is also about Burma .
It seems as though the United States have decided to introduce a investment ban , in other words a run up to an economic boycott .
The result is that European companies are beginning to take over the contracts the Americans are leaving behind .
Where American companies are withdrawing , European ones are entering .
What is the minister going to do , together with his colleagues in the European Council of Ministers , to stop this , and to come into line with America on the Burmese issue ?
Mr President , I must repeat a part of my question because the Council has not answered it .
I had asked whether the British oil company , Premier Oil , announced in September 1997 its intention to buy shares in a natural gas firm in Yetagun from the US firm Texaco after the latter decided to pull out of Burma .
Now of course we have again universally confirmed our condemnation of the regime .
What is the attitude of the British Presidency of the Council - this was my question before - to this possible purchase ?
We really would like an answer on this issue .
Equally - this is a supplementary question to the Commission - , on the issue of the compulsory return of refugees from Thailand to Burma , is humanitarian aid continuing there , guaranteed by the EU ?
Mr President , just to revert to the points I made earlier , how does the President-in-Office reconcile a sports ban on Nigeria with the go-ahead for the World Cup which has opened up a whole plethora of contacts with Nigeria ?
It must be very pleasing to Abacha !
In regard to Burma , would he care to volunteer some explanation about European companies investing with fervour in Burma ?
I cited Total as one example .
How does that tally with the statement of Mr Robin Cook in regard to new ethics and human rights ?
Mr President , I would like to back up the questions asked by Mrs Kinnock over benchmarks .
There were also in the resolution , which we have agreed amongst the groups , a series of measures which we want the European Council to agree to take .
I am referring in particular to paragraph 9 of the resolution which I am sure the President-in-Office has in front of him .
I want to know whether we are going to have some action or whether we are just going to talk about prolonging the present situation .
I should like to make a procedural point .
I was told that Parliament would like me to answer the written questions and that there was an opportunity for debate on those matters .
I answered the written questions but then , supplementary questions were raised by the original questioners .
I was given no notice that I would be required to answer them .
I am not complaining about it , but I suggest I take the questions as we do in Question Time and answer them like that , as I do not propose to give any written answers in future , for the rest of the Presidency .
I do not want to bind future presidencies to this procedure , but I am not going to do both .
I am either going to answer the questions as they are asked or I am going to answer the written questions because what I am being asked to do is to go over the same ground again .
I am happy to do it today , but I will not be doing it again in the future - with your support , Mr President .
I would like to do one or the other .
It is an extension of Question Time .
If Parliament wants Question Time to be longer and have less time for debate , that is fine with me .
But we really have to smarten up the procedure .
I shall now take the various issues which have been raised , and there are quite a large number of them .
I will try and link them where I can .
Firstly , as regards the sports ban on Nigeria , an exception has been made for Nigeria in the World Cup because the French government had a prior arrangement with FIFA which contractually bound them .
They supported a sports ban on the basis that the prior agreement with FIFA would continue to be upheld .
That was agreed by the Council .
The next question put on Nigeria by Mrs André-Léonard was : would Nigeria be top of the human rights agenda ?
The answer to that is that it should be , and I hope it will be .
We will endeavour to put it at the top of the agenda in discussions in Geneva later this year .
On the question from Mrs Lenz on enlargement , the Copenhagen criteria make it quite clear that meeting democratic targets and meeting human rights commitments are part of the enlargement process .
The Treaty of Amsterdam takes the whole question of human rights further in the preamble and reinforces the need for upholding the highest standards of human rights for all EU countries .
That is part of the enlargement dialogue .
All the countries who wish to accede to the European Union are aware of that procedure .
When I visited some of those countries that wish to accede , in preparation for the UK Presidency , I raised those issues with them .
If they were not aware of them before , they are certainly aware of them now .
On the question of Burma , there is no investment ban .
There are a number of policies which are in place .
I did , in my initial introduction , refer to the suspension of preferential trading for Burmese agricultural and industrial exports into the European Union .
In as much as that is a ban , it is an encouragement to Burma to mend its ways .
There are no further bans in place though I can mention , from a UK point of view , that we would certainly be receptive to toughening-up our approach to Burma .
If other colleagues wish to join us in the Council on that , then it could be carried further .
Discouraging tourism and stopping trade promotion is a starting-point here .
We would certainly want to push that agenda at the Council and hope to achieve in the future support from our other colleagues .
Again , as regards relations with the United States , we would want to cooperate with them so that any initiative which was taken by the European Union would not be undermined by the United States .
It is important to have that dialogue .
I now move to the question of benchmarks , which was raised by Mrs Kinnock , Mr Macartney and Mr Howitt .
That is a very sensible proposal .
I can let the House know that the issue will be on the agenda at the next EU-Nigeria experts meeting , which is being convened by the Commission in March in Brussels .
The outcome of that meeting will be a basis for the Council to take decisions in this matter at a later Council meeting .
Regarding the question that was asked by Mr Bertens on ASEAN , I do not believe that Burma is attending the ASEAN conference , so the matter does not arise .
Mrs Maij-Weggen raised the question of the US link .
I have already covered that point .
Regarding the question raised by Mr Telkämper about whether aid will be affected , the answer to that is ' no ' , but I would want to consult officials and then I can give a definitive answer to him in writing later .
Indeed the Commission may be able to provide further information on that .
Thank you , Commissioner Marín .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Situation in Albania
The next item is the Council and the Commission statements relating to the situation in Albania and the results of the visit by the tripartite delegation .
Mr President , the European Union is committed to helping Albania achieve reconciliation and a return to normality .
The Union 's political dialogue meeting with Albania last month is an important sign of this .
But the primary responsibility for this recovery rests with the Albanians themselves , the government , the opposition and , indeed , the people of Albania .
The Union welcomes the positive steps taken so far by the government and its commitment to restoring law and order and political and economic reform .
The agreement with the IMF is an important step forward .
The Union encourages the continuing process of democratic reform including the judicial system .
It is important that a new constitution is adopted after a wide-ranging discussion and the Union welcomes the constructive approach Albania is playing in regional issues and , in particular , in Kosovo .
It is important that the government works to build a genuinely non-political civil service .
The necessary cuts in public administration agreed with the IMF should be even-handed and aim to promote a high degree of professionalism and impartiality .
But the European Union is concerned at the continued refusal of important groups within the Albanian opposition to engage in the democratic process and to contribute to a common approach to rebuilding their country .
The Union calls on the Democratic Party and its allies to participate fully in Parliament including the adoption of a new Albanian Constitution .
The Union welcomes the visit of the troika parliamentarians to Tirana last month and urges the government and the opposition to live up to its recommendations .
It is important that the cooperation offered by Berisha is fulfilled .
The Albanian authorities must work closely with the European Union to ensure the most effective delivery of aid .
European Community assistance to Albania between 1991 and 1996 amounted to ECU 557 million .
The European Community pledged around ECU 100 million more at the October 1997 international donors conference .
The PHARE Programme of 1998 will make an additional ECU 42 million available .
The European Union Humanitarian Office has contributed substantial amounts of humanitarian aid to Albania .
Last December it announced projects of more than ECU 10 million to help vulnerable sections of the population .
This is in addition to the hundreds of millions of US dollars pledged nationally by European Union Member States at the Brussels donors conference .
Mr President , the Commission is of the exact same opinion as the UK Presidency with respect to the situation in Albania .
It is true that there were great improvements in the second half of 1997 as regards economic stabilization and public order .
However , in questions of security the situation is still worrying , and the collecting up of weapons has not been very effective so far .
Most important of all , there are still major political tensions between the main parties , and it must be realized that , for the moment , Albania is still a long way from being a genuinely democratic culture .
Nevertheless , it is critical that the main opposition party , the Albanian Democratic Party , should participate in the Albanian Parliament and in the drafting of the constitution .
Without the necessary political stability , all the country 's forces for recovery and reform , both those from Albania and those from the international donors , would be seriously threatened .
In that context , the Commission is pleased with the recent joint mission of the European Parliament , the Parliamentary Assemblies of the Council of Europe and the OSCE .
We think that mission was necessary , and it has confirmed acceptance of the June-July 1997 elections and the legitimacy of the current parliament , and has given ample support to the process of drafting the constitution , which the government has set in motion .
As a result of the mission , the Democratic Party is finally considering returning to parliament , and the government seems to be firmly committed to helping with political normalization , but the pressure will certainly have to be kept up on all the parties in order to further political and parliamentary cooperation .
The Commission completely agrees with the proposals made by the tri-parliamentary mission .
And in the context of the third joint European Community- / Council of Europe programme for Albania , with a value of ECU 1.5 million , there is a desire to support the work of the Venice Commission towards the preparation of the constitution .
This programme also includes aid for training judges , developing the legislative framework , maintaining law , progress in human rights law , and reforming the judicial system and local administration .
All this has an obvious link with the administrative reform programme , which is another key option in the PHARE programme .
As regards the agreed measures , an encouraging first result is the government 's approval of a law to transform the state service into a superior auditing institution .
Also in preparation is a law concerning the basis of the reorganization of the Ministry of Justice , and a constitutional budgetary law . These two advances - concerning the judiciary and the budget - will be fundamental in reforming public administration .
On the other hand , it is important that personnel cuts are carried out as part of the public administration reform process . These cuts have already been agreed with the Bretton Woods institutions , and maintain the necessary criteria of professionalism .
In this context , a decree is being approved which deals with transitional measures relating to contracts and dismissals , and it will be revised by experts .
If implemented , all this legislation - which I am describing in detail because it is a condition for budgetary aid through the PHARE programme - would release a first sum of ECU 9 million .
Just last week there was a Commission identification mission to see how the country 's political normalization is progressing .
As for the dramatic problem created by the pyramid scam and the bank fraud in Albania , administrators and auditors have been appointed for those companies which suffered bankruptcy , within the framework of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , and they have started work already .
Nevertheless , it must be realized that there are quite a few problems in applying the measures being taken to remedy this situation , which was created by the pyramid fraud .
It is difficult to carry out inspections and audits because the companies are not keen to cooperate with the administrators and auditors .
This issue , which is very sensitive and has a huge social impact , will be thoroughly dealt with during the next coordination meeting , to be held on 23 February and due to be chaired by the World Bank in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund .
The Commission is insisting that the Albanian government should facilitate the work of the international administrators , and it is very important that these audits should produce results .
That would allow the International Monetary Fund 's emergency programme and the negotiations with the Fund to become a reality , which would of course set Albania into a pattern of normalization , at least with respect to its international economic relations .
Mr President , I had the honour of taking part in this mission with Mrs Pack , which I believe was the first tri-parliamentary mission in the history of our Parliament .
It is an extraordinary event and we can certainly be satisfied with it , but satisfaction with the result of this mission should not be confused with a calm state of mind in relation to the internal situation in Albania because , as Commissioner Marín has just recalled , the situation remains worrying from an economic and safety point of view .
We have to realize that a race is taking place in Albania and we do not yet know who the winner will be .
On the one hand , there are those who want a process of national reconciliation and an effective democracy and , on the other , there are those who still want revenge over the electoral process .
It is true that in Albania , compared with a year ago when there was a kind of civil war , there is now a parliament and a government and constant efforts are being made to put things back in their places . It is true that the situation has improved , but if the government and the opposition do not soon work together to cooperate and complete the new constitution in the parliament and if there is no cooperation within the parliament itself , then conflicts will emerge outside parliament , throughout the country , and the arms used will not be those of deliberation and democracy .
Every day , the press reports news that , luckily , does not end up on the international pages , because it concerns local incidents of deaths and injuries , and fights for which those responsible are often not easy to trace .
The constitutional block in Albania was the fundamental reason for this mission .
The cooperation of all the political powers is required to draw up a constitution .
The opposition , however , has not yet participated in the work of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , giving as a reason , the fact that the parliament does not have the moral authority to rewrite the new constitution , and this gives us cause for concern .
With our tri-parliamentary mission , we sought to convince all our partners that a parliament , formed as a result of a laborious response from the ballot-boxes but also universally recognized as acceptable , is a parliament that is also legitimized to draw up the new constitution .
We said , however , that we needed to overcome this block ; it seemed to us that our words had been heeded with renewed attention and we had the feeling , as Commissioner Marín pointed out a short while ago , that in the days immediately following our visit , new political events took place .
Nevertheless , there was no specific or material follow-up to the declarations made immediately after our visit and , since our return , there has still been no follow-up within parliament and the Committee on Institutional Affairs as regards working together on the new constitution .
Simple declarations must be made : we need to insist that the Council and the Commission follow our tri-parliamentary mission with further measures .
I have heard positive comments in this respect .
We , as members of this Parliament , will have to comply with two commitments we have assumed in this respect : firstly , the formation of an international group of advisers with the task of contributing towards the definition of the status and content of the new constitution ; and secondly , the observation of the parliamentary work in Albania . This is a somewhat unusual commitment , but if we take the situation into account we can easily understand why it has been established .
In a fairly delicate context , we wanted to illustrate the requirement that the three organizations should dedicate themselves to observing the parliamentary work , with the agreement of the Albanian parliament .
Having said that , other things are also useful .
To give an example , and addressing Commissioner Marín and the President-inOffice of Council in particular , I believe that we should establish roots in the territory because , although the national government has good intentions , we cannot take it for granted that its supporters throughout the country have the same good intentions of working towards national reconciliation .
To use an image , there is still fire smouldering under the ashes !
We therefore need to ensure that democracy flourishes in the territory , at local level . I have heard talk of initiatives the Commission would support financially .
In this context , I would suggest that financing be assigned to a particular twinning project between the Albanian local authorities and the local authorities of our Member States . This would create a network of connections that would allow democracy to exist at local level throughout Albania , and would help overcome the temptation to resort to arms , by establishing a common desire for reconciliation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can subscribe fully to 98 % of your statement .
That does not happen very often , that our two sides are in such agreement , but on what you said about Albania I am almost completely in agreement with you .
The fact is , Renzo and I were the two participants from this Parliament in this tripartite attempt at reconciliation . The fact is , however , that reconciliation in this country between the two hostile camps has not yet been achieved and will not be achieved for some time to come .
It is constantly being undermined by both sides .
The language alone is revealing .
There , the leader of the opposition calls the parliament a Kalashnikov parliament .
The Prime Minister publicly calls the opposition a terrorist group and their leaders are called criminals with immunity .
It is therefore hard for a fruitful coexistence to flourish .
As the then socialist opposition did two years ago , the conservative opposition is now boycotting the Parliament .
We have always made it unmistakeably clear that a return to parliament is absolutely essential and it is also important for the opposition party , for it is only there that we shall listen to them .
The joint action , as Mr Imbeni has said already , was important .
It was unique in its cooperation and therefore it was of major significance to the Albanian public and the political representatives .
We all listened and our conclusions took into consideration all points of view on the internal politics .
The results included the fact that , firstly , amongst other things , the democratic place for decision-making was in the parliament and therefore the Democratic Party should finally return there .
Secondly , the parliament must , however , observe the dignity of the individual member and adhere to the democratic rules of the game , and in this respect the observation carried out by representatives of the OSCE or the Council of Europe should be helpful .
Thirdly , we also of course expect that the middle management staff , particularly in the legal field - and you referred to this earlier , Commissioner - which in recent years was trained with our money , are not arbitrarily thrown out into the street , but that use is made of their experience .
Fourthly , Albania needs a constitution , particularly for important investment projects .
According to existing law , the parliamentary committee should draw up the draft constitution , it should be accepted with a majority of two thirds and them - as they have committed themselves - a referendum by the public should decide .
I think that the composition of the committee destined to carry out all these procedures must be somewhat improved .
News in recent days reports , on the one hand , illegal police attacks on supporters of the Democratic Party , while on the other hand , the same event is represented as deliberate provocation of the police by the Democratic Party .
I find myself unable to say which of these is right .
It is very difficult to know from here but it proves one thing , that the fronts between the political camps are very firm and appear almost insurmountable and that force is the language of the politicians .
A joint action , such as we have undertaken can only be implemented once .
We do not churn them out on a conveyor belt .
As you have rightly said Commissioner , it is the job of politicians in Albania now to take their own fate into their hands at last and , if it is at all possible - and I address this both to the Council and the Commission - I would make a heartfelt request for pressure from both sides . I do not mean gentle pressure but really energetic pressure , so that they finally get together in reconciliation and in the interests of the tormented people of Albania .
Mr President , the situation and lot of Albania has often been debated in this House , and frequently with some intensity .
Today , we are here with balanced and constructive common positions .
These are mainly due to the successful mission of the ad hoc delegation which , with Mr Imbeni and Mrs Pack , recently visited Tirana. hey tried to bring the opposition back into parliament and succeeded in a first approach on issues of exceptional sensitivity , such as the working out of the new constitution amongst others .
Special congratulations are due to them both .
In any case , we have all expressed them on the Committee on Foreign Affairs , and we meant it very sincerely .
As has already been said many times , the situation in Albania remains fragile and fraught with tensions , even though some progressive steps have been taken .
There are always incidents , as Mrs Pack also said earlier .
Democratic awareness according to the Western European model is not yet the main factor in public life , and never has been , to this day .
As for the European Parliament , regardless of any preference we may have for one side or the other , we must continue to support truly democratic procedures in Albania , offering our experience and assistance to the extent that we can , to help that country find its European orientation as soon as possible .
In this respect , our joint motion expresses that intention and wish , and defines the objectives that must be achieved .
Finally , Commissioner , I would like to ask whether the European Parliament is to be informed about the talks you said were to take place on Monday regarding Albania at the World Bank .
I have received six motions for resolutions , pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I must say that the joint resolution which has been circulated is a text which , I think , will attract wholehearted support from Parliament because it is well balanced and reflects not only common positions but also the common anxiety of us all about what is going on in Albania .
In my view , the problem has become focused solely on the restoration of normal relations between the political forces in Albania .
My opinion is that this can only be achieved through the correct operation of the Albanian parliament .
Events or investigations which concern penal injustices that took place before the events of last year can often be used as a means to persecute political opponents , and that must be avoided .
I must say that a very important proposal is the one included among those agreed by the tripartite delegation in which Mrs Pack and Mr Imbeni took part with parliamentarians from the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe , that is , the proposal that an advisory group should be formed .
I would like to go still further and say that the advisory group in question should comprise not academics , not ex-cathedra specialists , but Members of Parliament who would alternate and could advise , in my view , on a day to day basis , how the Albanian Parliament ought to function .
Albania must be approached very carefully , mainly because of the religious differences that exist .
Despite its various religious persuasions , however , the people of Albania have lived for centuries as a single entity .
Having lived in that area , I think that if the advisory group is set up it will be able to achieve a great deal on a day to day basis , giving advice about the operation of parliamentary committees , about what issues to put before the plenary Chamber , etcetera .
It will also have the opportunity to make contacts , and most importantly , to offer advice about the formulation of a constitution which , as we have been told , the present government intends to submit to the Albanian people in a referendum .
I hope all will go well .
I hope this , because I am an optimist .
Those people deserve better luck and wholehearted and devoted support from Europe 's peoples and governments .
It is not enough for the Commission and the Council to tell us how much money they are giving , they must also back the European Parliament 's initiatives .
Mr President , I think we all agree on one point , and that is that Albania is still in an emergency situation : the problems remain serious , arms are widespread - around one and a half million - , the Mafia continues to benefit - it is calculated that US $ 6 billion are handled by the Albanian Mafia - and the situation is still precarious from the point of view of reconstructing democracy .
I believe that the road to be followed , as indicated by Mr Imbeni and strongly supported by Mr Pack , is to insist that the transition to democracy , which has just been delicately begun , can be followed , starting with the parliament , and therefore the insistence that the parliament explains its own tendencies .
I would like to tell the President-in-Office of Council that we can also help a return to normality with a more complex , more fundamental policy .
The Albanian question cannot be separated from the other questions in a particularly delicate area .
When , at the recent Madrid Summit , the Balkans and Albania are , so to speak , cut off from a policy of safety , a policy of attention , that should be considered globally , mistakes are made .
We are not without the means : the means are there . NATO is assisting with the rebuilding of the Albanian fleet , the WEU and the OECD are helping the police regain a professionalism they had lost , and there are means of creating the conditions of impartiality to which Commissioner Marín referred .
The other economic and financial questions should be aimed at implementing the programme presented by the government .
They relate to socio-democratic infrastructures that should be established and I believe that , with the means we have made available , we can pressurize all parties into bringing Albania into a greater period of normality .
Mr President , there is no doubt that , as the Members have shown , the state of emergency is , unfortunately , not yet over in Albania .
The situation is anything but resolved and , for these reasons , we have to say that the action carried out by our representatives , Mr Imbeni and Mr Pack , together with the OECD and the Council of Europe , has been excellent , and the agreement signed by the parties , namely , the government powers and the opposition , is an important starting point .
Unfortunately , however , we cannot be under the illusion that this is the answer to the problems .
I repeat , it is an essential starting point for drawing up a new constitution , which is necessary at the moment ; but a new constitution is not drawn up without the involvement of the opposition and , at the moment , the signs are unfortunately anything but favourable .
One opposition party is currently saying that the agreement is a partial agreement , an agreement that can only be observed provided the Fatos Nano government nullifies all the measures it has taken since it came to power .
This is obviously an impossible condition for the government to accept when the government has been prepared to ensure maximum transparency in the parliamentary action so that every right is provided for the opposition , an opposition which is entitled to one-third of the chairmanship and two-thirds of the deputy chairmanship of the parliamentary committees .
The signs are not favourable at the moment : incidents and further use of arms have been seen in the north , while in the south the territory is still not under the control of the police force ; the region around Tirana is beginning to show signs of intolerance owing to the shortage of adequate consumer goods and the lack of solutions to the economic problems it was hoped the new government would be able to resolve .
In view of all this , the EU should commit itself much further to offering economic aid and aid aimed at restoring democracy and control in the region .
Without this , there is a further risk that civil war will break out again .
Thank you very much , Mr Tamino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.15 p.m. , while awaiting Question Time scheduled at 5.30 p.m. )

Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0017 / 98 ) .
Question No 1 by Jens-Peter Bonde ( H-0001 / 98 )
Subject : Ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty
Is it true that the Amsterdam Treaty can enter into force only if all the Member States ratify the agreement ? Will the Council of Ministers respect referendums held in several Member States ?
In accordance with the provisions of the Treaty on European Union , specifically Article N , the Treaty of Amsterdam shall come into force after being ratified by all the Member States , in accordance with the respective constitutional requirements .
In certain countries this will indeed involve a referendum .
I would like to thank Doug Henderson for a very clear reply , which I can recognise as a repeat of the reply which Mr Henderson gave to a previous question in the British House of Commons .
It is of course enlightening that the Treaty has to be accepted by all countries to become law , and if a country does not ratify the Treaty , the countries which are interested in doing something new must call an Intergovernmental Conference . Then , 15 countries must sign to do something new , as has already happened when it was impossible for all the countries to agree to have a social protocol , but 12 signatures established closer cooperation for 11 countries .
But everyone must sign to amend the Treaty .
I am grateful to Mr Henderson for giving such a clear answer today .
You say that the Treaty has to be ratified in accordance with the constitutional requirements of Member States .
I would like people to know that in Ireland we will have a referendum on the Amsterdam Treaty and already the EU Commission is interfering by sending out propaganda to members of the public .
I would like some sort of assurance from the Council that this will not actually happen because it is an interference in the democratic process of a Member State .
There should be no undue influence using European taxpayers ' money to promote propaganda forcing people to vote in favour of the Treaty .
It is up to the Irish people themselves to decide whether they want to vote in favour or against .
I would like an assurance from the Council that the EU Commission will actually step aside from the process on this and allow the people to make up their own mind and that it will be in accordance with the constitution of Ireland which prohibits the use of public money to promote one side of the argument in a referendum .
Can I say to Ms McKenna that this is not a matter for the Council ; this is a matter that persons in Ireland including the government or the political parties who felt affected by it should raise with the Commission .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 2 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0004 / 98 )
Subject : Information gathering by the Member States
A number of authoritative European newspapers have reported that the British secret services gather information of a diplomatic , economic , technological and commercial nature in other Member States of the Union which is used , among other things , to improve the Government 's negotiating position at meetings of Community bodies .
In the Council 's view , to what extent and in what manner are the final outcomes of meetings of Community bodies and their decisions , including those of the Council itself , distorted by such practices which enable certain Member States to be briefed in advance of the negotiating positions of their partners ?
Can it confirm that such sensitive information is not passed on to third countries , particularly in the context of international trade and other negotiations or final preparations for the euro ( e.g. ideas and proposals on the definitive rates of exchange of Community currencies against the euro ) , since if such information became public knowledge , it could have a huge impact on the international money markets ?
In the Council 's estimation , how many other Member States , and which , engage in similar information gathering ?
Question No 3 by Nel van Dijk ( H-0035 / 98 )
Subject : Is MI6 spying on Britain 's European partners ?
Is MI6 , the British foreign security service , spying on Britain 's European partners with a view to collecting information which the British Government can use to its advantage in international negotiations ?
Does MI6 record confidential conversations , and does it tap telephone calls ?
In what way are MI6 's espionage activities directed at civil servants from other EU Member States consistent with the British Government 's aspiration towards " moral leadership ' in Europe ?
Does the Council share my view that a government which uses its security services to gather confidential information on its EU partners and their positions in international negotiations undermines the trust which Member States might have in each other and abuses the solidarity which the Member States might expect from each other in an " ever closer union ' ?
Are there other Member States which instruct , or allow , their security services to spy on their European partners ?
Can the Council give an assurance that the European Parliament and the Commission are not the target of activities by MI6 or any other security service of any other Member State ?
I am glad to link the questions .
In my Presidency capacity , I have to say that intelligence matters are within the exclusive competence of national authorities .
The Council has no information on such matters and is not in a position to respond .
Mr President , brevity such as that of the President-in-Office 's answers was characteristic of the Spartans in my country in ancient times .
The Spartans were not regarded as models for civilization , nor for dialogue and debate .
I ask the President-in-Office , and not of course in his capacity as a British minister , to tell me the Council 's assessment of such practices , whether they take place , whether he has ever heard of that in his life .
What is the Council 's assessment ? How does he characterize such activities and how can I , as a Member of this Parliament , have faith in the accuracy , seriousness and untaintedness of the debates taking place in the Council ?
I was not a Spartan , I am much more an Athenian .
I can only say that this is not a matter for the Council , whether it be from the Spartans , the Athenians , the new Spartans or the new Athenians .
It is not a matter for the Council , and I just reiterate my previous response .
You will understand that I can only interpret Minister Henderson 's remarks to mean that he wishes to neither confirm , nor deny .
Perhaps I should interpret this as a tacit confirmation of what is happening .
But surely it cannot be the case , and I would really like to hear Mr Henderson 's view on this - that the Presidency of the European Union has nothing to say , and has no opinion about the fact that one of its Member States is spying on the others to determine its strategy during negotiations ?
I would really like to have a very clear answer on this .
If Mr Henderson thinks the Presidency should have no opinion on this , then I would like know what the other ministers in the Council think about it .
Secondly , much commotion has arisen over the échalon in which the United Kingdom and the United States are creating one strong line in order to eavesdrop on the whole world .
Is this related , Mr President ?
Does this échalon exist ?
It is not a matter for the Council to speculate whether there is any new alliance between the United Kingdom or the United States .
I can only say that the matter raised is not a matter for the Council and that Members of the House should not believe from my previous reply that a confirmation or denial was involved .
Question No 4 by Angela Kokkola ( H-0008 / 98 )
Subject : Human cloning
Public opinion is disturbed at the decision taken by the American scientist , Richard Seed , to undertake experiments aimed at creating human clones , which is morally and scientifically unacceptable .
In view of the above , will the Council say whether the necessary legislation exists at EU level to ban the cloning of human beings ?
Even if it does , this is still not enough .
Will it therefore also say whether it intends to launch an initiative to establish an international convention banning the cloning of human beings in order to protect citizens from the " brilliant discoveries ' of scientists who sacrifice the ethical dimension of the issue on the altar of scientific research and prestige ?
I am pleased , in relation to Question No 3 , to acknowledge the important influence and responsibility of the Council on this matter .
The question of bioethics , and in particular protection of human dignity and of the individual , is a key consideration in Community research policy .
Research into modification of the human gene is among the most sensitive ethical issues in the field of science and therefore requires constant scrutiny and clear limitations .
This fact has been well understood in the European Union and its Member States for many years and has given rise to arrangements for the ethical supervision of human gene research , as well as to legal safeguards and limitations .
The Community 's Fourth Framework Programme on research contains an explicit provision that no support will be provided to projects which may contravene the European Convention on Human Rights , the Charter of the United Nations or the Council of Europe Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine .
The provisions on biomedical ethics provide that no research into modification of the genetic constitution of human beings , or into human cloning , may be carried out .
The Commission 's proposal for the fifth research Framework Programme would extend the scope of this exclusion .
The proposal is still under consideration in the Council but the honourable Member may rest assured that the rights and dignity of human beings will continue to be the guiding principle behind all decisions .
As regards international initiatives , the Council will consider with interest any proposals which the Commission may make on this subject .
My thanks to the Council 's representative for his answer .
With all due respect , allow me to say that I find it a little vague .
You refer in some way to future plans .
We see in the press every day how rapidly such experiments are progressing .
And with all my esteem for research and biology and for the development of science , when these issues touch upon ethics and we may be approaching the cloning of humans , I do not hide the fact that it frightens me and I am not alone in this respect .
Very many people and many scientists have expressed their opposition .
I would therefore like to ask you , to the extent possible during your Presidency , to speed up the use of the means at your disposal , because otherwise I think it will be too late .
I am aware of the concerns of the honourable Member on this matter and , indeed , of many others in this House and elsewhere .
I can only draw attention to a sentence in my previous reply where I said that the provisions on biomedical ethics provide that no research into modification of the genetic constitution of human beings or into human cloning may be carried out .
I hope that provides the assurance the honourable Member was looking for .
I would like the President-in-Office to give the Council 's position on the existing Commission arrangement whereby a group of advisers has been established to advise on the ethics of biotechnology and has already formed an opinion on cloning .
Does the Council support the principle of a Europe-wide ethics committee being eventually established ?
I say ' eventually ' rather than ' immediately ' , which gives some scope for the Minister to reply in a positive way .
I can say to the honourable Member that I do not rule that out .
It may be that is one way we can proceed on this matter .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 5 and 6 lapse .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 7 by Glenys Kinnock ( H-0017 / 98 )
Subject : Arms trafficking in Burundi
What steps are being taken by the Council to halt the flow of arms from the European Union into Burundi , where they are likely to be used for the continuation of fratricidal fighting between armed groups and the perpetration of further massacres of civilians ?
Question No 8 by Tony Cunningham ( H-0018 / 98 )
Subject : Arms trafficking in Burundi
Is the Council aware of allegations made in the Human Rights Watch Arms Project report : " Stoking the Fires - Military Assistance and Arms Trafficking in Burundi ' about the export of arms and military equipment , frequently originating in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union , to the armed parties in Burundi via western Europe , and will it make a statement ? Question No 9 by Arthur Newens ( H-0019 / 98 )
Subject : Arms trafficking in Burundi
Will the Council investigate allegations that arms manufacturers based in the European Union have supplied Hutu or Tutsi armed groups in Burundi and that the ammunition factory at Eldoret in Kenya , which was originally built by the Fabrique d 'Armes de Guerre , a subsidiary of the GIAT Industries Group based in France , supplied ammunition to the Hutu militia in eastern Zaire ?
The Council shares the honourable Members ' concern about the effect on the situation in Burundi of the flow of arms from third countries and has noted the resolution on Burundi adopted by the European Parliament at its 15-19 December 1997 part-session .
The Council has issued similar statements and declarations about the situation in Burundi , most recently on 7 January 1998 .
The Council has also noted the resolution on a code of conduct on arms exports adopted by the European Parliament at its 12-16 January 1998 part-session .
The European Council in Amsterdam on 16-17 June 1997 underlined the vital role of concerted international efforts towards proper regulation of arms exports and called for the development of a coherent arms export control policy throughout the Union on the basis of the common criteria identified in the conclusions of the European Councils of 29 June 1991 and 26-27 June 1992 .
These criteria include , notably , respect for human rights in the country of destination .
To this end the United Kingdom , in conjunction with France , has put forward a draft text for a European Union code of conduct setting high common standards for arms exports by Member States .
The text is in two parts .
Firstly , an elaboration of the eight common criteria agreed in 1991 and 1992 in line with the United Kingdom 's national criteria which were then announced by the Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom on 28 July 1997 .
Secondly , a consultation mechanism providing for partners to circulate information about denials of export licences and requiring a partner to consult the denying partner before coming to a decision on whether to issue an export licence for essentially the same goods to the same client .
Initial reactions have been strongly supportive and the aim is for the code to be adopted by a Council declaration during this Presidency .
I thank the President-in-Office for doing a sterling job all day here in Parliament .
I am not sure it has been entirely easy or pleasurable at all times .
I should like to return to the issue of Burundi , which my question addressed .
It is a fact that 36 % of Burundi 's budget is currently being spent on defence ; far more than they spend on health and education combined .
Could the President-in-Office confirm that a Member State which has colonial links with that Great Lakes region of Africa is still unwilling to agree to either an international or a European arms sale embargo on Burundi ?
Also , I should like to ask the President-in-Office whether it might not be a good idea to reactivate UNICOI , which was a commission of inquiry set up when we had the crisis in Rwanda ?
Would it not be appropriate for us to extend its mandate to Burundi ?
In my view - and I hope it would be the Council 's view as well - it would assist us in our efforts to stop arms trafficking into Burundi and , indeed , within the Great Lakes area .
I thank the honourable Member for her kind tribute .
It is always particularly pleasurable to attempt to answer her questions .
On the specific question that she raised , I am not aware of any European Union country that knowingly exports arms to Burundi and would block any measure taken to prevent such sales .
If Mrs Kinnock has any information that could confirm the point that she was suggesting , then I would be very pleased to look at that information with a view to giving it further consideration .
I should also like to thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
I would like to ask him if he has seen the information provided by Human Rights Watch showing that a great deal of activity has been going on , based in Ostend ?
Does he not think that it is important that drastic action should be taken immediately to prevent any further arms from being supplied from Europe and that those people who are involved in this deadly trade should be brought before the courts forthwith ?
We have spoken early today about the difficulties of arms suppliers to Iraq .
They are just as bad in this case .
Will the President-in-Office agree to pursue this matter directly ?
I thank the honourable Member for his question .
I can only refer him to my previous reply to the previous questioner .
We are not aware that any sale of arms in the manner which he is suggesting is taking place .
If he has information I would be very willing to look at it and make an assessment of it for further consideration .
I know there are other questions on the agenda today about the overall question of arms control and I may be straying into that territory , but the reason why the Presidency believes that the conclusion of a European Union agreement on arms is particularly important is , among other things , to attempt to deal with the situation which has been suggested by the honourable Member .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 10 by Patricia McKenna ( H-0020 / 98 )
Subject : Proposal for an EU code of conduct on the arms trade
The British Government has pledged to work for a European code of conduct " setting high common standards governing arms exports ' during its EU presidency .
Four non-governmental organizations ( NGOs ) - Oxfam , Amnesty International , Safeworld and the British American Society Information Council - recently published a briefing document , outlining the essential standards which such a code of conduct should establish .
The briefing argues that there should be no exports of military equipment to states with poor records on respect for human rights and to states which spend more of their GDP on the military than on health and education .
Can the Council give details of what progress it has made in formulating a code of conduct on the arms trade ?
When does it expect to have such a code of conduct completed ?
Question No 11 by Elisabeth Schroedter ( H-0116 / 98 )
Subject : Introduction of an EU code of conduct on the arms trade by the British Presidency
Britain and France have been developing a common text for the code which has now been agreed .
The proposed code is weak on consultation mechanisms , asking only for consultation between Member States directly involved in specific arms exports , and not between all fifteen Member States .
What effect do you envisage the code as having on arms exports from the EU ?
For example , will it stop the transfer of light weapons and armoured personnel vehicles to Indonesia or military attack helicopters to Turkey ?
Unless there are rigorous controls on the end-use of arms and military equipment , legitimate exports can be diverted to repressive regimes and countries in regions of instability .
End-use agreements should be legally binding contracts and a system of monitoring end-use should be implemented .
What provisions will the EU code of conduct include for controlling the end-use for arms and military equipment ? Question No 12 by Karin Riis-Jørgensen ( H-0153 / 98 )
Subject : Common EU code of practice for arms exports
What initiatives does the Presidency intend to take during the first half of the year to ensure that a common EU code of practice is drawn up for arms exports ?
Will it explain the purpose and contents of a common EU code of practice for arms exports ?
Will it also explain when it can be expected that any common EU code of practice will be implemented ? Question No 13 by Jan Bertens ( H-0161 / 98 )
Subject : European policy on arms export controls
I welcome the initiative taken by the British Presidency with a view to tightening up the rules on arms export controls .
The existing criteria , which date back to 1991 / 92 , have been interpreted very broadly and diversely , with the result that there has been no question of a coordinated European policy on arms exports .
Does the Council share my view that the criteria must be more concrete and less open to interpretation and that their implementation must be binding in order to eliminate the shortcomings of the existing criteria ?
Does the Council also agree that multilateral consultation among the Member States is necessary to achieve effective implementation of the European export criteria ?
What role has the Council assigned to the European Parliament with regard to the formulation of the new export control policy and practical implementation of the relevant rules ?
What steps will the Council take to encourage the Member States to reach agreements on promoting the transparency and parliamentary supervision of arms exports policy ?
As regards this proposed code of conduct , there are quite a number of deficiencies in it , for example the fact that only arms exporting countries will be able to call the shots on who buys their arms if this code of conduct is adopted .
That means countries like Ireland , which has no major arms industry , will have little say in how the EU arms policy would be implemented .
This seems to be a version of ' honour amongst thieves ' in that it is the countries involved in the arms industry which will make the decisions , and countries which have an ethical position as regards arms exports will have no say .
As well as that , there is a need for transparency , because commercial confidentiality means this subject will remain secret .
With regard to the delivery of arms , they would be allowed into countries which have not signed international human rights conventions .
The export to regimes with poor human rights records would be allowed if the weapons were to be used to protect the police .
There are many oppressive regimes , such as Turkey and Indonesia , which could take advantage of this .
I should like the President-in-Office to say that the Council is going to address these issues and will bring these points of concern into a code of conduct , otherwise it is just window-dressing .
There are a lot of points raised in the honourable lady 's questions .
I do not accept that there are any major deficiencies in the code that is being proposed .
This code is a major step forward which concentrates the minds of European Union countries on what their responsibilities are in relation to the sale of arms .
It provides for a transparency so that those countries know what is happening in relation to the arm sales of other European Union countries .
It also provides a mechanism for preventing one country selling arms to a third country when that third country has already been denied an importation facility by another European Union country .
In other words protecting the integrity of the policy .
People will always look for ways of circumventing regulations , codes and so on .
That will always be the case .
There is now a huge moral pressure on all the European Union Members , assuming that a satisfactory code is concluded , to deal with this matter in a completely new fashion .
The question of the criteria which decides whether or not an arms sale takes place is essentially a separate matter .
Where the arms are likely to be used , for example , for internal repression or external aggression , then those arms sales should not take place .
The problem at the moment is that it does not prevent another country making the sale if one country decides that the potential importer does not meet those criteria .
There is a period of consultation which is now taking place within the Union .
It is an opportunity for any Member State , or any lobby within a Member State , to look at ways in which the code can be more effective and make their views known .
I believe that the Council will have an open mind on how the code can be improved .
I invite all Members of the Parliament , if they have views , to submit them through the appropriate channels so that they can be made known .
The purpose is to ensure that we have a system with an internal integrity and I believe that what is currently proposed is a major step forward .
Mr President , I am rather disappointed by the Council 's answer , because we submitted our questions in writing in good time .
These questions were very much more concrete than your answer , which you have just repeated for the third time .
It is in fact a matter of whether , for example , it is possible that in future the Turkish government will as ever get weapons to fight the Kurdish population and to bombard the Kurdish population .
Is that , as ever , possible ?
This specific question was asked and we would like a specific answer .
We have also asked you , what is more , in writing , whether you provide a check on the route and also a check on the end user , and how this looks in real terms .
I would like to ask you to answer these questions , which were before you in good time , in terms as specific as those in which they were asked .
I have one final question . You said there are positive reactions .
From whom did these positive reactions come ?
From the arms industry , perhaps ?
I thank the honourable lady for her question .
The aim of having a policy at European Union level is to try to have a consistency across the Union with a view to eventually having a wider consistency outside the European Union which is equally as important .
At the moment I understand there are some European Union countries who have taken a decision that where there is a likelihood that arms sales to Turkey would be used for internal repression , then those sales will not be made .
As mentioned earlier , the aim of the code is to try to bring about a consistency across the European level .
There will be arguments about what is internal repression and to what extent there is internal repression .
It would be impossible to eliminate arguments among European Union Members on an issue like that .
There will always be borderline decisions on which there will always be arguments .
The important thing about the code is that it establishes a common criteria and a way of ensuring that those common criteria are applied , although it must always include an element of judgement .
I think those who are involved in the detail of those decisions will recognize the need for that judgement .
I thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
I congratulate him on the fact that the British Presidency now wholeheartedly agrees with what we have been requesting here for so long .
Yet there was one question you did not answer : which role does he think he will give to the European Parliament when a new export control policy comes into being ?
On that point I wanted to ask - because I know that the Italians have made a proposal to draw up an annual report on arms exports - if this will be adopted by the British Presidency ?
If not , why not ?
If so , then I think this would be excellent .
I would like to say in conclusion that it would seem better to me , when it concerns consultation about which countries does what with another , that this should not be so much a bilateral consultation , but a multilateral consultation , because only then will the code of conduct become a code for all countries .
I can say to the honourable gentlemen that I agree with him that it is important to have a multilateral approach which is why this code has been proposed by the Presidency in the first place .
I have also indicated that eventually it has to have a wider application than purely within the European Union .
Otherwise it could still be undermined .
It is important , as a first stage , that those who have strong views on those matters , including the honourable gentleman who clearly does , should concentrate efforts on persuading the governments within the European Union to support a strong code .
Once this has been established we can then look at where else there could be consideration of some of these matters within the institutions of the European Union , including the Parliament .
Mr President of the Council , above all I would like to thank you for these clear and precise answers which you have given , which show how Westminster is a good apprenticeship for all parliamentarians , especially , when you have one of the best Presidents of the current Presidency of the Council .
Therefore I would like to say - and pardon me if I also make this remark - that in fact if it carried on like this we could finally get rid of stupid rule we have , whereby we can only ask one single question for each general sitting .
My question is as follows : would it not be sensible , when we see that the major proportion of arms exports really do go again and again to the developing countries , to finally link development aid to arms purchase and inform the developing countries that development aid will be reduced as long as they use it for arms purchases .
Thank you very much , Mr von Habsburg .
I must say I sympathize with your concern about the two questions .
I have raised this matter with the Bureau , who will examine it during their March meeting .
In any case , I am grateful for your cooperation , as always , in improving Question Time .
I now invite Mr Henderson to reply to Mr von Habsburg .
I understand the point that has been made about developing countries .
It would obviously be a misuse of aid if aid given for other purposes were used to purchase military equipment .
There is bound to be an element of military equipment in the purchasing portfolio of a developing country .
They need to have law and order internally and there is a need for defence externally .
A judgement has to be made about that .
Clearly if a developing country is spending all of its other resources on the purchase of military equipment and then relying on a certain amount of aid for social expenditure then there is something wrong in the balance of that country 's use of resources .
I think it would be right to have a dialogue with that country to make it clear that a reasonable balance of resources for legitimate law and order or external defence expenditure is something which is acknowledged .
Aid directed to that country should not , in normal circumstances , be used for that purpose .
In some developing countries where there has been a period of crisis and anarchy one of the first things to establish any economic recovery is to bring about a degree of law and order and it may be appropriate for aid expenditure to help to bring about that process .
It may be that some hardware has to be part of that and indeed I know of some examples where that is the case and I would say it was legitimate .
But that would be the exception rather than the rule .
I wonder whether this really is a job for the EU .
Is there not a great risk that this could involve a militarization of the EU cooperation ?
I do not think that is in line with what most citizens consider to be our job .
I would also like to ask what this means for neutral states like Sweden which have tough rules on weapons exports .
In the EU there would be different rules to those we have , not necessarily worse , but certainly different and with a different basis .
I also have some additional questions : What rules are going to apply ?
Will they call for majority decisions or unanimity ?
Who will make the decisions ?
Finally , is it intended that the EU regulations should replace national regulations on weapons exports to other countries , or will the national regulations even be taken over ?
I can say to Mr Lindqvist that there was in fact a discussion on some of those matters in the working group which took place yesterday .
Clearly , for a framework agreement to come about there would need to be unanimity among Union Members on the way that the code would work .
If the current provisions are eventually agreed , and this is repetition to some extent , a country which felt that the export of arms would mean the likelihood of those arms being used for internal repression or external aggression and which therefore blocked the sale of those arms would then be able to say to other countries ' this is a position which we have adopted ' .
If another country then decides that they wish to take up those export orders they will be bound by the Court to come back to the original country which would then stimulate a dialogue on the rights or wrongs of the arms sale taking place .
The criterion should be the purpose of the arms , not the state of the domestic arms industry and that is a very important criterion which is built into the code .
The problem of the current situation where there is no code which is effective arises when one country says ' we do not believe that arms should be sold to a third country because of the likelihood of internal repression or external aggression , but if we do not sell them somebody else will and it will be trading our jobs for somebody else 's jobs and therefore we should not make the decision initially to block the sale ' .
The purpose of the code is to get over that very important issue because the arms industry is a big industry in a number of European Union countries .
The workpeople in that industry are saying ' why should it be our jobs that are sacrificed if someone else is going to jump in and take the order up in another country ? ' .
This code is intended to answer that question .
It does not mean it is the end of the matter .
There need to be other industrial policies which Member States adopt , or which might be part of an employment strategy for the Union itself , which would also address the needs of those workers who are no longer able to get employment in handling those export orders and who have to look for redeployment conversion and so on .
It is an important starting point but it is not the end of the matter .
Can I say to the President-in-Office that I welcome as a good first step the code of conduct for the arms trade which is designed to prevent arms being used for either internal repression or external aggression .
The President-in-Office has answered my question about how undercutting can be prevented in Europe between EU Member States when they are selling arms to a third country , but perhaps the President-in-Office would like to consider the question of end use which has often created problems in the past in tracing the eventual recipient country .
Would he like to perhaps give a response on the issue of end use ?
I am grateful to the honourable Member for that question because it raises another very real problem which has to be addressed in the code .
My current thinking - although I do not have a completely closed mind on it - is that there has to be an element of discretion .
Judgments have to be made not only on the likelihood of those arms being used for internal repression or external aggression but the likelihood of where that will happen .
In other words , will the arms be resold to some other party and , when they are resold , would there be a high likelihood of internal repression or external aggression ?
It is probably extremely difficult to deal with that other than on the basis of giving discretion to the nation which would initially be making the export order .
However , it may be that there can be some facility for an exchange of views on this matter so that as full information as possible is always made available to all European Union Member States .
It may be that an obligation should be written into the code that where a Member State believes there is a further follow-through trade in arms , that information should be made available to European Union Member States .
I too welcome the UK Presidency 's proposal for establishing an EU Code of Conduct on the arms trade .
It is the logical development and follow-on from the United Kingdom 's new ethical foreign policy and , although nothing is ever good enough for the Greens , I wanted the UK President-in-Office to know that the majority of Members in this House think this is a very serious and historic first step .
I want to know if the Presidency will take back to the troika the eagerness this House has for consultation , for being able to follow the guidelines , for being able to see where best practice is developing as the code is progressed throughout the year .
This House may want at some point to establish an annual debate on the code .
Would the President-in-Office assure us that our eagerness to be involved is taken back to the troika ?
I am very grateful to the honourable lady for her recognition that the general thrust of the proposed code would be broadly supported across the political divide of Parliament .
That reflects a very practical understanding of some of the very difficult issues .
I am very aware of them myself , as there is a large tank factory on the edge of my old constituency back in Newcastle-upon-Tyne in northern England .
The people working in that factory and the sub-contractors are very aware of this difficult problem .
They have as ethical a view of foreign policy as any one else but it is their job which is at stake .
I have always believed that people like them and in other similar positions will be prepared to make a sacrifice , to look for diversification , if they know that their efforts are not going to be undermined by others .
That is where the code is , in a very practical way , extremely desirable .
I wish that those in this House who have doubts would recognize the importance of that point .
I can assure the honourable Member that I will come back on the matter she has raised as I think it is an important issue which should have the widest consideration .
Question No 14 by Mark Watts ( H-0022 / 98 )
Subject : Slaughter of sheep in France for the Eid-El-Kabir festival
In the light of previous infringements of Community legislation , and in particular those occurring in April 1997 when the mass ritual slaughter of sheep in France for the Eid-El-Kabir festival caused enormous public outrage , what efforts will the Council be making to ensure that no further infringements are allowed to take place either this year or in subsequent years ?
The Council has no knowledge of the events referred to in the honourable Member 's question .
It would , however , take this opportunity to point out that it is primarily for the Member State concerned to ensure compliance with Community legislation in its territory and , where appropriate , for the Commission , pursuant to Article 155 of the Treaty , to take the necessary measures to ensure that any infringements of that legislation are duly punished .
As the honourable Member will no doubt deduce from these remarks , this is a question which clearly falls within the competence of the Commission and not primarily of the Council .
I thank the President-in-Office for his most helpful answer .
I know that the Presidency shares my concern about animal welfare but I recognize its dilemma which is that it operates as the Council while the Commission is the guardian of the Treaties .
Nonetheless , I would invite the Council to become familiar with this outrage that took place last year .
We fear that it will occur again on 7 April , although the Commissioner himself informed this House that the infringements that took place last year were in breach of regulations and promised to act .
So far he has failed to do so .
I urge the President-in-Office to do his utmost to put pressure on the Commissioner to do his duty .
Mr President , after your kind remarks and further kind remarks from the honourable Member I am going to have to have a rather large dining-table the next time I am in Strasbourg .
But all the better , I suppose , for the restaurant trade in this fine city , and the fine restaurants in it .
I believe there is an awareness already of the issue he raised with me this afternoon and , on the basis of that information , it should be possible for action to follow .
I would be delighted to have dinner with Mr Henderson .
I am not so sure that Mr Watts is going to want to have dinner with me after my supplementary .
While , of course , we are entirely opposed to any form of unnecessary animal cruelty , I welcome the President-in-Office 's caution in this matter .
The Minister is well aware that much of the public outrage in the United Kingdom over these kinds of issues is synthetic indignation manufactured by groups on the extreme right .
Last year in France there were problems around this festival but they were much exaggerated by people like Jean-Marie Le Pen 's Front national , a man who has more concern about animal welfare than the death of 6 000 000 Jews in the Second World War .
So I urge him to proceed with care .
Yes , we need to ensure that these things are dealt with , but let us not allow them to be used by political parties beyond the democratic pale as an excuse to beat the immigrant population .
I thank the honourable Member for his contribution .
All I can say to him is that when we next have dinner , I know one item that we will not be discussing , if it is going to cause such terrible division among good colleagues .
This is a very difficult issue because it brings into conflict concern for animal welfare and the need to respect the religious views of ethnic minorities .
But there has to be a limit somewhere .
I would ask the President-in-Office to assure us that the Council , bearing in mind what was agreed in a new article in the Treaty of Amsterdam on respect for animal welfare , will make clear that if minority groups expect that we should respect their religious rights - and , of course , we should - then the views of those who hold that deliberate cruelty to animals is morally offensive and unacceptable will also be respected .
It was very encouraging when we had the British minister responsible for animal welfare , Mr Elliot Morley , here last month at the Intergroup for Animal Welfare and heard the positive view he expressed on the initiatives that will be taken under the British Presidency .
So I hope for a positive response .
Question No 15 by Jaime Valdivielso de Cué ( H-0026 / 98 )
Subject : Consumer protection
In view of the announcement that one of the priorities of the British Presidency will be consumer protection , can the Council state what measures will be proposed and what their orientation will be ?
The Presidency has three key priorities for the Consumer Council : the Consumer Guarantees Directive ; more effective enforcement of existing consumer protection ; and improvements to the European home and leisure accidents surveillance system .
Progress in these areas will help consumers in all countries .
Firstly , the Consumer Guarantees Directive will give basic rights to consumers faced by unsatisfactory goods .
The remedies in the directive - repair , replacement , reduction in price , refund - are easy to understand .
People need to understand their rights if they are to exercise them .
Consumers should thus be able to take full advantage of the single market in the way businesses can .
In some countries consumer rights would be improved by the directive .
In the rest , existing high levels of protection would remain .
We await the European Parliament 's first reading on the directive and are aiming for a common position at the April Consumer Council .
There is no point in having consumer protection rules if they are not properly implemented and enforced .
We want the April Consumer Council to examine this on the basis of a Commission report .
To give one example , mechanisms for Member States to share best practice should make it easier to act against trading scams and to identify unsafe products .
Our third aim is to improve the European home and leisure accidents surveillance system .
This is used to gather accident data on which to base health and safety policy .
Doing that European Union-wide means a larger population sample and more useful data .
We are committed to ensure the system 's continuation and to improve it , building on the best current national practice .
I hope that we can count on the European Parliament 's support to achieve these goals .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I think it is interesting the way a framework has been developed for possible consumer rights or measures , as regards guarantees , basic rights , legislation , improvements to the system and consumer advice .
But could you please state what specific measures the British Presidency plans to take in favour of consumers ?
I am grateful for the question from the honourable gentleman but I have to say that I am not pleading guilty to his allegation .
There is a very positive agenda .
There is certainly a very heavy agenda for the April Consumer Council .
The general thrust of all the proposals is that there should be minimum standards .
This does not prevent any particular Member State deciding that they want to have better standards .
There needs to be discretion on some of those matters .
The important thing is to make progress and to bring in improved minimum standards so that all European citizens across the whole of the European Union can benefit in the way that businesses can from the single market .
This is a very important principle and I believe it is one that will receive a large area of support from consumers and citizens throughout the whole of the European Union .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 16 by Sören Wibe ( H-0029 / 98 )
Subject : The end of tax-free sales and its impact on employment
Tax-free sales on journeys between EU Member States are to end in 1999 .
A study has shown that this will result in a great many jobs , about 50 000 altogether , being lost throughout the EU .
Has the Council discussed this matter and does it intend to do anything about it ?
Can it , for instance , try to obtain a derogation for tax-free sales on ferries or , even better , seek to have the entire decision re-examined ?
Question No 17 by Jan Andersson ( H-0062 / 98 )
Subject : Tax-free sales
The Council has decided that tax-free sales should end in 1999 .
When this decision was taken , a commitment was given to carry out an analysis of the impact on employment .
However , no analysis has been forthcoming .
Does the Council intend to ensure that the promised impact analysis is carried out before the decision ending tax-free sales enters into force ? Question No 18 by Pat Gallagher ( H-0157 / 98 )
Subject : Job losses because of indirect tax increases
Representatives of those employed in the duty- and tax-free industry claim that a considerable number of jobs , up to 140 000 , are at risk should the planned abolition of this trade proceed as is currently planned , and stressed their concerns to MEPs during a demonstration in Brussels in December of last year .
As the Commission continues to question the validity of these claims , and at a time when unemployment is a priority throughout the European Union , would the Council confirm what steps it is taking to quantify the number of jobs at risk and to evaluate possible remedial measures ?
As the honourable Members will know , when the Council adopted directives abolishing fiscal frontiers from 1 January 1993 , it decided to put an end to tax and duty-free sales for intra-European Community passengers because retaining such sales would be inconsistent with an internal market without frontiers .
Knowing this decision would require major changes in the sectors concerned , Council provided for a lengthy adjustment period from 1 January 1993 to 30 June 1999 during which tax and duty-free sales for intra-EC travellers could be retained .
The Council currently has no plans to revisit its decision .
The effect on jobs of ending intra-European Community duty-free is hard to estimate accurately and depends in part on the nature of the successive regime .
Some estimates probably overstate the effect .
Whatever the successive regime 's nature , operators will still be able to make sales on a duty and tax paid basis .
I would like to thank Mr Henderson for his answer .
It is quite correct that the abolition of duty-free sales is a step towards the creation of the single market , but the single market is being created to provide economic benefits .
Whatever we say , it is still the case that the question of the existence of duty-free sales has extremely little to do with economic benefits .
If we abolish duty-free sales , to begin with we would incur costs in the form of 50 000 to 100 000 lost jobs .
Secondly , a number of ferry lines would be closed , including one which runs between Finland and Sweden and affects my home community , and which in turn has repercussions for tourism in both countries .
On the positive side we have some abstract economic gains which perhaps amount to a hundredth or a thousandth of a per cent of the gross domestic product .
I would like to ask Mr Henderson the following : Is it really worth it for the sake of this small gain to see so many people made unemployed , and to anger a large proportion of the Union 's population ?
I thank Mr Wibe for his question but he is not really introducing any new information .
These matters were discussed thoroughly in the early 1990s when the debate took place .
I cannot really add more to the debate than I remember hearing at the time and which no doubt the honourable gentleman heard at the time .
Thank you Mr President-in-Office .
Since it is the case that different countries in the EU have different duties on alcohol , tobacco and perfumes , I wonder whether you could tell me where the duty should be paid when a vessel travels between two or three countries .
Should it be paid in the country which has the highest duty or in the country which has the lowest duty ?
Or could people even buy goods in a third country in the EU and pay the duty in the country which has the lowest duty ?
It that is the case , is there not then a risk of tax dumping , and is it in that case a desirable development ?
I listened to John Prescott yesterday .
He said that as an ex-seaman he was concerned about the consequences of abolishing dutyfree sales .
On that basis I would like to put the following question : would it not be reasonable to investigate the consequences in the area of employment and in the area of taxes , so that we really know what will happen before the decision comes into effect ?
Mr Andersson , like Mr Wibe , is asking me to revisit the issues that were all very well aired when these matters were first discussed in the early 1990s .
There is no intention , currently , on the part of the Council to reopen these matters .
Regarding the question of taxation , yes , there are , as the honourable Member will know , different levels of consumption taxes in different countries within the European Union .
The answer , in theoretical terms , is that the tax which was appropriate would be paid on the purchase of the product .
There will no doubt be books and more books of Treasury and commercial law on those definitions .
At the outset I should like to say that I am extremely disappointed at the response of the President-in-Office who continues to say that this will not be revisited .
I believe a new Presidency coming into office - a new government - should at least look at this .
He referred to the major changes , the long derogation period because of the changes .
He must also remember that there were commitments given over the years that a study would be carried out .
It is rather alarming that the President-inOffice is not in a position to give us a clear view of the effects that this might have .
It does not surprise me .
I do not think any politician or any President-in-Office will be able to do that without a study .
We have been given that commitment and we have a duty towards the European citizens to give them that study .
But it is now becoming patently clear that considerable difficulties will arise should the abolition of duty-free sales within the EU proceed as planned in mid-1999 .
The rules for applying and collecting VAT , excise duties on products sold and consumed , duty and tax paid on board the few remaining ferries in existence on intra-EU routes - that he referred to - are unclear .
New arrangements are required .
Let the President-in-Office tell us what arrangements are required and will be made in view of these changes .
I understand how strongly Members feel about this issue .
But on a technical level , the way in which the regulation will be introduced - the notification of which has already been given to Member States - it would be possible to find out the details from them rather than from me .
The Presidency has no intention to revisit this issue .
There have been a number of new governments elected throughout the whole of the European Union in recent months .
It would be open to any of those new governments to raise the issue at the Council of Ministers .
It would then be a matter for the Council as to what kind of response would be given .
Duty-free income is of major importance for ferry traffic between Sweden and Finland in the Baltic .
North of the Stockholm area - you could say that Stockholm is in southern Sweden - there is only one scheduled ferry link .
That goes between the beautiful city of Umeå in Sweden and Vasa in Finland .
It is most uncertain whether this ferry traffic will survive a removal of duty-free sales .
That would mean that the heavy lorry traffic which takes this route would have to travel hundreds of kilometres extra with great economic and environmental costs for this area in northern Sweden and Finland .
In addition , old historic ties between these areas would be broken .
Furthermore , interregional aid is being received for cooperation between these areas in Sweden and Finland .
My question is this : does the Council have any objection to the Swedish and Finnish governments intervening and providing direct state aid to maintain this traffic if it cannot survive when duty-free sales are abolished ?
I can say to the honourable Member that it would be a matter for the operators to decide whether or not they felt that a subsidy was necessary .
It would then be a matter for the Finnish and Swedish governments to decide if a subsidy should be given to them , and it would then be for the Commission to decide whether or not the subsidy was in accordance with the rules of the European Union .
This is really funny .
Back home in Sweden the Social Democrats love to raise taxes both on work and alcohol .
I am therefore a little surprised by the argument which we are listening to here .
I would just like to tell the Council to stand firm .
There should not be tax advantages for certain sectors . Instead , we must have competition on equal terms .
It should not be the case that Europe should try to create new jobs through people getting drunk on a load of ferries .
I have interpreted that as a comment rather than a question .
I wish to congratulate the President-in-Office on the brevity with which he answers questions .
If only colleagues were as brief in asking their questions .
My question is brief .
He will be aware of the status of the President-in-Office .
Indeed he has used the very words Gordon Brown used when he attended the Economic Committee : ' no plans to revisit this issue ' , he said , and I hope that the Presidency will long stick to that .
My question , however , relates to the statement yesterday by Mr Prescott , also President-in-Office of the Council , that he is concerned about duty free and the consequential effects of its abolition .
Who is speaking for the United Kingdom Presidency , Mr Prescott , the President-in-Office present today or the President-in-Office of the Economic and Finance Ministers ?
I am not sure that brief answers will help me in future if it means I get these kinds of questions .
I am speaking for the Presidency today , and on any occasion where there is an official event the responsible minister speaks for the British Presidency .
The British Presidency 's position is determined by the British government through its relationship with other European partners at all levels .
Our colleague , Mr Sjöstedt , mentioned one of the most threatened ferry lines and spoke of the beautiful city of Umeå . I hope that you think the city of Vasa is equally beautiful .
I would like to ask the Council if it is true that in the Commission there is a list of the most threatened ferry lines .
Has there been a discussion about whether the Council could take up these issues ?
In addition , I would like to ask the President-in-Office what attitude the Presidency has towards contributing to an extension if other countries raise this issue in Ecofin ?
For example , the Irish government has expressed a desire to take such an initiative .
I hope that you take into account that the situation has changed compared with the situation in 1991 , particularly as far as unemployment is concerned , which is something Mr Wibe also raised .
I can say to Mrs Thors that I am not aware of any list but we have a transparent Presidency and if there is a list I will be happy to see it .
We are always happy to discuss any issue that any responsible Member wishes to raise .
In view of what the President said earlier , I must declare an interest , in that I had dinner with the President-inOffice last night .
I hope that will mean I get an even more detailed answer .
The President-in-Office mentioned that the decision was taken some years ago leaving operators six or seven years to phase out duty-free .
Does he therefore not agree that it is highly irresponsible of the tobacco and alcohol industries to be lobbying the way they have and spending millions to try to have this decision reversed ?
They are also trying to whip up consumers to take part in their campaign .
Does he agree that if governments have money to spare they should not use it as a tax break for the alcohol and tobacco industries , especially a ludicrous tax break which is only available to frequent international travellers , such as myself , who benefit disproportionately ?
Does he not agree that would be a total misuse of public funds ?
The clear conclusion for me is to take people for dinner after they have asked the question and not before .
I have to say to the honourable Member that , like colleagues who raised matters at the beginning of this discussion - albeit from a different viewpoint - he is revisiting issues which were discussed in the early 1990s .
The Council has no further comments to make at this time .
I will try to be helpful to the President-in-Office by providing him with some arguments as to why this matter should be revisited .
Firstly , excise duties have not been harmonized as promised .
Secondly , independent studies are now showing that thousands of jobs will be lost throughout the Community .
Thirdly , unemployment is now our top priority ; it was not back in 1991 .
Although I accept that he cannot change the Council 's position tonight , but could he not tonight agree to find space on a Council agenda to allow an opportunity for our Irish friends to put this issue to the Council with that fresh information so that it can be reviewed in the light of that information ?
If abolition goes ahead , what advice would he give to the ferry companies operating in my constituency between Dover and Calais ?
What tax rates do they apply ?
French rates , British rates or international rates ?
The Council has yet to really think about the post-1999 situation .
I invite the President-in-Office to do that if he can .
There were a number of issues raised by the honourable Member , most of which were returning to the debates , which took place in the early 1990s and have been covered in the past by the Presidency , and positions adopted .
As far as I am aware , there was no link in the decision between the change in the regulations on duty-free and any consideration of taxation .
They are two separate issues with no link .
So I do not think that argument can be put .
That is not to say that the issue of different levels of taxation should not be examined as an issue worthy of some consideration - but not linked to this particular issue .
Different Member States within the European Union will have different views on those taxation questions .
It would be open to any government within the European Union to raise the issue in Ecofin or at the General Affairs Council if they were so minded .
It would be up to the other Members of whichever Council it was to make whatever response was appropriate at that time and in the circumstances of how the issue was being raised .
But unless that happens , I can say that the Presidency has no intention of reopening this issue which we believe was settled .
Mr President , this is something which cannot wait .
I have been invited to Aberdeen Airport next Monday and I wondered whether the President-in-Office could give me advice as to what to say to the people there , or would he like to accompany me to explain to them what is going to happen to their fare structure and to the jobs they fear they will lose ?
Ladies and gentlemen , I would request you that private invitations be made outside the Hemicycle , otherwise it wastes time .
We have only four minutes left , and I hope we can deal with one more question without the President-in-Office missing his plane .
Question No 19 by Ulla Sandbæk ( H-0030 / 98 )
Subject : Environmental quality of EU overseas aid
What plans has the UK Presidency of the Development Council to address the need to improve the environmental quality of EU overseas aid , particularly for projects in sectors such as energy , mining , transport and the private sector ?
What means would it propose to achieve this improved environmental quality , in the light of the existing fundamental lack of capacity within the Commission ?
The Presidency considers that environmental protection is an integral part of the development process .
Lasting elimination of poverty requires environmentally sustainable solutions .
Poor people are most reliant on natural resources and most vulnerable to environmental degradation and mismanagement .
If natural resources are not managed sustainably , continued economic growth will not be possible .
We need to help developing countries integrate environmental concerns into their decision-making .
In particular we will support their efforts to prepare plans and policies for sound management of their natural resources and national strategies for sustainable development .
The intermediate targets for sustainable development , based on United Nations conventions and resolutions , anticipate the implementation of these national strategies in all countries by the year 2005 so as to ensure that current trends in the loss of environmental resources are effectively reversed at both global and national levels by the year 2015 .
Relevant action planned under the Presidency of the European Union will include endeavouring to secure commitments from the Commission and Member States to promote national strategies for sustainable development in developing countries and to adopt measurable targets , especially in sustainable development and poverty reduction , and to help increase the effectiveness of these funds .
A Council regulation was recently adopted on environmental measures in developing countries in the context of sustainable development , along with a resolution on environmental assessment in development cooperation .
This provides for the mainstreaming of environmental concerns in project and programme preparation , as well as at the strategy and policy levels .
In that case , I would like to repeat the last part of my question : ' What means would it propose to achieve this improved environmental quality , in light of the existing fundamental lack of capacity within the Commission ? ' After all , it is not we who cannot agree whether the programmes should be designed like this so that the environment forms an integral part of them - along with many other fine ideas .
But I do not think that I was given any actual indication at all of how to remedy the situation , given the Commission 's lack of capacity at present .
In a nutshell , how can we ensure that priority will be given to integrating the environment in implementing the EU 's overseas aid programmes and , in view of this , will there be incentives which will be sufficiently effective to ensure that integration also takes place in practice ?
I thank the honourable Member for her question , but I can only refer her to my previous answer which is that there are a number of different ways in which improvement can be brought about .
The Commission has an important role in identifying how they can monitor schemes where there is an environmental aspect to them , and how they can ensure that the best environmental practice is involved .
All of us have an opportunity , when we begin to renegotiate the Lomé mandate , to include a consideration of the important matters which she raises .
Since the time allocated to questions to the Council has now expired , Questions Nos 20 to 59 will be dealt with in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.00 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Air transport liberalization
The next item is the report ( A4-0015 / 98 ) by Mr Seal , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the impact of the third package of air transport liberalization measures ( COM ( 96 ) 0514 - C4-0602 / 96 ) .
Mr President , as rapporteur for this report , I have to say that it is a disappointing report ; not in the way it is written - because that is very good - but because as rapporteur I cannot examine the success or failure of air transport liberalization fully without examining the social consequences .
The Commission promised to publish results of a study they commissioned last October .
I understand it has just been issued this week .
So I ask the House to review the results of this report , to review the apparent results of liberalization , bearing in mind that the social effects of that liberalization have still to be taken into account .
The rest of liberalization in the air transport industry is a bit like the curate 's egg : it is good in parts .
We have some cheaper fares , but we have also some increased fares .
We have some increased competition ; we have some new airlines coming forward ; but we have a decline in safety and we have some frightening alliances on the horizon .
If we look at cheaper fares , then several no-frills airlines are offering cheaper fares such as Easyjet , Debonair , Virgin Express .
Even British Airways has set up a separate company to offer such no-frills deals .
These , however , are mostly based around the United Kingdom .
We need to extend some of these companies to the rest of the European Union .
I wish them luck and I commend what they are offering .
However , these lower fares must not be at the expense of cutting safety or worsening working conditions .
That is why we need to examine the social effects of liberalization .
Even with the larger airlines , business fares have dropped on routes where there is competition .
But when you look at these fares , even though they have dropped , they are still too high .
There is still an unbelievable complexity of fares .
We have got PEX , superPEX , Euro-fares , economy , full economy , business class , and so it goes on .
Buying an airline ticket should be simple ; it should be straightforward .
It is not .
Passengers should be able easily to find information on the various service provided for different fares .
They cannot .
Even though we have got air traffic increasing globally by 7.9 % a year , most people flying are having more difficulty getting the right fares .
Safety must be assured .
If we look at some of the examples : British Airways removed safety doors from some of its planes to put in more seats .
This was not a good move in terms of safety and it was a disastrous move for them as far as PR is concerned .
We have a situation now where pilots are flying longer and longer hours .
Some of them are flying 17 hours in a day .
That must affect safety .
Cabin crews are working longer hours for less money and that must compromise safety .
This is the unacceptable face of liberalization .
Liberalization does have its merits but it is not defect-free .
We need controlled liberalization .
By that , I mean we need to put in place preventive measures to avoid the cut-throat competition that would lead to monopolies the way it did in the United States and in Australia .
Their services , consequently , deteriorated .
We need a balanced liberalization that will benefit passengers , shareholders and workers in the industry .
We need to encourage new entrants and to ensure they are not wiped out by the larger companies before they can get going .
To do that we need to solve the slot problem - the problems at airports which they have too much traffic .
This is the subject of a separate report that has come into this House , but it needs solving if liberalization is to continue .
We need to ensure that the newly emerging airlines and the ones that are offering the reduced fares can get slots so that they can continue and can also fly between some of the regional airports .
We also need to look at the alliances that are proposed and in place between the US and European carriers .
We need to ensure that these alliances do not destroy our European airlines .
Global arrangements must allow the European airlines to compete and passengers to enjoy the benefits of this competition , but not at the expense of their workforces .
Liberalization has not been as effective as promised .
But the slower , controlled approach is desirable and must extend to all parts of the European Union .
If it is to continue , we need to solve the slot allocation problems and to protect new entrants .
But we cannot - and I , as rapporteur , cannot - assess the impact of the third liberalization package until we know the social consequences of this stage of liberalization .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , as draftsman of opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I agree with the basic statements in Mr Seal 's report and I thank him sincerely for his report .
In addition , even if , as he has rightly commented , the Commission knowingly , unknowingly , consciously , or unconsciously has concealed its report on the social consequences , his report is nevertheless a valuable one and I hold Mr Seal in very high esteem .
It is true that the air transport liberalization finalized in the past year has completely opened the Single Market to this field and all of us , the actual consumers , are gradually noticing the advantages .
National air transport markets were opened up , competition is allowed , even if it is sometimes a little bit strange that an airline from country A has flown cabotage for years in country B without covering its own costs , without making a profit and survives .
Well , we shall see if this is actually possible in the long term .
Also , the number of routes serviced has risen , the number of operating airlines has risen , yet nevertheless the planes have to a large extent been filled .
In that respect , I believe that liberalization has succeeded .
My dear Mr Seal , I do not believe that the safety of passengers has been put at risk in any way by the liberalization of the air transport market .
All the accidents which have occurred have been outside the area of the European Community and not within it .
Of course , the Commission also offers us a glimpse into the areas which have not yet been dealt with , into tariffs , the limitation of capacity , the cost of flight services and access to the market .
The Commission is surely right when it says that on many intraCommunity routes , and above all the internal domestic routes , there is still no competition .
But Commissioner , I believe that in the case of many routes which today are not even profitable for a single airline - particularly those in peripheral regions - we cannot expect competition , because nobody as it were wants to lose money .
That is what we must realize .
In that respect , I believe that the Commission has come to the wrong conclusions .
I believe that many internal routes are simply not profitable because of insufficient passenger numbers and will not attract competition .
What I also agree with in Barry Seal 's report is that the tariff structure is something over which the normal consumer can have no overview .
The various cheap and cheaper tariffs and special offers which the airlines offer are simply too difficult to understand .
For clever business people and people who have a good travel agent , maybe they can cope , but not normal citizens .
That , I believe , must change .
I would also like to say something about competition and about the alliances .
I do not completely share the view of my colleague , Barry Seal .
I believe the European airlines only have a chance in alliances with other partners in other continents .
I do share his view that we must be watchful that American partners do not drive our European lines to the wall in these alliances , but we also cannot let the Directorate-General IV see the Single Market as a total area in which it will judge the competition situation .
We must look globally at the question of market restriction , competition and cartel rights , because air traffic also takes place globally in alliances .
You all know that the airlines make most profit on the North Atlantic route and not on internal European routes .
In this respect , we must ask the Commission - and Karel Van Miert will probably take this into account - to regard the alliances not only as a danger but also as an opportunity for the European airlines to join in global competition . I hope that Neil Kinnock will also say something on his view of the alliances .
Finally , I would like to ask the Commission : when will we get the proposals for discussion and decision which are still outstanding ?
I am referring here to the question of the slots .
I am not yet sure when the long-since announced package on the slots will be placed before us , Commissioner .
It needs to be discussed .
We should , Mr President , also discuss the question of flight management .
There are in fact still too many problems for the passengers and for the airlines , because air control in Europe is simply organized on a pre-Europe basis .
That must be changed .
Perhaps you can also say something about this , Commissioner , since the free market can only be effective for environmental protection and our citizens if the air space is used efficiently .
Mr President , we welcome this opportunity to discuss the impact of the third package of our transport liberalization measures and , in particular , I wish to thank Mr Seal for the work he has done on this communication .
I accept that some progress has been made but I would point out to the Commissioner that there is still no level playing field and the market remains distorted .
The British Presidency of the Transport Council talks of a people 's Europe .
So perhaps within this people 's Europe we could see a stop to state aids now to ensure that there is a level playing field and fair competition between the carriers .

In their reports both Mr Seal and Mr Sindal have referred to the problems of slots , and it is recognized that generally the overall capacity of slots both in the air and at airports is a problem .
I would make a plea to the Commissioner tonight on the question of new entrants .
While I personally accept the priority should be to encourage new airlines on existing routes , I would argue that where there is no new airline which wishes to compete , an existing airline should be allowed to operate a new route .
Perhaps the Commissioner could consider that in the context of his slot-allocation proposals .
As the Member representing Stansted Airport in North Essex and South Suffolk , I particularly welcome the new entrant , the British Airways carrier which is to be called ' Go ' , to operate from Stansted Airport .
We are not sure yet where it is going but I am sure it is going to mean greater choice , lower fares and be the airline that we all welcome .
All of us would like to see a people 's Europe and true liberalization in air transport and I hope that both this Commissioner and the British Presidency will complete the single market by June , giving a greater choice of routes and carriers and lower fares for travellers .
Mr President , I would like to welcome the Commissioner and to thank the rapporteur for his report .
I wish also to state that I speak this evening on behalf of Mr Niall Andrews who wanted to speak on this subject but had to return to Dublin unexpectedly .
The free movement of labour is one of the basic tenets on which the European Union relies and it is therefore up to us , the elected representatives of the European Union , to ensure that all our citizens have assess to affordable and speedy transport between the Member States of the Union .
Airport charges play a pivotal role in allowing airlines the financial scope to offer customers low cost travel .
The issue is one of particular importance to Ireland , as it is the only island state in the Union and relies heavily on the availability of low cost airfares .
Through the air transport liberalization programme the European Union has taken steps to create the climate necessary for airlines to offer competitively priced airfares to the citizens of Europe .
The air transport liberalization programme , which culminated in full liberalization of the market in 1997 , has undoubtedly brought many benefits to consumers both in terms of access and cost .
However , a commercially successful Irish airline competing in the European market , Ryanair , is currently engaged in a protracted trade dispute with its employees arising from the company 's refusal to recognize or negotiate with the trade union chosen by some of the employees to represent them or to cooperate with the national industrial conciliation procedures which have been established to resolve such disputes .
Ryanair , whose owners and senior managers had been very substantial financial beneficiaries of air transport liberalization , must immediately enter into dialogue with these employees who seek to be represented by a trade union of their choice and to utilize the resources of the national procedures that exist .
I am concerned that this employer 's behaviour may be symptomatic of a wider problem whereby the rights of vulnerable groups of employees are being abused in the aftermath of market liberalization and in the absence of adequate corresponding enforceable social protection .
Could I call on the Commission to conclude and publish as a matter of urgency its promised assessment of the social impact of liberalization of the air transport sector , including the right to free negotiation , free association and collective bargaining .
Mr President , it is a pity that the rapporteur has sung his own praises because otherwise I would have done so and coming from me that would have been even more exceptional .
However , I have to say that his report is excellent , even if in his contribution tonight he possibly concentrates a bit too much on the social consequences given that aircraft crews and pilots are among the best paid workers in the world .
Mr President , I would like to draw the Commissioner 's attention to a few things which to my mind require some improvements in this sector .
Firstly , there is the issue of state aid .
I recall the discussion Mr Kinnock had with us in the Committee on Transport and Tourism when he took office , and in which he promised emphatically - I would almost say , with his hand on his heart - to put an end to state aid .
Well , Mr President , state support is still continuing , and I want to state this emphatically , unfair competition in particular is perpetrated by companies such as Iberia , which allows its subsidiary Viva Air to work below cost price , and in doing so makes the market situation almost impossible for all sorts of other commercially operating companies and companies operating without government support .
It should also be said that Air France , time and time again , cannot resist making life very difficult for new entrants onto the market in France .
But on that , at least , the Commission took some action .
Secondly - and I here I would like to ask the attention of the Commissioner 's staff , who are excellent , incidentally , because I would like a reply to my question if not during the next few days , then in writing if necessary - I am being told that in Italy the use of the seventh freedom , - I am not talking about cabotage , that is going reasonably well - the transport of a Community company to a third country , is alleged to be impossible . This is because the Italians are demanding that this should only be an option when a company is established formally and legally in Italy , and not only has a company there , but also permanent equipment , in other words , aircraft and staff .
This contravenes what is being requested in the seventh freedom .
If we have to meet these kinds of conditions , we would rather grant the transport to companies from third countries , such as Egypt and Senegal , for instance .
Mr President , I would like to raise a last point , and this concerns airports .
I believe that if in Europe we are going to have competition in the aviation sector under the kind of circumstances we have at the moment , and in particular the environmental circumstances , where there are no common standards on noise levels on and around airports ; companies start to compete with each other at the expense of the people because certain airports can take on extra passengers , because they ignore environmental and noise standards , while others do not .
I would also like see to some harmonization in this area in Europe .
Mr President , I have one final point .
I would ask the Commission to pay more attention in its competition policy to networks rather than to specific lines .
Mr President , we would like to place the environmental considerations at the heart of the European Union 's decision-making process .
Integrating environmental issues into all policy areas of the European Union will be a major task , but one that we have to face .
We believe we can deliver a more sustainable transport policy , and we are all agreed that it is essential to cut CO2 emissions from transport , which are growing faster than in any other sector .
This is of course the Green group droning on about the environment again , is it not ?
The Committee on Transport and Tourism is quite happy to integrate the environment into transport policy , as is rapporteur Seal .
But let me tell you , Mr Seal , that I did not make up my first four lines : they were spoken yesterday by your fellow party member Mr Prescott , who was here as President-in-Office of the Council , and he mentioned transport and the environment as the most important environmental issue of the British Presidency .
But you , on the other hand , Mr Seal , do not manage to mention the word environment even once in your report .
You , who blame the Commission for devoting a mere nine lines to employment , seem to have quite a blind spot when it comes to the environment .
And let no one claim that air transport liberalization and increase in pollution from aeroplanes are not related .
Competition has made flying cheaper , and Mr Seal points this out in his explanatory statement .
That is nice for travellers , but bad news for the descendants of the travellers , because cheap tickets lead to more passenger kilometres and that leads to more pollution .
The resolution predicts an annual increase in air traffic of 6 or 7 % .
If we assume optimistically that half of this growth can be absorbed by technological progress , then we are still left with an increase in CO2 emissions from aeroplanes of at least 3 % a year .
Did we not agree in Kyoto that CO2 emissions should come down , and that aviation should do its bit towards this ?
Clearly this all remained in Japanese to Mr Seal and my colleagues on the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I would like the Commission to tell us whether it has proposals to reduce CO2 emissions from aviation .
And , by the way , how are the studies on kerosene tax and other levies progressing ?
Are environmental agreements part of the additional measures which , according to page 22 of the Commission 's statement , are missing in the present aviation agreements between the Member States and the US ?
Will the Commission ask the Council for a mandate to negotiate with the US not only about open skys , but also about cleaner skies ?
I would also like to know if the subject of aviation and the environment is on the agenda of the next two Environment and Transport Councils .
If not , then I will have to conclude that although we may be trying the tame the car , the aeroplane has become Europe 's holy cow .
Mr President , on 1 April 1997 , liberalization of the internal market for civil aviation was completed - at least on paper .
This occurred without as much as a whimper , so that the Dutch press spoke of a ' whispered Big Bang ' .
No cutting competition broke out between the big carriers , and ticket prices did not drop dramatically .
Still , the structure of the aviation market in Europe has altered fundamentally over the past ten years .
In the European Union market the large airlines are regrouping .
A number of associations have grown modestly , and the market has become more dynamic .
This is evident from the emergence of low-budget companies , amongst other things .
Tickets on routes where there is competition have now also become cheaper .
The fact that liberalization passed off peacefully is also the result of the spectacular growth aviation has sadly undergone over the past few years .
This meant that there were no large scale job losses , despite a constant drive for more efficiency .
The Commission 's report deals primarily with efficiency and competition in aviation .
The Commission rightly states that substantial savings can be made in groundhandling and air traffic control .
But I believe that in future fair competition between different modes of transports must be looked at .
Compared to passenger transport by rail or bus , aviation is still subsidized in disguise through duty-free sales and cheap kerosene .
I think it is right that duty-free sales are soon to be abolished for flights within the European Union , but more efforts are needed as regards fair competition between different means of transport modes .
That is why the introduction of a tax on kerosene within the Union is urgently required .
Tax-free kerosene in an internal market , with apologies to the interpreters , is truly " swan mad ' .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too would like to thank the rapporteur for his work .
I believe that the report enables us to give a sound opinion on liberalization and to deal with the relevant subjects specifically .
I would like to point out several aspects I believe to be important .
It was said that numerous companies have entered the market , remaining there without being competitive .
In actual fact , many have not survived .
Although , from an economic point of view , this may be considered negative , from the point of view of security it may be considered positive .
Liberalization has not completely shattered the security and social guarantee mechanisms .
However , there are contradictions and problems , particularly as regards working hours , the relocation of companies - which can have a negative effect on human resources from third countries - , and the management of services with agencies outside the EU which we naturally have to monitor carefully .
In effect , the system has had positive results .
I am convinced that we should take into account the reorganization process begun by the national companies . This reorganization process has been favourable and has made it possible to face the competition specifically , even leading some to highly innovative ideas , such as the company Alitalia , whose operators and workers are personally committed to the company management and also take part in company activities .
These are highly important and significant aspects .
State aid has made this reorganization process possible .
I believe that proper aid has been provided and that they now possess a market opening and the ability to withstand the competition .
However , I would like to deal with another aspect that needs to be highlighted .
In some ways , competition has been more focused on the ground services and airport services than on the specific system of airline liberalization .
It has to be admitted that we still have major problems as regards the airlines : I am not convinced we need to continue in the same way , for example in relations with the USA .
The open sky treaties should continue far more specifically because we need to extend the reorganization of the European airlines to the global market , to include therefore the competition within the American market , which we are prevented from doing at the moment .
I believe that provides a strong limitation to the mechanisms of international competition .
That is why the liberalization of the open sky systems and the ability to liberalize air space are important .
We are faced with an air space that is strongly conditioned by the military systems , even today .
Unfortunately , nowadays , we are still talking of war and the obstacles it might establish - I am referring to Iraq , of course . We will still have a complete violation of air space available .
This is a dramatic point . It would be advisable for air space for the civilian system to be increasingly more available .
The aspect of air traffic control has also been pointed out .
We cannot go on like this any longer !
It is possible to make marked savings and establish strong coordination in the control sector .
To conclude , Commissioner , I am in favour of the measures and I believe that the next action relating to airport duties will provide us with further capacity to face the market and to support the social mechanisms providing guarantees for workers .
Mr President , the liberalization of the aviation industry has been taking place for decades .
It is a positive and necessary development to satisfy the desire of a growing number of passengers .
In the assessment now being made , the Commission does not see any dramatic changes in the development after liberalization .
That means that the large airlines still remain and that foreign competitors have not ousted domestic operators to any large degree ; nor have there been any dramatic price reductions .
Clearly , if that is what we want to bring about through liberalization , we can say we have succeeded .
But if prices have not been reduced and accessibility for passengers has not increased , I am drawn to the conclusion that liberalization needs to be taken further .
There is a need for more competition and more operators in the European air transport market , not fewer .
Today there are far too few airlines dominating far too many routes , and these airlines are constantly entering into increasingly sophisticated cooperation agreements .
In practice , this continues to disable competition in the air transport market .
I am convinced that the necessary development has only just begun .
Satisfying the passengers ' demands calls for increased accessibility and lower prices .
We need to open up to competition and create the conditions for substantially more players than there are today in this sector .
Together this will enable the development which will allow us to satisfy passengers ' demands by the year 2000 .
Mr President , unlike Mr Stenmarck , I do not have the same faith in the possibilities of liberalization with regard to airlines and air transport .
I think there is considerable over-confidence in what can be achieved through deregulation of air transport .
Swedish domestic air services have been open to competition for a number of years , and this initially led to much price competition .
However , today we have a quite different situation .
There are sometimes two airlines on the most attractive routes , but these usually compete with the same timetables , the same prices and roughly the same service too .
On the less attractive routes , however , there are higher prices and poorer services , and this strengthens the regional differences which were already considerable .
Unfortunately , this is all happening in a country which is highly dependent on domestic air transport since there are often no alternatives .
I also think it is important to ensure that an increase in air transport is not a goal in itself .
It is in fact environmentally unsustainable to maintain the rate of growth which we have today .
I have proposed a special amendment , Amendment No 3 , which is based on the idea that competition must take place through socially acceptable methods .
I have made particular reference to the Irish airline Ryanair , which has distinguished itself through its anti-union policies .
The airline refuses to enter into agreements with unions , and this has led to a conflict which is currently taking place with baggage handlers at Dublin airport .
The airline has refused to cooperate with the Irish Labour Court .
I think it is quite unacceptable to employ such methods in competition between airlines .
We must show that we do not accept anti-union attitudes or social dumping as a means of competition .
It would be interesting to hear whether the Commissioner has any views on Ryanair 's behaviour .
Against this background I would like to say I support the GUE / NGL group 's amendment as well as that of the Green group .
Mr President , this obviously is not Ryanair 's evening .
I would also like to draw attention to the regrettable situation that has developed there .
Mr Seal 's report highly recommends many of the positive aspects of the aviation industry in recent years .
Among the blessed , he mentions Ryanair , now the most profitable airline in Europe , more profitable as a percentage of turnover than the giant BA .
As several previous speakers have mentioned , they have been locked in dispute on what many of us would regard as one of the basic human rights , that of the workers to join a trade union and be represented by a trade union .
These workers were willing to work for considerably below the going rate when the airline started , recognising that the company could not afford the higher wages at the time .
This is an airline that has made £ IRL 35 million profit in the last year .
Their chief executive recently earned a personal bonus of £ IRL 17 million .
Another company much smaller , much bigger are paying considerably higher wages than Ryanair .
Let us not hand out kudos to a company whose industrial relations practices are unjust and whose profits are built on the generosity of their employees .
This has been a very interesting debate .
I should like , first of all , to thank the rapporteur , Mr Seal , for his account of the evolution of aviation liberalization in the European Union .
Producing a fair assessment of a new and ongoing process is always likely to be a testing experience .
I compliment him on the approach that he has taken .
As the House will know , civil aviation liberalization in the Union has been an intentionally progressive process , partly in order to take account of the conditions from which it started in the mid-1980s , and partly to avoid disruptions and losses of the kind which liberalization produced in the United States of America .
In other words , it has been and is what Mr Seal is seeking : a balanced liberalization that has taken some pains to try to ensure that the interests of all legitimate concerns are taken into account .
It is inevitable that while some of the main effects of liberalization were identified in our 1996 communication , others have only become clearly apparent since , as airlines have increasingly taken advantage of the possibilities offered .
As we acknowledged in 1996 , much remained to be done to ensure that the potential created by liberalization was fulfilled and fair competition conditions were achieved .
That is certainly true of state aid .
As the House will know , in the Commission 's view , aid to airlines from Member State governments can only be justified , and must only be authorized , as an integral part of a consistent and timelimited programme to restore the financial viability and competitiveness of the recipient companies .
I am certain that this approach has directly contributed to making the restructuring programmes credible and successful .
I noticed Iberia 's results in The Financial Times this morning and took some satisfaction from that .
Our careful monitoring of the implementation of restructuring plans and the way in which they comply with the conditions laid down shows the productive results that are being achieved .
It was on that basis that we were able to authorize final payment by the French and Portuguese governments to Air France and to TAP .
Regrettably , it is also on that basis that we had to conclude that Olympic Airways was not complying with the essential conditions set out at the time of the agreement with the Greek Government in 1994 .
We consequently had to reopen the procedure on that case .
In recent weeks we also had to take a very strict attitude towards the Italian Government and Alitalia who were in breach of basic conditions that were included in the Commission 's state aid decision of last July .
I am glad to say that we received a swift and effective response from the Italian Cabinet and , within a few days , further and binding undertakings were given which resolved the issues .
On the other issues that I have listened to , in the claims made during the course of the debate , and relating to state aid in competitive conditions , I must say that if honourable Members have evidence upon which complaints can authoritatively be made , they are doing the complainants no service if they do not encourage them to make the appropriate complaint to the European Commission .
I can say this : we respond with speed to all substantive complaints .
The recent experience in the case of Alitalia is a further demonstration of that .
If Members believe , therefore , that they have heard of complaints that have not been notified to us , they should say so ; not to us , but to those who have voiced concerns to them .
On the issue of globalization , we are now turning our efforts to ensuring that the consolidation of the market does not produce adverse and counterproductive effects .
The rapporteur identifies the multiplication of mergers as being part of the globalization trend .
It is worth noting , however , that because of the restrictive clauses on ownership and control in most existing bilateral agreements , mergers are practically impossible , and that is why we are witnessing a proliferation of airline alliances instead .
The diversity and the disparity of regulatory regimes clearly inhibits the effective operation of the market and that , of course , is a major reason for the Commission 's efforts to gain a negotiating mandate on market-access agreements with third countries , particularly the United States of America .
It is obvious that if the Community does not take the opportunity to negotiate a comprehensive air-service agreement with the USA , United States Airlines will , by design or default , be disproportionate beneficiaries of our single market , of our liberalization , when our airlines have no effective comparable rights of access and operation to the United States ' single market .
I hope , therefore , that Member States of every kind will heed the reality and respond with alacrity to the challenge so that we can get on as a Community with negotiating a fair and balanced open-skies agreement across the Atlantic and on both sides of it .
It would be extremely alarming if , by the cumulative effect of current bilateral agreements and future bilateral agreements , United States Airlines were effectively able to operate at will in our single market when there was absolutely no reciprocation to speak of in the United States ' single market .
Meanwhile , as the House will know , we opened investigations into three existing transatlantic airline alliances and into one proposed alliance in 1996 .
Far from having adopted a dilatory attitude , as the rapporteur appeared to suggest in his report , the Commission has been very vigilant about the developments in a market which , by becoming global , could , in turn , create fresh constraints on the full benefits of liberalization .
Recognition of that has , for instance , prompted the Commission to take initiatives on air-traffic management - which was mentioned by some honourable Members - , on groundhandling services - mentioned by other honourable Members - and on airport challenges - again referred to by some contributors to the debate .
Our proposal for the revision of the current airport slots regulation will become public within the next few months .
Mr Seal is right to point out that our communication did not devote much space to the social aspects of liberalization .
Although it would also be true to say that the Commission has in other respects been particularly attentive to the social impact of liberalization measures .
The House is aware - and there were references to this - that we commissioned a study to address this issue . And since we received the results of that study within the last week , I can firmly express the hope that the final report will be available to this Parliament and to the general public in April .
It is already clear , of course , that civil aviation has been the only transport mode in which employment increased between 1990 and 1995 , and although the total growth was modest - about 0.4 % per annum over the period - it is worth noting that was achieved despite general economic recession and despite extensive airline restructuring , which has , in some cases , caused what turns out to be a temporary reduction in staff .
The increased effectiveness and competitiveness of airlines has the effect , of course , of again stimulating demand for employment - and that is good news for everybody .
As the House might anticipate , I totally agree with Mr Seal 's view that liberalization should not , indeed must not , be achieved at the expense of safety , and we will therefore continue to be active and vigilant on safety issues , not only at Community level but globally .
To give practical evidence of that : we have in recent months proposed a directive to establish safety assessment of thirdcountry aircraft operating in the European Union , and we have published our proposal for the establishment of a European civil aviation safety agency .
In addition , outside the Community the Commission makes sustained efforts to secure and to maintain the effective implementation of ICAO standards .
Meanwhile we are also addressing environmental aviation issues , which were referred to by some of the contributors to the debate , through the communication on carbon dioxide emissions and transport which we shall be publishing in the spring and , in addition , more specifically in our study on the implication of the impositions of a kerosene tax for civil aviation and the environment .
The House may know that we have for the first time joint environment and transport councils convened under the United Kingdom Presidency - one informal , one formal - and we look forward to very positive results for transport and environment from those initiatives .
As far as the protection of consumers is concerned , the Commission has recently presented a proposal concerning denied-boarding compensation , whilst the current code of conduct on computerized reservation systems , as well as the amendments proposed to it , already provides for the operator of a flight to be clearly identified and for the passenger to be properly informed .
We have had some passenger complaints on this issue and I hope that honourable Members , as frequent flyers themselves , and as users of liberalized air services , will take pains to ensure that if they experience difficulties in this respect , they communicate those difficulties both to the airlines concerned and send a copy to me .
I would be pleased to have such information from the front line .
I will certainly act upon it .
These actions , in so far as consumers are concerned , should reinforce the requirements of information and transparency that Mr Seal 's report is rightly seeking .
The list of different actions , which I have given this evening , is not exhaustive but it shows clearly that the Commission does not consider that its work was completed when we presented our communication in October 1996 or when the single market in civil aviation was formally and legally completed on the 1 April last year .
On the contrary , we acknowledged that further work was necessary and since then we have been actively pursuing further necessary advances .
Against that background , Mr Seal 's report is of great help in emphasizing priorities and in highlighting the significance of the social dimension .
He will , I hope , be pleased to know therefore that in order to give full attention to the social impact , and also to take account of new developments and the changing environment in which airlines operate after the full completion of the aviation single market , we will be publishing the report that I referred to earlier which should be available for debate in this Parliament in the near future .
I hope that I can say with complete confidence that the report will provide a full response to those aspects of Mr Seal 's report which relate to the matters that were not dealt with by our previous communication .
I look forward to considering that and indeed other matters with this House but hopefully not at such great length in future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Cabin crews in civil aviation
The next item is the debate on the report by Mr Grosch ( A4-0018 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive on safety requirements and attestation of professional competence for cabin crews in civil aviation ( COM ( 97 ) 0382 - C4-0460 / 97-97 / 0212 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the safety training of cabin crews in civil aviation is almost a component of the subject which we have just discussed , or a consequence of it .
The Commission could in this respect have taken the terms of the JAA changed or unchanged and transferred them into Community law - quite simply in accordance with Regulation No 3922 / 91 .
It has , however , chosen another route , namely the form of a directive .
It is of course clear that we as Parliamentarians explicitly welcome this decision , and the fact that we as a parliament are involved in the lawmaking process .
But in my view that is not the most important reason point .
The Commission 's proposal - and this is the most important element - puts the work of the cabin crews in the correct light , that is , it covers their safety functions .
It is very important therefore to provide more transparency in terms of the fact that the crews must undergo basic training , a general further training and additional training related to various types of aeroplane .
That is , in our view , an important part of this work .
There is in fact a risk , which has just been discussed , that the airlines in the thick of the competition battle will regard these very training costs as variable costs and correspondingly perhaps try to economize in this area , which in my opinion would be unfortunate .
Therefore , we also see the programmes proposed in the Annex as minimum requirements .
In our opinion , both the basic training and the type-training indicated should form part of basic training , in which really nothing may be left out . This would mean that the cabin crew enjoy the social protection which exists in every similar profession , and that entry to the profession or employment in this job is no longer possible without training .
If we compare the programmes of one airline with another then we soon discover that this directive is necessary . Although most airlines take training very seriously , the further training , particularly the typetraining is somehow neglected .
The Commission 's proposal also respects subsidiarity .
It therefore takes into account the desire of Member States to continue to define their training themselves , although there should be an obligation to keep the Commission informed .
In short , the proposal is an ideal response to technical and administrative questions , to social challenges in the free market and to safety claims associated with the profession of cabin crew .
Although it is not as important , we must not forget in this document that with some form of recognition - here known as certification - mobility in this professional sphere can be increased .
The amendments submitted by the Committee on Transport and Tourism in this respect are therefore to be regarded as no more than fine tuning .
They regulate amongst other things transfer conditions , they regulate or fix the obligation of the Member States to supply information and they regulate medical monitoring somewhat more clearly .
In the Commission 's proposals only regular checks are suggested : we however propose a periodic cycle of inspections .
The amendments tabled later by Mr Simpson are in my view also worthy of support .
Although the Commission 's text , my amendments , and the amendments proposed in committee maintained the distinction between cabin crew with and without safety functions , these amendments from Mr Simpson are designed to remove this distinction , so that all cabin crew must meet the same training requirements .
In my opinion , this has the important advantage of ensuring that there will no longer be cabin crew with varying qualifications and that in serious situations any member of the cabin crew will be able to fulfil his task completely .
Finally I would like to remind my colleagues - and perhaps that could have been said from the start , for thus far the whole thing sounds rather unanimous - that this directive is of course not welcomed by the JAA and the airlines .
For me this is not yet particularly worrying .
I am far more concerned about the scepticism - to put it mildly - of the Council on this subject .
I hope that even those accidents which have been avoided , to say nothing about the tragic reality of the actual aircraft accidents , will convince the Council , so that this document does not end up in a drawer somewhere but is instead dealt with effectively and also fulfils its objective .
Mr President , first of all , just to clarify : we are tonight debating safety standards for cabin crew and not air traffic controllers .
At least I hope so .
I know it is very late but I believe that is the directive we are discussing , otherwise I am in the wrong room .
I think we have a problem with interpretation , with all due respect to Mr Grosch .
I wish to thank him for his efforts in endeavouring to steer this report through Parliament and doing such a comprehensive job , and also to congratulate the Commission on having the foresight to bring this forward , particularly in the light of what we have just been saying about liberalization and the very important comments the Commissioner made about the need to underpin liberalization with a very strong social framework .
This is clear evidence that is actually happening , and this is a measure which commands the full support of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
One point we have to stress is that we need to get over to the Council and , indeed , the wider community why this measure is so important .
One thing we have to make very clear is that , contrary to accepted beliefs , if you are involved in an air crash the likelihood is that you will not actually die .
Indeed , many aircraft accidents are survivable .
Around 75 % of aircraft are involved in accidents during approach , landing or take-off .
Research indicates that around 90 % of all aircraft accidents could be survivable .
It is estimated that of the 1 500 people on average who die each year , some 300 a year , on average , could survive if evacuation measures within aircraft were improved .
I am confident that if we had better , faster and more effective evacuation , we could save lives - as many as 300 a year .
How do we do that ?
There are a number of methods by which we can improve evacuation measures .
Firstly by the behaviour and crowd-control skills of cabin crew during emergency evacuations , and , secondly , by passengers ' knowledge of safety procedures and their motivation to get acquainted with them .
We all know from our experience in flying that no-one takes any notice whatsoever of cabin crew when they are giving us the safety demonstrations and yet all the evidence suggests that information they are conveying to us could make the difference between life or death .
There are a number of reasons why evacuation is a key issue , and training is clearly a means by which we can enable and motivate the cabin crew to provide effective information to the passengers , before , during and after an incident .
That is why we believe this measure is so important .
The large majority of air crashes are survivable technically , and effective evacuation is so important .
Current regulations , for example , specify that an aircraft must be evacuated within 90 seconds with just half the exits open .
In 1994 research was carried out by both the CAA and the FAA which clearly indicated that the difference between getting out of the aircraft or not depended on assertive , highly-trained and highly-effective cabin crew .
Tonight we should reflect on that .
It underpins the work of Mr Grosch and the proposal from the Commission .
The results show clearly that trained cabin crew make the difference .
That is the reason why we are very pleased to support this proposal for a directive on the training of cabin crew .
We have a number of concerns which we have identified via our amendments .
We think that in an incident you cannot differentiate between some cabin crew who may have safety training and others who do not .
All the crew should have the skills necessary to ensure that the plane , for example , is evacuated as quickly and effectively as possible .
That is why we have tabled Amendments Nos 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 14 , 15 , 16 and 17 , to ensure this measure applies to all the cabin crew .
If you speak to the cabin crew themselves , they do not want to create a situation where , possibly , some airline operators could differentiate between cabin crew and create a two-tier system .
In Amendment No 13 we propose annual medical checks for cabin crew .
Again we think this is perfectly reasonable , when your life is effectively in not just the pilot 's hands but also in the hands of the cabin crews .
An annual medical check is the best way forward .
Leaving it just to the wording ' regular ' is not sufficient .
Finally , Amendment No 18 talks about annual training for cabin crews , including things like fire-fighting and the use of life rafts .
Again , it is extraordinary that a basic requirement like using fire-fighting equipment or life rafts is not checked annually .
That is why we are tabling this amendment , to ensure that training is given on an annual basis .
In conclusion , as travel demand increases , the number of aircraft increase , the number of risks increase , it is vital that safety standards throughout the Community are harmonized .
We believe this directive will ensure that and could make the difference between life and death itself .
Mr President , let me begin by thanking Mr Grosch , on behalf of the PPE group , for a thorough piece of work .
This is a very important report .
Setting safety requirements is one of the most important tasks for all of us who are concerned with questions of transport at European level .
With the deregulation and liberalization of air transport , it is essential that safety should not suffer .
We know today that safety rules vary greatly from one EU country to another .
The JAA , the Joint Aviation Authority , has concentrated on this and approved common requirements both for basic training and for further training .
This is all of the utmost importance , and the more players operating in an increasingly liberalized air transport market in future , the more important it will become .
I am quite convinced that there really will be more players operating in this market .
In this context , one of our biggest and most important tasks is to help ensure that safety requirements are increased and not reduced .
That is a precondition for liberalization to have a real and lasting impact .
In this context , I do not want to make a big thing of the issue of certification at European level .
But it is worth giving encouragement to cabin crews , who are a group of employees who work across borders to a very large extent , so that they also have the possibility of changing jobs to another airline in the EU .
This could happen in various ways , such as through a licence of this kind . But I think it seems extraordinarily important to encourage this .
Mr President , Commissioner , the completion of the internal market for civil aviation has increased the need for international agreements on safety standards for European Union countries .
Increased competition sadly only increases the temptation to cut down on safety .
The proposal on safety requirements for cabin crews has been prepared and accepted within the Joint Aviation Authority to which eighteen European countries belong .
The Commission believes it should add to the JAA proposal a competence certificate for cabin crews .
Recognition of training in one Member State by aviation authorities in other Union Member States was meant to improve the mobility of cockpit crews .
This concession to the unions ignores the reality that all airlines have different safety procedures which even differ between aircrafts within each airline .
That is why , to my mind , such a certificate will not promote staff mobility , whilst the Member States are burdened with an extra administrative commitment .
Moreover , the addition of safety certificates has made the Council proposal controversial .
It looks unlikely that this will be discussed within the near future .
For these reasons it would have been better if the Commission had limited itself to the JAA proposal .
We have a similar objection to the amendments tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
They claim that every crew member is responsible for safety duties , and should therefore receive training .
I believe that it is possible to maintain a proper level of safety on aeroplanes without seeing all members of the crew as safety personnel .
I will therefore not be able to support the PSE amendments .
I support Mr Grosch 's amendments which clarify the proposal where the Commission text is too vague .
Mr President , firstly we all know national provisions on safety training for cabin crew vary widely across the European Union .
With the liberalization of the whole air transport sector , it is imperative that we have common standards on training and licensing of cabin crews throughout the Union .
As you have heard earlier , in Ireland we have the situation where Ryanair baggage handlers are on strike simply because they want to be represented by a trade union .
They are low paid with poor working conditions and their legitimate demand is that they be represented professionally with regard to pay and health and safety conditions .
Serious questions have to be asked about the operation procedures and indeed the training provided by low cost airlines such as Ryanair , Translift and others .
I am also very concerned about reports on the hours that these cabin crew work and the consequent fatigue they suffer with no breaks allowed between shifts and 25 minute turnaround time during which they are required to carry out cleaning duties .
Cutthroat competition in the air seems to be leading to a lowering of safety standards and we have seen a lot of accidents recently which I know will be investigated and we will see what turns up .
The latest media reports that airlines are reducing fuel costs by recycling unfiltered air into passenger cabins are equally alarming for all of us who travel frequently and , more particularly , for the cabin staff and pilots .
Cabin crew are the only safety professionals with dual responsibilities .
While safety is their primary responsibility , they are mainly engaged in other tasks .
Safety refresher courses must take place on an annual basis .
Finally I would ask this particular question : is it because the vast majority of cabin crew are women that licensing was not introduced a long time ago ?
Mr President , this proposal is obviously linked to the measures to support the process of liberalization in the air transport sector with the aim of ensuring high safety standards .
I congratulate the rapporteur for his excellent work , and the Commission for its excellent proposal .
My concern with the directive proposed is , will it actually improve safety in air transport ?
Our aim should surely be to set the best safety practices across Europe .
Currently , the joint aviation authorities seek to achieve cabin crew safety by placing responsibility for safety throughout an airline clearly on the operator .
Currently that operator must ensure comprehensive safety throughout the company and that cabin crew are trained to fit in with that company 's specific system .
The directive waters down this responsibility and , therefore , may just possibly undermine cabin crew safety .
The Commissioner , this evening , referred to a number of proposals , including that to set up the European Civil Aviation Safety Agency and efforts to improve the implementation of ICAO standards throughout the European Union .
I would make a plea to the Commission this evening to reach an early agreement with the Council on the setting-up of this European Civil Aviation Safety Agency to ensure that safety both in Europe and worldwide is secured .
The figures show - and were discussed in a conference in Maastricht today - that over the last ten years 70 % of all accidents have involved carriers accounting for only 16 % of total air traffic .
Those airlines from developing countries appear to be mostly at risk .
Without this European action which is so urgently required , experts predict that quite possibly there could be one air accident a week .
So please , Commissioner , and the British Presidency of the Transport Council , act now .
We must set up this European air transport safety organization with proper safety checks at all European airports to ensure the safety of those European passengers using those carriers and those European residents near Community airports receiving them .
I am delighted to support this report .
But I hope that the Commissioner can satisfy me that urgent action will be taken by the Council of Ministers and through his good offices .
First of all I would like to thank Mr Grosch and the Committee on Transport and Tourism for the work that they have put in to considering this particular proposal , and for the generally supportive attitude that they have taken .
In a growing and changing environment such as civil aviation , it is obviously essential that the highest possible safety standards are maintained .
It is equally obvious that the people responsible for fulfilling those safety standards must be well-trained and wellmotivated .
The purpose of the proposal before the House is to achieve those outcomes .
I know that honourable Members share that objective , as they have demonstrated again in the course of this debate .
I should like to make two other points by way of introduction .
First , this draft directive sets down minimum , not maximum standards .
Our constant desire is that Member States will seek to exceed these minima , even though they are of a satisfactory level for the general purposes of maintaining the safety of aircraft and passengers .
Secondly , just as a point of reassurance , but certainly not in any spirit of complacency , our region of the world sees 30 % of the world 's air traffic movements , but only 10 % of air traffic accidents take place in this region .
Everybody responsible works to try to ensure that the level of accidents is even lower than that .
We strive for nil , naturally .
But it is important to put the matter into perspective so that the general idea is not spread that somehow there is a deterioration in standards , inadvertent or deliberate .
I would say to Miss McIntosh , for instance , that there is absolutely no conceivable way in which this draft proposal , inadvertently or deliberately , could possibly lead to the dilution of standards in air safety .
I will deal with that point at greater length later on .
I should also say to Mrs Malone , though unfortunately she has left the Chamber , probably on pressing business , that if she has evidence of an increase in accidents , as she claimed , I want to see it most urgently .
Secondly , if there is evidence that any aircraft operating in European Union airspace has been recycling unfiltered air into the cabin , I want evidence of that too because we most certainly will make an active response .
In response to the amendments proposed by Mr Grosch , Amendments Nos 4 and 5 add clarity to the text .
The Commission can therefore accept them .
I am also glad to say that the Commission shares the desire of the rapporteur to uphold the established rights of experienced cabin crew .
We can therefore accept Amendment No 8 .
I understand the motivation behind Amendment No 1 , but it appears to me to be somewhat superfluous since the content of the training programmes is laid down in the Annexes to the directive and will be universally applicable .
To centralize each and every programme at Community-level seems to me to be unnecessary .
That problem of otiose bureaucracy also applies to Amendment No 6 .
As far as Amendment No 7 is concerned , I do not see what added value it gives .
In practice , cabin crew automatically receive conversion training when changing from one aircraft type to another and the obligations for and the regulation of recurrent training are laid down in Article 5 and in the annexes to this directive .
While I fully appreciate the rationale behind Amendment No 2 as well , it would , in practice , extend the provision of the directive to staff such as beauticians , secretaries and medical companions who are on-board an aircraft for purely commercial reasons and have neither the training nor , in general , the competence to provide useful assistance in the event of an emergency in the air .
In many respects they are effectively passengers themselves .
I do not believe it was the intention of the rapporteur that this should be the case - that people should be allocated responsibilities for which they have not been professionally trained .
This point applies equally to the series of amendments put by Mr Simpson : Amendments Nos 9-12 and 14-17 , which have the same objective .
I understand it to be laudable , but I cannot see how it can be practicable .
So I cannot accept any of those amendments .
The Commission cannot support Amendment No 3 either , nor the new Amendment No 13 , which specify the regularity of medical checks .
When legislating , we have to bear in mind the costs of our legislation and also have to recognize who will meet the bills .
If the result of implementing the provision on medical checks appeared to be very costly , there would be resistance and that would undermine the very basis of the proposal .
Decisions on precise frequency of checks are therefore best left to national authorities who , I am absolutely certain , will not let great gaps appear between medical checks of air crew of any description .
There remains just one amendment , Amendment No 18 , which , again , I regret to say I cannot accept .
This amendment seeks to increase the required frequency of recurrent training and to so well beyond the requirements of JAR-OPS from which our proposal originates .
I would say to Miss McIntosh , when she considers that there is a possibility of reducing the level of requirements below that of the JAA , I would refer her to page 2 of the proposal .
The common safety training standards , as laid down in JAROPS compare favourably with international recommended standards and the better training practices of industry .
They are adequate to ensure a high level of safety .
This proposal is entirely in conformity with that .
Making a further change would add an unnecessary burden on operators without bringing any greater safety guarantees .
In conclusion , I would like again to thank Parliament for its work .
The adoption of this Commission proposal , with the amendments that I have indicated will , I am sure , contribute directly to maintaining motivation amongst staff and sustaining high levels of safety standards in civil aviation .
I know that honourable Members , together with the Commission , strongly support both objectives .
Mr President , if I can try be helpful to the Commissioner I accept his point about other auxiliary cabin staff , beauticians etc .
But his own proposal , his own directive Article 2 ( b ) , with its definition of a cabin crew , already addresses this point .
It actually specifies that it does not apply to crew members solely assigned to non-safety duties .
So the answer lies in your own text , Commissioner , I hope perhaps we can review this in that context .
Secondly , on the point about annual health checks , I understand that all staff of the European institutions are required to have annual health checks .
Surely if it is good enough for us and our institutions , it should be good enough for cabin crew members .
Mr President , if all airlines were as willing as the European institutions to meet the costs of ensuring that their employees had annual medical check-ups in common with many other employers in the public and private sectors , I could share the honourable Member 's confidence .
But that is not the case .
As I have said , if there were resistance based on the idea of unnecessary cost then the consequence would be that we would get even less adequate standards than those set down in this draft .
I take the point that the honourable Member made about other staff referred to in this draft .
I think that is a very good debating point .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Transport of dangerous goods by road -Distinguishing signs for motor vehicles - transportablepressure equipment
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism :
by Mr Le Rachinel ( A4-0014 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive relating to motor vehicles and their trailers with regard to the transport of dangerous goods by road and amending Directive 70 / 156 / EEC in respect of the type-approval of motor vehicles and their trailers ( COM ( 96 ) 0555 - C4-0665 / 96-96 / 0267 ( COD ) ) ; -by Mr Le Rachinel ( A4-0024 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the recognition in intra-Community traffic of the distinguishing sign of the Member State in which motor vehicles and their trailers are registered , ( COM ( 97 ) 0366 - C4-0419 / 97-97 / 0199 ( SYN ) ) ; -by Mr Camisón Asensio ( A4-0039 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive on transportable pressure equipment ( COM ( 96 ) 0674 - C4-0068 / 97-97 / 0011 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am attacking my first report .
The proposal for a directive and the report which I submitted have as their objective the establishment of technical requirements applicable to motor vehicles and to trailers , guaranteeing transport by road .
Certain requirements were already put in place by the 1994 directive regarding the construction of vehicles which transport hazardous goods by road .
However , the recognition and acceptance by all Member States of the characteristics of construction of this type of vehicle is not guaranteed .
This new directive sets down specific clauses for the construction of vehicles .
It also provides the technical specifications for electrical equipment , braking systems , fire risks and speed limits .
This harmonization has the advantage of preventing a Member State from prohibiting the sale , registration or entry into service of motor vehicles which have already been approved in other Member States .
Only one amendment to this proposal has been tabled by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
It relates to fixing a date for the entry into force of the legislative , regulatory and administrative clauses necessary to conform to this directive .
This deadline has been set for twelve months after the publication of the directive .
No other amendment has been tabled and I think that this report does not represent any particular problem and , Mr President I think we have a broad consensus on this subject .
Mr President , it is very clear that this proposal for a directive has been in the process of formulation , basically , to plug the two most blatant loopholes in the legislation referring to the manufacture , transport , commercialization , use and maintenance of all transportable pressure equipment which will fulfil the requirements of the ADR and RID agreements .
Such agreements , as you know ladies and gentlemen , are intended to strengthen safety in the transport of such equipment and ensure free circulation of the same in the common Community market .
At the same time an orderly transition is needed from current transportable pressure equipment to that of the future and this can be done through periodic inspections and conformity assessments following the modular approach , although the process requires inspection bodies to comply with adequate quality criteria , such as those based on the CEN standard in the EN 45000 series , since basing such criteria solely on the content of the directives concerned may not be sufficient , as both these directives deal almost exclusively with transport , with the result that there is a shortage of specific provisions on certain other matters .
Finally , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it seems clear from recent experience that mutual recognition of inspections , which is essential for making progress towards completion of the internal market , can not be fully achieved , through the application of annexes A and B of the ADR directive , which only seems to ensure freedom of transport , and which , because it includes no provision for distinguishing marks , has little impact on the use of such equipment in the country of destination .
Hence the need for the present directive .
Consequently , one of the major advantages of this proposal is that products can secure a higher market share , with the inherent advantage of securing economies of scale and lower administrative costs for the relevant approvals .
For this purpose , the equipment concerned must be easily identifiable and the best way of doing this is clearly to give them a distinctive mark different from those currently in force for stable pressure equipment or gas bottles .
However , the main dilemma posed by this proposal concerns the question of experience as opposed to independence .
I am referring , of course , to the inspection bodies .
It is well known that for many years , the European industry has been able to carry out proper inspections on this equipment , including ADR class 2 , by means of type B or even type C bodies belonging to the users ' sector .
This has been possible because they have been able to accumulate an advanced level of knowledge through daily contact with the problems concerned .
They have therefore achieved a lot in the last few years .
On the other hand , it may be that the experience because of their centralized nature , of type A bodies is confined to new products on the market , with the result that their experience and skills are more general .
For these reasons , the Committee on Transport and Tourism unanimously approved this report and its corresponding motion for a resolution .
Mr President , I support the Rachinel report and I must say that one of the hallmarks of this Commission has been its overriding concern for safety , especially on our roads .
This directive is designed to enhance existing legislation in the motor vehicle sector by ensuring that the construction characteristics of vehicles carrying dangerous goods are harmonized throughout the whole Community .
It will be welcomed , in my opinion , by the industry that one set of rules will apply across the EU for the design and construction of vehicles carrying dangerous goods .
This is a necessary step to develop and enhance safety on our roads .
We need technical provisions to ensure that dangerous goods are safeguarded during the time they are in transport .
This means possibly adopting standards of electrical equipment , braking systems , fire risk prevention provisions , etcetera , just to name a few .
All will help to create what I regard as a safer environment on our roads .
Accidents have happened and accidents , of course , will continue to happen .
Let us not allow dangerous goods , which would pollute and damage health , to be carried in vehicles which are not up to what the Commission regards , and what we regard , as the highest possible standards .
Let us minimize the risk of horrific accidents on the roads where hazardous materials are involved .
Let us make this applicable to the whole of the EU .
Finally , just one last appeal regarding distinguishing signs .
I hope that the Commission will give some account to the symbols that might highlight smaller nations like Wales .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since all of us here are experts I shall , in view of the late hour make just two basic comments on the Le Rachinel report on the type-approval of vehicles and on the report of my colleague , Camisón Asensio , on transportable pressure equipment .
Firstly , it is clearly insanely difficult really to make a reality of the Single Market .
It is technical and is getting more and more technical , but we shall not be able to get out of the work .
Perhaps we shall one day manage to deal conclusively in committee with the kind of report which does not have particularly great political importance , if the Commission presents us with well-prepared reports , so that we no longer have any need to argue about slots at this time of night .
Secondly , it is nevertheless important for our colleagues in the committee to study these reports carefully themselves .
Mr Le Rachinel was , as it were , in the fortunate position after careful checking to be able to say : I need only one amendment .
And everybody agreed with him .
Colleague Camisón had more difficulties .
He had to deal with 28 amendments because on the important question of inspection , he had become involved in discussions with those in the industry who were directly affected and came to a different point of view .
I am very grateful that he worked out this complicated point so well .
But it is important that we bear in mind that both reports are not only reports for the Single Market , for more business and for more trade .
Rather both reports , as the previous speaker has also said , are quite important for people 's safety on the roads and thus for the protection of the natural environment , since accidents which occur can not only kill and injure people , but accidents with dangerous goods can cause incalculable damage to nature , in the water and in the soil .
Therefore , I thank you sincerely for these good reports .
We shall take the trouble to study these reports carefully .
I thank the two rapporteurs and we will await the opinion of the Commission .
I hope that the Commission does not immediately discard 20 of Mr Camisón 's 28 amendments , but we shall wait and see .

Mr President , the merits of the regulation concerning the distinguishing signs for motor vehicles is that they put an end to the practice of drivers being fined because one Member State does not recognize the distinguishing sign of another .
The recognition of the registration plate comprising national registration and the European flag will obviously become increasingly important as more Member States start introducing this , and , perhaps , a Community registration number .
The Dutch government , for instance , plans to include the European flag and the letters NL on the number plate .
It might be possible , of course , that in a wave of Euroscepticism , the flag will be a disaster in the Netherlands .
The European Parliament 's popularity , and by implication that of the European Union , is not exactly furthered by the kind of scenes which took place here yesterday and today during votes , when European Members of Parliament declared they were not being paid to vote .
I wonder then what they are paid for .
It bothers me very much that our European flag is allowed to grace vehicles which should not really drive on the European roads ; cars without catalytic converters , for example .
I would like to see Member States , mindful of the subsidiarity principle , be given the right to withhold the flag from the most polluting cars and engines : watch out , environmental pirate !
Unfortunately , parliaments do not seem to understand my graphic amendments , which is why I was not able to submit them .
Mr President , I will restrict myself this evening to Mr Le Rachinel 's report on vehicle registration signs and of course I congratulate him on his efforts in producing the report .
There is clearly a need across Europe to clarify the situation , which is incredibly complicated for the average motorist trying to travel around the Continent , and indeed UK and Ireland as well .
The signs referred to by Nel van Dijk which the Dutch may or may not adopt in the year 2000 are currently compulsory in Ireland and Portugal , they are optional in France and Germany , where they may make them compulsory , whilst all the other countries have the Vienna Convention white ellipse except the UK , Spain and Portugal which do not have anything .
There is a need to make life simpler for the motorist .
The Commission 's proposal does just that and I commend it .
However , as the Commission will be aware , motorists throughout Europe are much more European than perhaps we think .
They are of course rebelling against the Vienna and the Geneva Convention , and indeed his own proposal , by adopting their own symbol of European unity .
Therefore I would like to draw the attention of the Commissioner and Members to our Amendments Nos 4 , 5 , 6 and 7 which recognise the reality that many motorists do not like the Vienna Convention symbol , the rather boring black letters on a white background , but prefer the European symbol of the white and yellow letters with the gold stars on a blue background in accordance with their particular national registration .
I hope that the Commissioner will agree with our argument that we should give the motorists a choice .
Why is it that motorists in Greece or the UK - it could be my car , Commissioner -have to remove their European symbol and replace it with a white sticker with black letters when they travel to France ?
That to me seems a backward step .
Our amendment is trying to be helpful by giving motorists that choice , that additional right to display a European symbol if they so desire rather than the white ellipse .
I commend it to you , Commissioner , and I commend it to the House .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to talk about the second Le Rachinel report .
The present proposal for a regulation remedies the lack of similarity between the separate national legislations .
The Community model for the distinguishing sign of the Member State licensing of vehicles and trailers in internal Community traffic , let us call it the European nationality plate , is long overdue .
Such a measure directly helps to include and raise the awareness of the citizens of the Union in the creation of an area without internal borders and to form and establish a feeling of European identity , while contributing indirectly to n increase in road traffic safety .
In particular , the demand that the proposed Community sign must be located both at the front and at the back on the left beside the registration plate will be an advantage for the police and other administrative and judicial bodies .
Although on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party I completely support Mr Le Rachinel 's report and thank him for his work , it seems to me personally that the Commission 's proposal for a regulation is not completely logical .
Let us just consider : in a few weeks the third phase of European economic and monetary union begins , which will lead to a domestic market , the formal external appearance of which will be the single currency .
What a magnificent achievement , proving our great farsightedness !
With the distinguishing sign for vehicles and trailers the Europeans are failing to achieve logical standardization in the form of a common , standard design principle . Thus , with reference to the principle of subsidiarity , the EU Member States are obliged in fact to recognize the proposed Community model , but the validity of existing nationality plates remains completely unrestricted and continues to exist , independent of the Community model .
There is not even a reference to the fact that in the Member States the Community model should preferably be used .
In view of this fact , I could even understand if citizens from third countries were doubtful of the ability and / or seriousness of the efforts of EU to build a political union .
For the vehicle owners of the Member States who have already accepted , on a compulsory or voluntary basis , the use of the Community model - it is of course not a new invention - , the present proposal for a regulation takes up a long-standing desire for legal certainty and is recognition - let us call it personal - of the costs they often willingly incurred when buying this combined vehicle registration plate .
For me , too , it is desirable that third countries , above all the countries of the European Economic Area but also the associated countries of central and eastern Europe give legally binding recognition to the Community model .
I recommend that we accept this report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like briefly to express an opinion on Mr Le Rachinel 's report on the transport of dangerous goods by road .
One of the Union 's aims is the completion of the single market .
We should do everything we can to guarantee its successful operation by implementing suitable measures .
In this sense the free passage of vehicles transporting dangerous goods should be possible .
Above all , I believe it is very appropriate to harmonize design features and technical specifications , for example on brake fittings , speed limitations or electrical equipment , to guarantee free passage within the Community .
The creation of a European type-approval system will help ensure that in future no Member State will be able , on grounds which relate to design features , to prohibit a vehicle manufacturer from offering it for sale , or to refuse its approval or use .
The Member States should thus be obliged to produce the necessary legal and administrative regulations within 12 months of the publication of this directive .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at this late hour we are once again discussing transport policy questions .
Let me make just two short remarks .
Firstly , I would like to look at the issue of transportable pressure equipment which unfortunately has figured too briefly in this joint debate .
This is a very important matter , not only from a technical viewpoint - although to me as an engineer it appears thoroughly interesting , - but it also as regards the question of safety of everything which travels on our roads .
It concerns the question of regular monitoring and the capability to carry out this monitoring and I think that here it is the rapporteur , whom I would like to thank sincerely , who has succeeded in presenting a balanced report .
I can only ask the Commission to listen carefully to Parliament .
Secondly , I would like to consider the distinguishing sign of the Member State of registration , that is , the national registration plate .
I consider that , too , to be an important proposal and Mr Koch referred to the problems which we still face .
Here at last we have a regulation with which we can bring Europe to life . As well as the standard driving licence , which has already been decided on , it is a further symbol to make Europe come to life .
It is a citizen-friendly decision which makes administration simpler .
I would just like to ask you , Commissioner , to take this up perhaps in negotiations with Switzerland too , because it is not sensible or logical to introduce it throughout Europe , and have it recognized in the European Economic Area , and in the associated states , while right in the middle of Europe we have an Island of the Blissful , where we still have to have our stickers .
I ask that you take this up in the negotiations .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Le Rachinel for his two reports , firstly on the proposal relating to the type-approval of motor vehicles and trailers intended for the transport of dangerous goods by road and , secondly , on the distinguishing sign for vehicles .
On the first report , I am pleased to say that the Commission accepts Mr Le Rachinel 's single amendment , since the additional wording he suggests on Article 6 provides the correct legal term for the date of implementation and does not in any way contradict or change the intention of the Commission proposal .
This legislation , as the House will know , is an important step towards harmonization of the laws of Member States on typeapproval procedures relating to vehicles carrying dangerous goods .
I am therefore grateful for the constructive approach taken by the rapporteur and his colleagues .
Colleagues , indeed , like Mr Morris who , in an erudite and convincing speech , would not only have demolished any doubts at all about the transport of dangerous goods but probably have persuaded everyone that Wales should have its very own distinctive number plate .
That would , of course , be permissible , as we see evidenced by the fact that in the Republic of Ireland the name of the region is given on the numberplate in Erse and in Germany the Land badge is also shown conventionally on the numberplates .
So I am looking forward to seeing a draig goch , the red dragon , on Mr Morris ' numberplate .
I am sure that would be a very popular step .
Not that I would dream of intervening in subsidiarity to advocate it publicly .
Mr Le Rachinel 's second report concerns numberplates .
Because of press misreporting , which has on occasion misinformed public opinion on the issue of vehicle numberplates and distinguishing signs , I think it wise to begin my short response to this very constructive report by saying what the proposal does not mean .
Firstly , it does not have any suggestion that Member States must provide numberplates which incorporate the symbol of the European Union .
Secondly , it does not have any suggestion that all vehicles must show the symbol of the country of registration .
I specify this because Mr Jarzembowski will I know be interested to be informed that a couple of years ago the Daily Mail - not a newspaper that I customarily buy - incredibly printed a front-page story about me going to impose Euro-numberplates on all unsuspecting citizens of the Union .
The story was so inaccurate , misleading and mischievous , that I sued the Daily Mail and , I am happy to say , successfully .
I hope that they will record , with precision , what this proposal does and does not do .
The aim of the proposal is simply to ensure that where the rear numberplate on a vehicle shows the distinguishing sign of the Member State of registration , on the background of the symbol of the Community , the distinguishing sign is recognized by the other Member States as a valid identification of the country of registration , without further need for the vehicle to show any other sign .
That includes the elliptic sticker , the rugby-ball-shaped sticker specified by the Vienna Convention .
It may be , of course , as far as Mr Morris is concerned , that shape of sticker would do for Wales , but I understand that too .
I know that Members of this House understand that and I would like , therefore , to respond to the amendments tabled by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
First , we welcome Amendment No 2 and the first part of Amendment No 3 , which extends the coverage of the regulation to trailers .
We can also accept the second part of Amendment No 3 , which refers to the position of the distinguishing sign on the left-hand side of the numberplate .
In addition , we can accept in principle the last part of Amendment No 3 that refers to other official signs .
But we believe that the wording and the purpose of the recognition , which is to identify the state of registration of the vehicle , could be more specific .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 1 , which is intended to introduce a requirement to affix the distinguishing sign of registration on the left-hand side of the plate .
However , the amendment actually changes the legal term distinguishing registration signs , which simply means the official abbreviation used to denote the Member State .
The term itself and the definition are consistent with the Vienna Convention , which is as it should be .
As in the case of the Convention , the size , shape and location of the distinguishing registration sign are specified in the Annex , although that provision is now also covered by the second part of Amendment No 3 , which , as I said to the House , we have accepted .
Amendments Nos 4 to 7 have been tabled by Mr Simpson with the purpose of sanctioning or regularizing the practice of using stickers in the form of the European symbol containing the abbreviation of the country of origin .
I have to say that Mr Watts did a job of which any salesman would be immensely proud in the course of the debate tonight .
As a consequence , I have some sympathy for the idea .
However , I have to tell the House that these amendments do not meet the need to lay down the technical specifications with sufficient detail to achieve mutual recognition .
Well I can always mutually recognize Mr Jarzembowski even if I cannot hear precisely what he is saying !
Our proposal makes mutual recognition possible precisely because the sign is issued under the control of the national authorities as part of an official numberplate , and that would clearly not be the case for the separate sticker .
The eighth and final amendment by Mr Cornelissen is unnecessary since the regulation , once adopted , will be automatically applicable in the European Economic Area .
Incidentally , I think history is being made .
It is ten past eleven on a night in Strasbourg .
We are having a transport debate and Mr Cornelissen is not actually here .
This must be the first time in history and I am sure there is a very good reason for it .
I now turn to the third report and I would like to thank Mr Camisón for the time and effort that he spent on this complex technical proposal related to safety in the movement of transportable pressure equipment .
As the House will know , by adopting Directives 94 / 55 and 96 / 49 , the Council has already ensured a high level of safety in the movement of transportable equipment by defining common rules on design , materials , filling and periodic testing of such equipment . However , one further demand needs to be met .
The current situation is that transportable pressure equipment , for instance gas cylinders , moved from one Member State to another and then used cannot be refilled in the receiving Member State and then transported back to the first Member State without being retested , inspected and approved in the receiving country .
This threatens the very existence of the single market and so obviously has to be changed .
In the absence of mutual recognition of the conformity procedures and of markings of the inspection bodies in different Member States , these conditions will continue .
The proposal before the House therefore seeks to rectify that .
A further effect of this proposal is to ensure free circulation of transportable pressure equipment in the internal market , a facility which is not possible now because Directive 97 / 23 on pressure equipment excludes transportable pressure equipment from the scope .
Since Amendments Nos 4 , 6 , 7 , 11 , 12 and 19 are consistent with the aims of the proposal , the Commission is able to accept them and , as a consequence of accepting Amendments Nos 6 and 19 , the Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos 10 and 20 in so far as they relate to the date .
When I conclude my time in the Commission , I can always get a job as the person who announces the lottery results on BBC television on Saturday nights .
I have been training for that for some time .
Señor Camisón 's report provides me with the unique rehearsal in this number reading skill .
Amendment No 9 deletes Type C inspection bodies and there are related editorial changes in Amendments Nos 5 , 8 , 10 , 11 , 13 , 15 , 17 , 18 , 20 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 and 28 .
They can all be accepted by the Commission if the definition of Type B inspection bodies is modified .
We will therefore frame our revised proposal accordingly .
And people say that DG VII functionaries do not earn their money !
The other amendments , however , are not acceptable .
Amendment No 1 is rejected since that ' whereas ' clause is limited to the main objective of the proposal : transport safety .
Amendments Nos 2 and 3 are primarily editorial changes but they are rejected because the original text is more accurate .
Amendment No 14 is rejected because the limitation solely to existing Type B inspection bodies is too restrictive and would prevent new Type B inspection bodies from entering the market .
Amendment Nos 16 and 20 are rejected since the Commission considers that frequency of controls upon relevant bodies and the details rightly fall under the competence of the Member States .
Amendment No 22 is also rejected because it would not allow the same undertaking to be engaged in maintenance and periodic inspection and is therefore , in the view of the Commission , too restrictive .
As I said at the outset , this is a technical proposal which is nevertheless a further contribution to safety in transport and I am grateful for the fact that it has the support of the rapporteur , Señor Camisón , and indeed of the House .
Naturally I am pleased to note that the large number of amendments manifests the attention to detail that the proposal has received from the Transport Committee rather than any real differences of substance between European Parliament and the Commission on the issue .
Dealing with three different proposals in one debate is obviously not easy and this is even more true when the proposals and the discussion are particularly technical .
I know , however , that the House is well able to cope with such situations , apparently better than the Commission , and I look forward to progress on all three measures now before the Parliament .
I must say that history is being broken for the second time in the course of this debate .
Not only is Mr Cornelissen not here but I have managed , having been given 15 minutes of the Parliament 's precious time , to finish in 13 minutes and 58 seconds .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I did not intend to spoil your future as announcer of the lottery numbers on the BBC , but you also , of course , have a past as a parliamentarian , and I had asked a question which certainly did not come up in your speech , that is , the question of how this nationality plate will be treated in Switzerland .
I think it is in fact an important point if we introduce it in the European Economic Area but not in Switzerland .
Is the Commission considering the possibility of finding a standard regulation in Europe which includes the Swiss authorities ?
I am grateful to the honourable Member .
I must say that some of my friends say that I am quite gifted in some respects , but I am not yet gifted enough to be able to read what is not written .
Consequently , since the Swiss references are not part of this report , I am sure that the honourable Member , who is very understanding , will comprehend why I have not made the response .
In addition , whilst I take full account of the difficulties that can be caused because Switzerland takes a different view , I am not anxious to enter any new material in the negotiations on land transport with Switzerland which we have just concluded very satisfactorily for the Union .
I will discuss it very readily with him under other circumstances .
It astonishes me , Commissioner , that you do not have a simple answer for a simple question , for normally you have an answer for everything , prepared or otherwise .
I assume that you will follow up the question asked by Mr Ferber .
In my opinion , as a stimulus we could say that we would perhaps be prepared , in exchange for recognizing this distinguishing plate , to fix the transit fee through Switzerland at 236 Swiss Francs .
But maybe it would be better to discuss this over a whiskey !
First of all , I am aware that Switzerland is party to the Geneva and Vienna Conventions , so there is some reassurance there .
I am also , as a special concession to Mr Jarzembowski , prepared to call the Swiss Transport Minister and recommend that in order that Mr Jarzembowski can wear any plates that he likes , he do so for the small consideration of paying double the Swiss vignette in order to pass through the country .
Maybe it is a privilege he would not want to take advantage of .
I certainly will see Mr Ferber on the specific issue that he raised .
Mr President , I would not like to conclude this debate without offering my hearty congratulations to the Commissioner for his marvellous ability to trivialize this topic .
Indeed , I have to put on record here that his frivolity contrasts greatly with the seriousness and concern which many sectors of European industry display , and it should go on record that this marked contrast has caught my attention .
If the honourable Member cannot tell the difference between passing amusement at some of the text that I am obliged to read out to this House , and trivializing a proposal , then his wisdom is considerably less than his years .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.20 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
Madam President , I would just like to say I was present although I am not included in the list at the back .
Madam President , this also applies to me .
I am not on the list either .
But there is I something else I would like to say , Madam President . Yesterday the debate on the various oral questions was chaotic .
We had a number of debates : Nigeria , Burma , the United Nations .
These debates , and the speakers , were taken randomly .
This throws Parliament into chaos , and is not very courteous towards the Commission representatives or the Presidency , who have difficulty making sense of anything from the different remarks which are made at cross-purposes .
Madam President , I would therefore ask you whether in future , when as a group we submit to you the list of speakers per subject , you could keep to it .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , I have taken note of your criticism .
We shall discuss it amongst the few people who are leading the session here , and then it will certainly be possible next time to proceed in a more orderly fashion .
Madam President , the Minutes of Wednesday Part I , page 1 , sub-paragraph , ' the following spoke on the new rules ' .
That is in the official record .
I have been arguing that it was a new rule but have been assured by the Chair that it is not a new rule .
It is something other than a new rule .
I note the last sentence of the next paragraph which states ' The President replied that the new rules were being applied for the first time ' .
If there is a procedure for new rules , this House has to agree to them .
One gets a little tired of raising points of order on something so clear but it nevertheless is in the Minutes and it is incorrect .
Mrs Ewing , in logical terms you are , of course , right .
If it were a matter of changing the agenda that would have to be decided by the plenary .
But it is not .
It is a new rule , but it is not a change to the agenda .
That was incorrectly noted in the Minutes .
We must check it .
You are right in your criticism ; the item must be corrected .
Madam President , I raise the report of the speech of Mr Titley in the report of proceedings of yesterday on the debate on Iraq .
I ask the President to give a ruling as to whether this requires a personal statement from me and from the Member concerned , Mr Titley .
He said in his speech ' I have never heard a speech of such distorted self-indulgent drivel than that which Mr Kerr give a short while ago . '
Clearly many Members would agree with that and that is decent political debate .
However , he goes on to say ' I now know that care in the community in the United Kingdom does not work ' which is clearly an indication about my mental health .
You may think that is true as well , but I suspect , under the Rules of this House , you are not allowed to cast aspersions on Members ' mental health . I would ask you to make a judgement on whether I can make my three minutes ' personal response .
Can I also indicate that , as shown on page 25 of the Rainbow , I asked Mr Henderson , the Minister for Foreign Affairs , whether it was true that the Financial Times had reported that Britain is preparing to use nuclear weapons against Iraq .
He said in his reply to me that Mr Cook , Foreign Secretary , had denied this in the House of Commons .
I have the transcript of Mr Cook 's speech in which there is no denial .
The Foreign Office officials are still briefing that Britain is preparing to use nuclear weapons on Iraq .
Mr Kerr , I followed that myself yesterday .
I was not in the Chair but remained in my place and heard what you asked .
I also heard the answers given by the representative of the British Presidency .
It is true that he did not answer this question precisely , but I wonder why you did not yesterday make your point , whilst the Presidency of the Council was still present .
I take note of your comment , but in such cases it is wiser to rise to speak up immediately .
Madam President , if Mr Kerr were to read Hansard of 10 February , he would see that it states : ' Will my Right Honourable friend , the Foreign Secretary , rule out the possibility of a nuclear attack on Iraq ?
Mr Cook : Yes , I can rule that out straight away . '
Madam President , I wish to remind you that , two days ago , on 17 February , the German writer Ernst Jünger died at the age of 102 .
He was one of the main exponents of the conservative revolution in Germany and certainly , as pointed out by the international press today , an important author of European political thinking and twentieth century literature .
He died at the age of 102 and is , therefore , an excellent witness of the twentieth century , a century full of contradictions ; Jünger , a free spirit , remained loyal to the principles of freedom and intellectual consistency , refusing any subjection to the totalitarian regimes of his time .
And so , Madam President , it is the duty of the European Parliament to pay homage to the memory of this man .
Mrs Angelilli we all regret the death of Ernst Jünger and know that he was a great thinker and writer , but what you have just said is not really a comment for the Minutes .
We are still approving the Minutes .
Madam President , I apologize for returning from the heights of Ernst Jünger to the quite ordinary parliamentary level of yesterday 's Minutes .
On page 8 under the heading " subcritical nuclear tests ' is a note saying that there is an objection by Mr Rübig .
As a result , the heading " safety in the Leopold District of Brussels ' is to be dealt with instead .
I want to make a correction here .
It is not " safety in the Leopold District of Brussels ' but " crime in Brussels ' .
There is , I believe , a major difference between the two , since we are not fighting here for our own benefit , but in principle for safety in Brussels .
Furthermore , it states here that the President informs us that he has declared the objection to be inadmissible in accordance with Article 47 , paragraph 2 and that he intended to send Mr Rübig a letter with an explanation .
Mr Rübig has received this letter .
I have seen a copy of it .
In the letter there is no more explanation than here in the Minutes .
It would , I believe , be very appropriate , if he could pass on the information he has on to the Bureau .
We would be very grateful if the President could tell us with which offices in Brussels he has had contact , what the concrete results of these conversations were and if he will also inform the House about them .
In any case almost 50 Members have signed the resolution . They are really concerned about what is happening in Brussels and would therefore like to know what is going on .
I believe the House has a right to be told .
Would it not at least be possible for us to learn this week when we can expect to get this information ?
( Applause )
Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , as far as I know , the President has said that he will take up these contacts .
He has not done so yet and probably the details about whom he will contact are not yet fixed .
I am quite sure that he will report on the matter .
I will , nevertheless , pass this on to the Bureau .
As regards your first comment , the Minutes can contain only what was said .
If the wrong description or wrong terminology is used then that is unfortunate .
However , thanks to your comment the item has now been corrected indirectly .
Madam President , I just wish to refer to the last item on page 4 - the statement by Mrs Green , leader of the socialists - in the English version of the Minutes .
I do not want to get into any type of war , be it nuclear or otherwise , with Mrs Green .
I want to correct a statement she made yesterday concerning the Pery working party and the new rule which was introduced this week .
Neither Mrs Nicole Pery , who has left this Parliament , nor the working party , made any suggestions concerning the application of this rule .
What Mrs Nicole Pery reported to the Bureau was quite simply that she had various documents from different groups and individuals and many varied suggestions on this particular matter .
She did not come down on one side or the other or make any such suggestion .
So we go back now to the Conference of Presidents , because that is where the pressure for this particular rule came from .
While I am clearing the decks on this particular matter , it is only right and proper that the House should know that when this first request came to the College of Quaestors , the College , in its varying political make-up , unanimously agreed that it was impossible to implement .
It then went back to the Bureau , and the Bureau made the decision on the basis of what , I assume , the Conference of Presidents had requested .
So , in order to clarify all this , let us not take a third outside organization into this , namely the Nicole Pery ad hoc committee , because I was a member of that working party and on this particular matter it did not do anything of that nature .
I would suggest that we need reform , and we all agree on that .
The dignity of this House is a priority above all other things and the dignity of this House was brought to its knees this particular week and it is time we reviewed it .
As far as the agenda is concerned , Mr Killilea , we shall keep to it . Anybody can point matters out and if there are any problems , they will be corrected .
What you have just discussed relates to events which go back as far as last July .
Then this report was submitted .
I remember very well that we discussed it in a session in Luxembourg .
I cannot check it quickly this morning . I will , however , have it checked and then we shall return to it .
Madam President , on the same subject : item 5 of the Minutes , which is on page 9 in the English version , and your reply to Mrs Ewing .
Members have a variety of names for this attendance-checking procedure - some of them rather rude - but you mentioned a new rule and change of rules .
Vice-President Nicole Fontaine actually refers to them as ' implementing measures ' .
Which are they ?
I do not have that is not in front of me at the moment , but we are , of course , all aware of the incidents in question and we know what we are talking about .
I believe it has been said several times that there have been renewed discussions in the Bureau about the way in which attendance can be confirmed in future .
Please let us wait for that and discuss it when the Bureau hands down other rules which are more easily applicable to the House or to the groups .
I find it simply futile that we have now referred to this matter for the hundredth time in one way or another .
This robs us of time for other more important discussions .
It is now agreed that the Bureau has decided to deal with it again , to correct any possible mistakes and to ensure that it will be simpler in future to confirm attendance .
Perhaps we can wait until we receive new proposals .
Madam President , concerning Mr Kerr 's remarks , I would like to draw to your attention an open letter sent to all Socialist Members .
I will quote a small part of it : ' We would ask all Socialists to support this , particularly British Labour Members , who will be glad to know that we shall be circulating the names of those Members who voted for this amendment and therefore against the war throughout the Labour movement in Britain ' .
I am not sure whether that is a carrot or a stick , but I have to inform the two individuals involved that I know my conscience and my duty on Iraq and how I will vote .
I do not need instruction from a pair of political opportunists .
Madam President , I share Mr Smith 's viewpoint on these matters but I would like to return briefly to the Rules , the implementing measures , the procedures or the diktat from the Bureau .
Yesterday the House agreed to allow Mrs Fontaine as President in the Chair then to conduct the sitting in a rather abnormal manner .
All I seek are assurances that we will return to the instructions from the Bureau and that , when a roll-call is called , you will accept my wish to speak and note my presence at that time if I so desire .
I hope and trust that you and future Presidents today will implement that particular measure without heeding the ill-advice that comes from your advisers .
Mr Falconer , you have heard what I have said on this matter .
I think that will suffice !
Madam President , I would simply like to remind Mr Falconer that this matter is perfectly clear , although I am sure he knows this from the Minutes .
I had stated that yesterday 's conduct was exceptional , due to the exceptional situation in which we found ourselves , since the voting time was divided in two to allow for the speech by the President of Portugal .
Moreover , the first thing I did this morning was to ensure that the Minutes referred to this exceptional procedure .
Mr Falconer could see , as I could , that they did .
I therefore believe that this matter is completely clear .
Madam President , I hope we are now moving away from the matter discussed at the last two sittings which brought Parliament into disrepute .
Along the same lines as Mr Cot , may I have an assurance from you that when the changes to the Rules are drawn up , they will be put to the House so that the House can endorse or reject them ?
That is all we are asking for .
Madam President , I have just seen that my name does not appear in the list of Members present .
I cannot rule out that I might have forgotten to sign in .
In view of the many roll-call votes , I believe that can be entered later .
Madam President , I notice that my name is missing on page 26 of the English version of the roll-call vote on Lange .
It was a report I was particularly interested in and I voted on it .
I said on Tuesday how important it was , with the new roll-call system and the new proposals coming out from the Conference of Presidents , that Members should understand all the regulations and that we should circulate these regulations to Members .
It must also be made quite clear that Members themselves must hold a certain amount of responsibility for making sure they check that their names are recorded .
Mistakes can be made .
That will be corrected , Mr Sturdy .
Madam President , I had made a suggestion in keeping with the Minutes .
I had asked that a list be drawn up of Members who do not fulfil the criteria for the payment of allowances .
I have not had any response concerning this matter nor have I seen any such list .
However , I think that the most important thing should be to inform Members what to expect !
Mrs Guinebertière , miracles take a little longer !
I have this morning said several times that the Bureau will discuss this question again .
Please be patient until we get an answer since this is all part of the matter which did not really have to be discussed in such depth in the context of the Minutes .
However , we have done so .
( The Minutes were approved )
Animal feed
The next item is the report ( A4-0020 \ 98 ) by Mrs Poisson on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the proposals for European Parliament and Council Directives amending :
I.Council Directive 93 / 74 / EEC on feedingstuffs intended for particular purposes and amending Directives 74 / 63 / EEC , 79 / 373 / EEC and 82 / 471 / EEC ( COM ( 97 ) 0408 - C4-0409 / 97-97 / 0208 ( COD ) ) II.Council Directive 95 / 69 / EC laying down the conditions and arrangements for approving and registering certain establishments and intermediaries operating in the animal feed sector ( COM ( 97 ) 0409 - C4-0408 / 97-97 / 0213 ( COD ) )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposals for directives submitted by the Commission are aimed at amending Directive 93 / 74 / EEC on feedingstuffs intended for particular nutritional purposes through the integration of a new mechanism which would allow its field of application to extend to a new generation of products called nutritional supplements for animals . They are also aimed at amending Directive 95 / 69 / EEC on the approval and registration of certain establishments and intermediaries operating in the animal feed sector .
One important factor must still be underlined .
In fact , having made commitments to the Committee of Inquiry into BSE in feedingstuffs and foodstuffs intended for human consumption , the Commission is proposing for the first time to apply the codecision procedure , in accordance with Article 100a of the Treaty .
The Commission hopes to regulate the use of a new generation of products which have appeared on the market in all the Member States , with a view to defining a strict framework covering the nature of these products and their use .
These new products , known as nutritional supplements , cannot be likened to complementary feedingstuffs or additive premixes .
They must not contain medicinal substances , must be used under clearly defined conditions and for a short period only .
Nutritional supplements are intended to adjust an animal 's nutritional intake in response to a temporary increase in its nutritional requirements brought about by critical breeding or living conditions , such as during calving , weaning or at point of lay .
Animal nutrition plays an important role in the human food chain .
It is therefore necessary to ensure that the Directive 's scope is clearly apparent from the definition of the term " nutritional supplement ' , so as to avoid a legal vacuum in the products used in the animal feed sector between straight or compound feedingstuffs and nutritional supplements .
As regards Directive 95 / 69 / EC , the Commission lays down certain obligations applying to operators in the animal feed sector , with a view to providing sounder guarantees of the quality of products destined for this sector .
Nutritional supplements should be subject to the same rules as additive premixes , given that both categories of products generally contain the same proportion of additives .
However , the Commission 's position as regards the obligation to register gives rise to some reservations .
In fact , the registration system proposed by the Commission for users of nutritional supplements would in practice create a register of breeders parallel to that provided for in Article 9 of Directive 96 / 23 / EC , which has the aim of ensuring the correct use of substances in stock farming .
It would create an additional administrative procedure which would be a burden for both operators and inspection departments without bringing any real practical benefits .
This is why , in the desire to maintain clarity and simplification , I cannot accept Amendments Nos 11 and 12 from Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf relating to the list of components and their proportions , since obligations are already defined in this area .
In conclusion , I support the new provisions put forward by the Commission which will provide consumers with an extra guarantee of the quality of products .
Madam President , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Poisson , for her very clear report on the proposal to amend the Council directive on feedstuffs intended for particular nutritional purposes .
Over the last two years we have all become very much more aware of the need to ensure that anything entering the human food chain via animal feed is carefully controlled and presents no dangers , either to human or animal health .
I have more than once drawn the attention of this House to the dangers of indiscriminate additions of substances such as antibiotics or other medicaments to animal feed , not to deal with a particular , temporary health problem of an individual animal , but as general prophylactics .
I therefore welcome the precautionary note clearly set out in the Commission proposal to regulate the use of new products with high concentrations of vitamins , trace elements , fatty acids , etc. as food supplements to normal animal feed .
Of course there are times in an animal 's life cycle when such dietary additions can be very valuable , such as when a cow is in calf .
The rapporteur 's proposal that there should be very clear definitions as to when such products should be allowed for use , should be supported .
The Commission 's proposal requires stock farmers to register if they use such products .
This was regarded in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development as being excessively bureaucratic .
But it is important to set clear guidelines to stock farmers to ensure that they understand the parameters within which such products should be used .
Prime among them is the stipulation that they should only be used for a limited period and for a very specific purpose , to ensure that no possible residues from such products could remain within meat or other products which eventually are sold for human consumption .
Furthermore , the precise composition and quantities of such products should be clearly stated on the label .
Never again should farmers be able to say with truth that they are unaware of exactly what they are feeding to their animals .
Madam President , animals , like humans , are entitled to good and healthy food .
Our legislation should serve this aim .
Furthering this aim , and certainly not standing in the way of it , is what we should focus on with this directive .
The directive deals with nutritional supplements which serve a particular nutritional purpose ; it concerns dietary feed which should not contain any medicinal substances .
The national legislation which will have to be based on this directive must be clear .
It should be possible to hold the companies manufacturing and launching these products onto the market responsible for this part of the food chain .
In the meantime it appears that several directives , and consequently also national legislations in this area , are in force , and it is difficult to see any overall coherence among them .
For example , a registration requirement exists for manufacturers of ordinary compound feedingstuffs , or for so-called premixes , but there is no system of approval for these firms .
It therefore makes no sense and it is wrong to lay down an approval system for the manufacturers of nutritional supplements , which contain no pharmalogically active substances .
This is unnecessarily bureaucratic , especially if these nutritional supplements are only used in-house at the stock farm .
The rapporteur 's proposal to delete the suggested approval procedure for manufacturers of nutritional supplements has our support .
Yet in the report by Mrs Poisson - whom I would like to congratulate on her clear presentation of this complex matter - there is one bit of unnecessary centralist meddling in the use of nutritional supplements .
In Amendment 3 it is noted quite rightly that it is vital that the notion " temporary use of nutritional supplements ' is not to be taken as a reference to a random limited period , but that the length of use should be determined case by case .
A duration stipulation of this kind will have to be supported by a bibliographic case , underpinned by scientific facts which justify the nutritional objective and the period of administration .
Using this as a starting point , the condition in Amendment 6 , which covers the legal text , stating that nutritional supplements intended for pets should not be administered for more than eight days , is completely wrong and contrary to good animal husbandry practice at many stock farms within the European Union .
It should be possible for this maximum period to differ according to the type of farm and type of animal .
Thus , the eight day condition must be deleted .
I am convinced that the regulation of sensible animal feed in all its aspects should never be a subject of controversy between farmers , consumers and organizations promoting animal welfare .
I therefore think that the Commission might be able to embark on a codification of all legislation on the matter .
Many would see the importance of this .
It could come about in a codecision procedure with the European Parliament , as is the case with this directive .
Madam President , I have been able to note this week that not only does Mrs Poisson write a very good report , she can also write a good newsletter .
I am familiar with both .
Firstly , my group is looking forward to the fact that the proposal will collapse over the co-decision procedure .
We think it is extremely important that after the BSE crisis , this Parliament will have to deal in all kinds of areas with the food that people , consumers , consume daily within the European Union .
Like the rapporteur , we believe that the use of drugs , nutritional supplements , and so on , should under no circumstances become a habit in animal feeding .
Since the BSE crisis we have learnt how careful we should be with animal feed .
That is why we support the proposals of the Commission in principle , as well as the rapporteur 's amendments .
Yet , like the Christian Democrat Group , we have the gravest objection to the eight day period .
We find it difficult to insist for all eternity that a certain product can only be used for eight days .
When used under expert supervision , it might benefit the health of the animal if it is given for nine or ten days .
This should be possible , so in our opinion the eight day restriction should be removed .
I would like to make another remark on something quite different which does not relate to the proposal as such .
In Europe we are improving our standards .
We are making food healthier , we are making meat and animal products healthier .
But what happens to imports ?
What is the use of introducing strict conditions in Europe , whilst we import , under WTO rules , increasing amounts of products over which we have no control .
I would like to advise the Commission , when the occasion arises as part of WTO , or in any forum with America , to state that we as Europeans have every right to know what our food contains , and that we can demand this from the imports which end up on our table from other continents in the world .
This is a view which cannot be found in the Commission proposal , and which is not discussed in the report , but which our group believes does require attention .
Mr President , this is a question of food additives which are not medicaments .
These are not the main problem with regard to people 's health in the European Union .
The biggest problems are the use of hormones and antibiotics , the use of substances that are prohibited .
We cannot , however , fully rely on the chemical industry in this matter when , under the guise of added ingredients , they produce substances harmful to humans .
Whenever there are regulations people always try to get round them .
A good example of that is the use of asthma medicines at the Olympics : sportsmen and women appear to be severely asthmatic .
In exactly the same way it may be that some animals need added ingredients in accordance with the regulations .
I think we must therefore monitor the use of additives ; Mrs Poisson 's recommendations are far too wishy-washy .
The Commission is being more responsible in wishing to establish how these substances are being used .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased with the warm welcome which the Commission 's proposals .
Like any other product destined for animal consumption , nutritional supplements must be subject to strict regulation , with regard to the needs of the breeding sector .
Therefore , I would like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and in particular its rapporteur , Mrs Poisson , who has been rightly praised by various speakers for her constructive motion for a resolution as well as for the amendments she has proposed .
For the most part , the Commission agrees with the amendments proposed concerning the draft amendment of Directive 93 / 74 : Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 and 7 , aimed at strengthening and clarifying the proposed measures can be included in their entirety ; in the same way , Amendments Nos 1 and 6 can be approved , on the condition that a slight change is made to ensure that there is greater coherence between the provisions of the regulation concerned and some of the amendments which have been taken over .
In addition , the Commission can approve Amendments Nos 8 , 9 and 10 , aimed at simplifying the amendment of Directive 95 / 69 as regards the approval and registration of certain establishments and intermediaries operating in the animal feed sector .
The Commission cannot include Amendments Nos 11 and 12 which require a qualitative and quantitative declaration of the ingredients used in both dietetic feedingstuffs and the nutritional supplements given to animals .
As regards Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's speech , the Commission points out that it has already begun a study on the possibility of monitoring this declaration using analytic methods and , as promised , will inform Parliament of the results of this study as soon as they are available , as well as of its intentions in this area .

Finally , as regards Mr Mulder 's reference to the World Trade Organization , the Commission is opposed to those who would like more flexible regulations , and support the adoption of strict rules . We feel that this criterion should remain in place .
Madam President , can you ask the Commissioner if my statements , made in reference to the Commission 's statements , are correct ?
Then we need rather more clarification of the question .
The matter of the study is a completely different one .
This relates to the open declaration in the vase of feedingstuffs and we have agreed to wait for this study .
I want to know whether my statements are correct : then these amendments must be accepted .
This conclusion here is based on false statements by the Commission .
Madam President , I would like to point out that we believe the information presented by the Commission to be correct , but that we will complete our study in order to allow us to clarify any doubts that might exist .
In any case , the Commission 's position is clear , and Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf is now aware of it .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , that obviously cannot be clarified in the way you mean .
The discussion is closed .
The vote takes place today at 12.00 noon .
Impact of biotechnology on agriculture
The next item is the Report ( A4-0037 \ 98 ) by Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the impact of biotechnology on agriculture .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first of all , as the rapporteur in the Initiative Report on the impact of biotechnology on agriculture , to thank very sincerely all those who have helped me so magnificently in the work .
Every new technology conceals risks within itself but also promises advantages .
I am of the opinion that broad statements which only condemn or only glorify , are inappropriate .
Modern biotechnology , as a key technology of the 21st century will make a central contribution to feeding the global population .
Of great importance in this will be the need to treat the natural fundamentals of life in a manner which is caring and long lasting .
The use of bioand genetic technology brings advantages for agriculture .
A world population which is growing out of all proportion against a background of static-remaining areas for cultivation obliges us , across all party boundaries , not to shut ourselves off from the use of new technologies .
In all the work of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development this was the prevalent opinion .
Scientists are of the opinion that the use of biotechnology can make a contribution of 20-30 % of the supply of food .
Of course it always has to be borne in mind , that with any use of genetic-technologically modified organisms the principle must always apply that health and the environment must not be damaged in any way .
It makes no sense and is irresponsible to use this topic simply to stir up the fears of consumers .
Factually accurate information and enlightenment in the field of biotechnology and its applications should always be highly valued .
In my view , economic considerations , however important they may be , must never take priority over people 's health .
But the scepticism which prevails in Europe will not change the fact that this innovative technology is being used throughout the world .
To renounce biotechnology and gene technology would mean leaving this important sphere to our competitors on the world market .
European agriculture needs this technology as an essential means of improving its technical proficiency and the effects on the environment .
We must catch up as quickly as possible on the lead gained by countries outside Europe from the introduction of biotechnology so that the agricultural commodities market is not lost to world wide competition .
I therefore call in my report - and here I turn to the Commission - for the very rapid setting up of a legal framework , so that the consumer can decide what to buy on the basis of enlightenment and appropriate product labelling .
The comprehensive and risk-free realisation of the potential of bio-technology needs the best possible framework of control .
This must take into account the fact that we in Europe are making possible the innovative development of bio-technology which is at the same time aware of its responsibilities .
I also support an intensive , constructive and factual dialogue with the people about this new technology .
Bio-technology and its application together will fundamentally determine the development of agriculture .
Finally I would like to point out that in many spheres , but particularly in our capacity as politicians , we are not only responsible for what we do but also for what we do not do .
I would like once more to appeal to the Commissioner at the end of this discussion to tell us quite clearly how the Commission plans to proceed in this matter against the background of this Initiative Report .
Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate Mrs Keppelhoff for her work which , while being brief , is very serious and balanced and does not omit any of the fundamental points of the impact of biotechnology on the agricultural sector .
Her report is inspired by a positive view of the biotechnology and their potential for the agricultural sector .
I take note of it and agree with what it has to say .
A positive view is not an idyllic and illuminist view that ignores the problems .
On the contrary , I believe the report we are preparing to approve illustrates all these problems extremely clearly , including those of an ethical and moral nature that need to be faced by trying to provide a way of offering the consumer every guarantee and , at the same time , a favourable framework for the development of this sector , which has great potential for agriculture .
There are three aspects of interest to agriculture .
The first is environmental .
Using genetic techniques , we can reduce the use of plant protection products and chemical synthesis products and obtain considerable advantages in respect of greater ecocompatibility of the crops from the point of view both of pollution of the strata and of product safety .
The second aspect of interest is that of development of food products worldwide to face the problems of food safety resulting from the population increase .
As rightly observed by Mrs Keppelhoff , so far we have dealt with the increase in the arable and irrigated areas and the increase in production with the use of fertilizers and manure .
Today , the responsible use of biotechnology can enable the use of these to be stopped .
The third aspect is the development of biomass , as sources of renewable energy .
We know that the Commission is active in the sense , that work programmes and proposals exist that are aimed at this sector .
However , all these opportunities are not being developed in a consistent and painless manner , it cannot be a question of working shut up in a laboratory and then leaving it convinced that a miraculous solution had been found for everything .
Dialogue with the consumers is decisive and their attitude is of the utmost importance .
However , I have to admit that there has often been a great deal of joking , with thoughtlessness or improvisation , or because , as Mr Happart has suggested , the interest in consumer health has been sacrificed to financial and economic interests , and sometimes those opposed to biotechnology have aroused consumer concern in bad faith .
Europe cannot withdraw into a useless dispute between those in favour of and those against biotechnology .
The conditions are there for doing more than that !
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work on this report .
I would also like to compliment her on the very clear way in which this complicated and very emotive subject was discussed , not only in general terms but specifically in relation to environmentally-friendly and sustainable production , world food supplies , economic aspects and the future prospects for genetic engineering .
During earlier debates in this House I said the purpose of modern plant breeding is to improve quality and increase the resistance to disease while also increasing the yields of cultivated plants .
Genetic engineering makes it possible to achieve these aims more efficiently and in a much shorter time than by conventional propagation .
I agree with the views set out in the EU White Paper on growth , competitiveness and employment that biotechnology is one of the technologies which will determine the future of European competitiveness .
Unfortunately , surveys show that at this stage more than half of European citizens are opposed to the release and marketing of genetically modified foods .
I believe the vast majority holds this view because of the influence of scare stories and theories which are completely without scientific foundation .
The full benefits of biotechnology will not be manifest unless public trust and approval are first secured .
The only way this can be achieved is through continuous research to ensure absolute safety and maximum transparency in that research , including explanations to consumers of the technical details should they wish to avail themselves of them .
The compositional quality and indeed the bacteriological quality of foods are more accurately measured today than ever before .
Consumers can feel at ease that this technology , which is highly monitored and tightly regulated , will ensure that Europeans continue to be the best fed people in today 's world .
Madam President , I would firstly like to thank our colleague for her excellent report which reasserts the fact that biotechnology should come under a specific and individual programme within the Commission 's 5th Framework Programme .
It is important to point out that the European Union has already made significant efforts in research and the application of biotechnology in agriculture and the agro-food industry .
These efforts must therefore be maintained .
This report also underlines the economic importance of the introduction of biotechnological products in the field of agriculture , while pointing out that it is necessary to inform and educate the public effectively .
Modern agriculture will have to face up to the major challenge of providing for a world population which , according to forecasts , will double over the next 30 years , and this at a time when we are experiencing a global reduction in the amount of land available for cultivation .
Over the past 30 years , the productivity of agriculture has improved due , amongst other things , to a significant increase in the use of additional products such as protective agents and pesticides .
In the years to come , modern agriculture will have an additional challenge to face : respect for man and for the environment .
In order to maintain the competitiveness not only of agriculture but also of its related industries , it is important to supply it with the means necessary to participate in the game of world competition , particularly within the controlled framework of reducing Community aid to agriculture , as laid out in Agenda 2000 .
Biotechnology can provide solutions , but we obviously cannot accept them at any price .
Consequently , we must adapt the regulation system , which will have to accept a double challenge : it will need to be flexible enough not to hold up any initiatives in this field , and it will need to be rigid enough to respect both the primary principle , that is , consumers ' sanitary health and the principle of ethics .
In conclusion , if we allow this technological revolution to take place outside the boundaries of the Union , we will be left with many concerns for the future , not only for the economy , but also for European agriculture .
Therefore , the major challenges now are to encourage the use of biotechnology in creating an agricultural industry which is productive and durable and which respects man and the environment , to help companies involved in this field to become established within the Community and to continue efforts made in the areas of research and innovation .
In order to overcome these challenges , Europe must also ensure that its consumers are better informed and better educated and that they are reassured with accurate , scientificallyproven arguments .
Madam President , my group does not share the optimism with regard to the impact and benefits of gene technology .
We have major concerns with regard to the health of consumers and we have major concerns about the impact on the environment .
We hold the view that unlike the sphere of medicines , where possibly the side-effects of a product can be tolerated the sphere of food cannot tolerate any side effects .
As long as this is not guaranteed we must treat this technology with very great caution .
We do not share , Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert , the hopes you expressed with regard to feeding the world .
We must teach people how to run agriculture so that they have enough to eat .
The satisfying of people 's hunger will , in my view , not come from the key industries of gene technology .
In the matter of factually accurate information , this is exactly what we require and our amendments are aimed at obtaining this factual information from science , but also from the Commission .
For example , science has always told us that genetechnologically modified organisms would not transmit further , not skip generations .
However , we do have the case of the herbicide resistance of rape , where the generation skip to a weed took place , and I find that this contradicts the certainty which is being dangled in front of us .
We therefore demand first and foremost that science must create certainty in this matter o that we can move into this risk technology .
There does remain a ray of hope : the Commission will accept Parliament 's proposal and exclude the biosphere of gene technology .
We shall have a statutory regulation whereby bioproducts may not come into contact with gene technology . That urgently requires precise labelling of the use of gene technological processes in food .
I look forward to the conflict between these two areas and the competition in the positive sense .
Then we shall see which foods will be accepted by the people and I think that in the long term the bioline will be the line which secures the feeding of the world .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert 's excellent report on the application of biotechnology to agriculture seems to me , nevertheless , somewhat moderate given that it is a topic which is often the subject of heated debates .
However , we must recognize that it forms a good basis for discussion because Madame rapporteur has objectively presented us with the opportunities and challenges of biotechnology applied to agriculture .
Faced with expectations and with concern on the part of the public , we , the lawmakers , and the consumers outline what exactly is expected from these new technologies .
There is no doubt that the enormous potential that exists for developing biotechnology could lead us towards a new green revolution .
It is we who must decide what it will be like .
The image of the world farm providing for an overpopulated planet is more like a nightmare than paradise .
Although excessive concentration and specialization lead to an increase in productivity , which are important in the short-term , they also lead to more fragile surroundings and more vulnerable populations .
Can we imagine the dramatic effects we would see if a single seed which had become the only standard in the world became diseased ?
These choices are at odds with our convictions and with our European way of conceiving durable development .
The green revolution must be mastered rather than endured .
This means guiding agricultural policies so that they are based on the advantages their surroundings offer .
It also means that at an international level we must establish a coherent , legislative framework in order to avoid concentrating cultures and technologies in the hands of a few privileged people .
Rather than trying to provide for the world population from giant , highly specialized centres of production , we must ensure that these new technologies are made as widely available as possible .
The rules to be established at an international level must be based the highest levels of safety for man and for the environment , and aim to avoid the setting up of any sort of free zone fearing neither God nor man and permitting everything , particularly in terms of genetics , to the benefit of certain sorcerer 's apprentices greedy for profit .
Money is money after all !
My own belief is that biotechnology must not take over from nature , but should allow us to profit from its diversity on a longterm basis .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must take up a strong political stance and take action so that the WTO takes these demands into consideration .
For the good of public health and consumers it is the duty of the European Union to acknowledge that European agriculture is an exception . If we fail to do this , we will eventually have to find the political courage to reject unjust compromises in the future .
Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent report in a very difficult field .
Certainly developments in the field of biotechnology bring a tremendous challenge to the agricultural industry and beyond .
The question is whether we move with the new developments and new technologies or stand aside and allow others to set the pace .
I personally have to admit that I have terrible concerns about a lot of the new technologies and things that are happening now .
I would also like to ensure that we in Europe do not lose out if we say no .
That is the bottom line as far as we are concerned .
We must proceed with extreme caution .
There is a very clear concern in the mind of the consumer and , taking into consideration past events , I think one has to sympathize with that concern .
Consumers are sceptical and will require convincing that the legal framework that is put in place to control and act as the safeguard will ensure the most stringent monitoring of the new arrangements .
Whatever is put in place cannot be seen to be weak and lacking the ability to control the harmful aspects that might develop .
To this end we must make doubly sure that all genetically engineered food should be clearly labelled , in a transparent way , so that consumers can see what they are purchasing .
In this way there can be no ambiguity or reason for any concern in the mind of the consumer .
I have no problem in principle with the continued research and development in this field .
But , as I have said , we must have maximum transparency , control and full knowledge of the ultimate objectives .
As long as we are assisting society and the consumer , and not using and abusing technology to increase the profit margins of the major multinationals at the expense of consumer confidence , then I am prepared to give tentative support to current developments .
We must give a clear warning that any abuse of these new developing technologies by those involved will be dealt with in the most severe manner .
Although I have my reservations , I hope I am also realistic and it is that realism that forces me to give my qualified support at this time .
I feel I speak for many when I say that it cannot be taken for granted .
Madam President , the proposals before the House reflect the lessons that have been learned across Europe from the BSE crisis .
That crisis taught the value of caution where foodstuffs are concerned , especially as regards animals and meat eaten by human beings .
Everyone involved in this crisis has suffered : producers , consumers and the ancillary industries .
The proposals that we are talking about now are a necessary step , but this step has to be taken - as my colleague from Northern Ireland has said - with great caution .
There is a clear need to lay down a strict , enforceable framework of rules governing the nature of the products we are discussing .
Animal nutrition plays a crucial role in the human food chain , so this is a vital report .
Confidence is of the essence .
Without confidence in the standards of foodstuffs , the entire basis of our agricultural industry is put in jeopardy .
I would underscore again that extreme caution is needed in biotechnology .
It is high-risk and there are unknown risks which lie ahead .
Great care is essential .
I might add , in concluding , that the recent outbreak of BSE in the United Kingdom affected Northern Ireland .
Northern Ireland has been unfairly penalized by having all beef exports banned by this Union .
This was despite the very low incidence of BSE in the province and our excellent traceability system , which is better than anywhere else in the whole European Union .
The Commission has proposed a lifting of this ban in Northern Ireland .
We welcome that , but the standing veterinary committee seems to be engaged in delaying tactics .
I call on those Member States which , for political reasons , are continuing to block the lifting of the ban , to start looking at the objective , scientific evidence .
The beef ban for Northern Ireland is unjust and should be lifted immediately .
Any further delay would rightly be regarded as political .
As our beef industry is worth over £ 50 million per year , agriculture is our biggest industry .
The Commission has decided that the time for action is now , and I endorse this view .
Madam President , for the balanced and , above all , convincing report I would like to thank the rapporteur Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert .
I am sure that in future there will be much discussion of this subject .
The discussion on biotechnology is indeed usually a very controversial one and like many other Members I , too , see advantages and positive effects in this field .
Possibly the result will be an increase in jobs , but in spite of all this we should not be so blue-eyed as to see only the advantages .
There are certain risks .
I can only support the rapporteur explicitly when under point No 2 she demands an optimal control framework which includes the impact on the environment , on every single animal , on the health and well-being of people and all the ethical aspects .
Do we really know everything about the interaction of gene technologically modified organisms in the overall ecological system ?
How do we deal with waste and residual matter ?
Where does the residual risk end or where does the risk begin even ?
What is the long-term impact on the metabolic and other natural processes in the living organism ?
Anyone who has read the article about the Monsanto report " Green Gene Technology ' , Volume 39 of 9.2.98 , No.6 , learns there are only positive results and effects .
There do not appear to be any risks , or at least they are not mentioned .
There are obvious advantages , but precisely because of that the responsibility-awareness of all those involved must be alerted to the not least very profitable possibilities .
Therefore it can only support explicitly the announcement by the Commission in its proposed Amendment to Directive 90 \ 220 \ EEC that it will undertake a broad evaluation of the direct and indirect risks to human health and the environment .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is in the interests of the farmers and the consumers of the European Union to study critically the use of gene technology and to consider both the advantages and the risks .
The use of gene technology cannot be excluded out of hand , but we need clear rules and a clear administration .
It is a concern of all farmers that the confidence of the consumers is fostered and that can only be ensured , through the greatest possible transparency and unambiguous marking of food and animal feedstuffs which are produced by means of gene technological methods .
It would be wrong to negate these new developments , since in many parts of the world they are already being used professionally .
In my view it is nevertheless necessary to orientate the statutory framework conditions to the greatest possible extent to the needs of the consumers and the farmers .
An optimal framework of control must be created in order to make possible a biotechnological sphere which is aware of its responsibilities . In other words , we need a statutory framework which is efficient , quick and transparent and at the same time meets the requirements of the most comprehensive clarification possible of all safety questions .
For me the essential element in this context is the situation and management of imports from third countries .
I therefore demand that this is dealt with immediately .
A step by step procedure in the release of gene technology modified organisms is a necessary condition and we must not allow a general go-ahead to small and large-scale open experiments .
Each case must be tested separately , in the same way that our decisions here must be made .
At any rate there must be the greatest possible degree of safety and all questions about any procedural step must be clarified before a further stage in the development can take place .
I am against the general shortening of the testing periods .
I would like once more to emphasise how extremely important it is to ensure that when gene technologically modified organisms are used , neither the health of the people nor the environment is impaired .
Madam President , I wish to thank Mrs Keppelhoff for her work in bringing forward a report which represents a reasonable balance between the importance and potential of biotechnology in the development of agriculture and food production , on the one hand , and on the other the understandable concern of citizens about possible ethical implications , which is shared by all who wish to see technology developed for the benefit of mankind .
For farmers , who are the custodians of our land resource and responsible to society for guaranteeing food security and quality , it is of the utmost importance that the benefits of science and research are available and applied to this sector .
It is to the credit of those who manage our land resources that they have been at the forefront in the application of modern technology .
Hence the remarkable progress in agricultural production , in food quality and safety .
I am a supporter of the concept of sustainability and the development of renewable resources but I also live in the real world .
I am realistic enough to know that those who would keep agriculture in the dark ages have little to offer in the way of solutions to the threat of world hunger , a reality which future generations of farmers will be called on to address .
It must be borne in mind that the world 's productive land resource remains constant and much of it will not respond to established agricultural practices .
It is only through ongoing research , the application of new science , including safe and tested biotechnology , that the full potential of land resources can be harnessed for society .
We need , however , as other speakers have said , a balanced and sensible approach .
I fully share the view of those who have expressed concern with regard to the application of genetic engineering to humans which I strongly oppose .
It must also be acknowledged that biotechnology has made a significant contribution to the development of modern medicine .
Biotechnology is not a recent discovery , it has been applied , as the rapporteur has said , in varying degrees since 1970 .
There is now a greater understanding of its potential and benefits for mankind .
It is one of the key technologies of the twenty-first century and there is an obligation on us to use this in a careful and planned way .
As should be the case with the application of all new research , transparency and consumer information are important .
To this extent I fully support the case made by other speakers in this debate that labelling of all genetically modified food is important so that the consumer can make a choice .
Finally , I say to those who hold positions of influence in society and who , for their own good reasons , oppose the development of biotechnology , that they should be careful not to overstate or exaggerate their position .
The future of world agriculture , the profession of farming , the health of our citizens and employment in the food sector are dependent on the development of a sustainable agriculture based on the benefits of ongoing research and the application of carefully tested new technology .
Madam President , some interesting things can be learned from the latest Eurobarometer on Biotechnology .
It appears , for instance , that the European citizen feels less optimistic about biotechnology , whilst his knowledge of modern biotechnology has in fact increased .
The interviewees on the whole have little faith in their governments , as these restrict themselves to a risk analysis of new products for the safety of humans and animals .
The general opinion is that governments should pay much more attention to the ethical aspects of biotechnology .
I do not wish to play down the positive aspects of gene technology , but I do wish to remind the national governments and the European Commission of their responsibility .
Government must curb man 's laxity .
Legislators have the responsibility to indicate clearly which limits should be observed .
An essential part of this is a thorough deliberation of the values and standards against which new techniques are tested .
The Bible teaches us that in nature we are dealing with God 's creation .
The Biblical concept of custodianship is therefore a central factor for me .
It means we should build and maintain .
Only if we use creation as God intended , is it able to serve man .
Plants and animals must not be degraded to production factor , which can be manipulated to our heart 's content .
If no thorough deliberation of the limits of biotechnology is initiated , I fear we will be relinquishing control to research and our trade partners .
I therefore cannot support the plea in the Keppelhoff report for the harmonization of European testing legislation with those of Japan and the United States .
It is to be expected , of course , that technological companies will locate in countries with the most flexible preconditions .
The fact that 27 out of 43 registered products are in the name of the United States says something about the ease with which they handle such techniques .
But that should be no reason for Europe to opt for a less careful testing procedure .
Madam President , gene technological manipulation has nothing whatsoever to do with conquering world hunger .
We can only combat global hunger by offering those countries in which it prevails fair social development possibilities .
Sociologically it has long since been proved that there is a close connection between the population explosion and social emergency .
To use population growth as an argument in favour of the need for gene technologically manipulated foods is a pure and simple deception .
The same applies to the assertion that gene technological manipulation enables us to reduce the use of fertilizers .
I regard as particularly questionable Point 16 of the report which declares cross-frontier open experiments to be appropriate .
The promotion of communication for gene technological manipulation must also involve promoting the communication of information about the dangers of gene manipulation .
Madam President , I also wish to thank Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert for her own-initiative report on the impact of biotechnology on agriculture , which sets out in a very balanced way the opportunities and risks presented by the rapidly expanding development of biotechnological processes .
There are huge vested interests involved .
A number of large multinational companies are investing heavily in biotechnology , developing products which could be of great value to the human race , particularly in helping raise agricultural output and thereby tackling food shortages in parts of the world where they exist .
All too often , however , the aim is to establish a monopoly position over important market sectors to maximize profits , and the poorest farmers in the world are either further impoverished or put out of business completely .
Of course , companies need to make profits to survive , and many jobs are provided by the biotechnological industries .
However , as previous speakers have pointed out , these profits should be made within a basic ethical and regulatory framework to ensure that new biotechnological products are beneficial , rather than harmful , to the health of human beings and other living creatures , and also to the wider environment .
Governments and the Commission of the European Union have a role to play in encouraging beneficial application of biotechnological products by supporting research , basic research , which is independent of commercial concerns and has at its prime purpose the discovery of biotechnological applications which really will benefit the world rather than company profits .
It worries me greatly that agricultural and horticultural research organizations and university departments which used to be publicly funded are now increasingly reliant on multinational companies for their finance and are thereby prevented from pursuing basic biotechnological research , independent of the need to make a rapid financial return .
Commercial concerns should not be allowed to dominate this vital area totally .
Madam President , today , world food problems are more complex than they were twenty or thirty years ago , in terms of volume of production in some parts of the world , such as like Africa and Asia , or of quality , as in the case of the European Union .
Biotechnology has been able to offer solutions to these various situations , creating varieties with higher yields and others that are disease-resistant , and by reducing the use of chemical products which are usually harmful to the environment .
As our rapporteur suggests , the time has come to end the demagogic vilification of biotechnology and genetic engineering , because these techniques can in fact provide consumers with supplies of adequate quantity and quality and protect environmental quality .
Moreover , if the European Union does not use these technical and scientific resources , it will find it quite impossible to respond to increasing world demand for food , for which it must contend with the major exporting powers .
For European agriculture not to use these techniques which are employed by its main competitors would be like taking part in a bicycle race against competitors driving cars .
We cannot , therefore , be afraid of using biotechnology and genetic engineering , although we must be realistic , disciplined and cautious .
Consequently , the European Union should draw up a clear and operational legal framework that covers such important issues as the environmental impact of these new products , their effects on human health and on the well-being of animals and , of course , the compliance with previously-defined ethical standards .
Finally , I would like to say how important it is that the next round of GATT should include clear rules in this regard , without which unacceptable distortions of trade could well be created .
I would like to thank Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert for her excellent work .
This is a very sensible and balanced report which will be extremely useful to the European Union .
Madam President , with the problem and the report by Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert , we are getting into the myths of Prometheus or Demeter , and it is true that biotechnologies will go through both good times and bad .
Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert rightly informs us that through this technology we can obtain a whole range of modified plants ( potatoes , soya , rice , cotton , rice , tobacco , etc . ) , that 32 million hectares have already been cultivated , that 6 , 000 experiments have already been conducted and that there have been positive results .
We can fight against viral diseases in sugar beet , the European corn borer , fungus on potatoes which can lower harvests by 20 % and we are even building plant factories .
So we have brought about the third industrial revolution whereby the mylolepine in potatoes has increased adhesive capacity , gene technology allows an increase in the content of oleic acid in oilseed rape , we can manufacture detergents , lacquers and cooling liquids and we even have larger fish and transgenic poplars which produce more wood .
Finally , the dream of having heaven on earth is to become a reality .
However , there are still risks involved .
Firstly , there is trickery involved in the terminology .
The word " bio ' is a favourable word and the word " techno ' reminds us of a sort of natural music which would be modified .
As soon as the words " techno ' or " bio ' are used , young people are likely to be supportive .
In addition , there is a contradiction : a contradiction between fallow land and the genetically modified organisms .
We cannot use the fallow land because of world overproduction and then produce GMOs in order to fight hunger , since , if there is a hunger problem , we might as well recultivate the fallow land !
There is also a contradiction between the GMOs and the MGQs , because we cannot increase the yield of oilseed rape and then have maximum guaranteed quantities under the GATT for rape if we do not have enough .
There is obviously a very real risk from the multinational monopolies seized by Novartis , Cargyll or Monsanto , since these multinationals in the Arizona desert have stockpiled more than six million plants for which they possess the patent .
Resistance to antibiotics has been discussed .
My colleagues have not seen any mechanical factors , or dare I say quantum factors , which are much more dangerous and which involve the molecular composition of plants .
All plants and all life are made up of four sugar sticks : ATCN .
This is the elementary alphabet and this alphabet vibrates in quantum mechanics .
Changing one of the elements of this molecular composition is the same as changing the atomic vibration of the plant , and we do not know what the consequences of this would be .
There is therefore a risk involved in the great universal harmony and the great universal division ; there is the risk of a false , yet to be found , molecular note .
In other words , the " mad-cow ' lesson seems to have been forgotten .
I believe that Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert is right : we must not work against progress .
However , time is not yet running out !
There could be at least a moratorium before there is widespread dissemination !
Labelling is still an illusion .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must find a balance , an ancient balance which comes from Greek mythology , between the need for progress and the need to respect natural harmonies , because life is beautiful and we should not play with it !
Madam President , the principles of a computer are actually quite simple .
Basically it is a question of adding zeros and ones .
The mechanical adding machines of the 1800s were actually far more complicated , but because computers can add up so quickly , they can carry out infinitely more tasks that the adding machines of the 1800s could do .
As we all know , computers have opened up entirely new areas for mankind and science .
Biotechnology is old in the sense that for many hundreds of years we have deliberately changed the genetic make up of animals and plants .
However , this relates to the old methods in the same way that computers relate to the old adding machines .
Biotechnology is opening up entirely new possibilities , partly through its speed in creating new species , and partly through making combinations possible which nature herself cannot create .
At the university I come from , for example , people are working on using genes from fish which are implanted into trees to get the trees to grow faster .
With these words I would like , apart from thanking the rapporteur for an excellent piece of work , to underline the importance of always putting the principle of caution first .
Modern biotechnology makes it possible to manipulate nature in ways people could not do in the past .
In these new areas we must move with great caution .
Nature can hit back !
Madam President , we have received reports about which we can be pleased and Mrs KeppelhoffWiechert has written a report which has a great future , which deals with a very responsible subject and is very ambitious .
I believe that food technology and in particular biotechnology have enormous influence on the people who sell food , on innkeepers and consumers .
Mrs Schierhuber has already referred to the fact that we need a good legal framework which makes it possible to produce these products without risk .
Labelling is a very important topic and I believe there is also a consensus here that marking must take place .
In principle we must say that there is no such thing as gene-free food .
In every food we consume there are genes and when today we eat various foods - vegetable , fruit , milk or meat - then these genes come together in our stomach and are digested there .
We also know that from foods which are made on a purely biological basis many illnesses can occur .
Dr Flande has shown in his latest book that food allergies can trigger off problems such as migraine , neuro-dermatitis , fungal infections , colds , asthma , chronic tiredness , obesity , itching , swelling , palpitation - all due to perfectly naturally produced foods .
We must see to it that we find foods with which we have a chance of remaining healthy .
That is an important task in which agriculture , the food distributors and ultimately the consumers must cooperate in order to be able to remain healthy in their old age .
Madam President , genetically modified food is on the agenda once again .
This is about food which is processed not by old-fashioned methods but by changing the inherited basic characteristics of vegetables , for instance .
The results can be apples which do not turn red and types of corn which do not need so many insecticides .
Seen in environmental terms , it is essential that there should be research into biotechnology , because this may also allow us to reduce our use of insecticides .
But there is also some reason to believe that this technology will not solve all our problems .
There is also some reason to stop and think about whether this technology might at some point not go beyond the limits of what is ethical and correct .
Are we fully in control of the consequences of what happens if we alter foods so drastically ?
Labelling of foods containing genetically modified products is therefore essential .
It is important that consumers themselves should be able to decide whether they want to eat these products .
Consumers have the right to know what production methods are used , not just for square bananas and blue tomatoes , but also for natural products and the ingredients which go into them .
I therefore welcome this initiative .
The report recognizes that genetic engineering is a tool which can have both positive and negative effects , so we need proper legislation in this field to protect consumers against the adverse effects of this new technology .
Finally , I would like to emphasize once more that it is essential to mark these new products so that consumers themselves can decide what they want to eat .
Here in the European Parliament , we have passed a proposal that ecological products must not contain any genetically modified organisms .
This would guarantee consumers products which are produced in a healthy , environmentally friendly manner .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes the initiative taken by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to present this excellent report on biotechnology to the European Parliament , and I would particularly like to thank Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert who has laid out so clearly the challenges that this new technology presents to the world of agriculture .
Despite everything said by its critics , biotechnology is now a reality which we cannot avoid . To surrender to it would mean that Europe would experience an accelerated loss of competitiveness , to the advantage of the great economic powers who have understood very well over the last decade the benefits they can obtain through exploiting the enormous possibilities offered by this new science .
As the report rightly points out , European agriculture must show itself to be less conservative and must take advantage of this new technology , since its many different applications would allow Europe to face up to the constant impoverishment of its natural resources and the continuous rise in its population 's needs .
Since the beginning of this decade , the Commission has shown that it is clearly in favour of biotechnology through the creation of a regulation framework for genetic engineering .
The adoption of Directives 90 / 219 and 90 / 220 on genetically modified organisms reflects our Institution 's constant desire to welcome innovation , while at the same time endeavouring to control it in order to better protect the environment and the population .
I have noted with much interest that the Commission 's attitude towards biotechnology is shared by those responsible for the report , who advocate a style of agricultural production which is open to this new technology , as long as it respects the environment .
I also share the opinion that considerable efforts should be made to provide consumers with information about genetically modified foodstuffs .
The reservations still currently felt by many consumers towards genetically modified foodstuffs and agricultural products will only change through objective dialogue and accurate information .
In my view , the only way to change fixed , negative attitudes regarding genetic engineering is through total transparency on the labelling of transgenic products which then allows the consumer to choose freely .
In relation to the question raised by Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert , I would like to say that I have read very carefully the recommendations put to the Commission and I can already tell her that some of these are about to implemented .
The Commission will soon submit new proposals for a more adequate regulation on genetic engineering and an improvement in the procedure set out in Directive 90 / 220 for the authorization of established genetic organisms .
In addition , with the aim of perfecting the existing regulation , the Commission , probably during this first semester , will submit a proposal concerning the raw materials destined for the animal feed sector that have been genetically modified .
I can assure you that the Commission will study with extreme care all the recommendations set out in this report , as well as those presented orally here this morning , with specific questions , and it will endeavour to take them into account in its future proposals .
Madam President , I have no questions but I would like to sum up by saying thank you .
Time has moved on .
Most speakers have expressed themselves very positively indeed .
I hope that this is reflected at 12.00 in the vote .
I just wanted once more to reply to those who keep saying that it does not help the people in the developing countries .
Only yesterday afternoon we had a broad discussion here in the chamber in which the scientist Dr Klaus Amann refuted that very argument .
So , for example , in cooperation with research bodies in Europe and with organizations in the Philippines types of rice are being developed which promise the people there a better future .
To that extent I must again , being logical , reject it .
I must also say that for me ecological agriculture and gene technological do not represent a contradiction .
Thank you very much for all your work !
Thank you , Madam Rapporteur .
The discussion is now closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 noon .
Confidence in electronic means of payment
The next item is the Report ( A4-0028 \ 98 ) by Mrs Thors on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament , the Council , the European Monetary Institute and the Economic and Social Committee : " Boosting customers ' confidence in electronic means of payment in the single market ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0353-C4-0486 \ 97 ) .
Madam President , I am pleased to see that you , Madam President , are a true friend of Finnish jewellery .
This report is part of a long series of initiatives which the Commission has already taken and will continue to take in order that we shall eventually have a set of rules to apply to the numerous new means and methods of payment which are being rapidly introduced .
During the suppliers ' strike in Brussels we had practical experience of what living in a society free of notes and coins is really like .
The euro is just around the corner and we have these new means of payment whose limitations not even we are aware of .
Central banks will no longer regulate the money supply .
I think it is time for us to prepare ourselves , because the new situation will be very different .
We need to be prepared with a set of rules , but we should not legislate unnecessarily .
The communication which we are now discussing and the recommendation which it contains are not particularly dramatic .
It is a minor modernization of a ten-year-old recommendation which actually has minimum requirements for terms of agreements and legislation in the Member States .
It will be more exciting this spring , I expect , and we hope that we shall soon have a proposal from the Commission concerning when , where , how and whether we should supervise those who have the right to provide means of payment .
Although I am a very experienced user of the new means of payment , and although I often make my payments by Internet , it is still unclear to me whether this recommendation is about that .
We have also noticed that the Economic and Social Committee was very critical of the definitions in the recommendations .
If recommendations which are supposed to increase consumer confidence are unclear , that is worrying .
We have no need for unintelligible language in this matter .
On the other hand , I would like to express my appreciation of the fact that in the recommendation the Commission says that the terms of agreements should be in a clearer language .
Unfortunately , the recommendation has still not realized that several of the Member States are bilingual , because it refers to the official languages of the Member States .
Something which I also consider to be important , and which we stress in the report , is that all customers should have access to the terms applicable to the means of payment they are going to use .
It is far too common to just have framework conditions ; the small print is somewhere else , and the consumer is not really shown what the agreement will entail .
I hope that the Commission will be strict and will monitor how the recommendation works .
In addition , we know that flaws in this area include the fact that sometimes there is a lack of effective procedures to compensate consumers , that there is a lack of clarity about liability for theft , that the rules on the burden of proof are unclear , i.e. who must prove what , and that the position of customers in bankruptcies can be vague .
We should also be aware that when new means of payment are introduced , a long time may elapse before consumers become aware of the new problems which can arise .
Instead of somebody stealing your card , it could happen that someone breaks your code or spies on you when you use it .
It takes longer before you discover this loss .
I think this problem requires new consideration by all of us .
I must also say that a few weeks ago we had an unfortunate example of what happens when there is a lack of clarity about means of payment .
Here I refer to the payment card VISA Electron .
It appears that the issuers of this card did not follow the principles in the recommendation , and in particular Article 8.1 b .
And so to the future timetable . During 1998 the Commission shall monitor what happens .
I hope that this will be done in a more active way than with the previous recommendation , when a very mechanical study was carried out .
I hope the Commission will invite consumers and issuers of cards to a round table conference , so that people can go through problems and see how things work in reality , and that the Commission will also be prepared to always have a line always open for feedback from the consumers .
In that way we shall get a speedier and proper understanding of how the recommendation is working .
Madam President , I would like to add my voice to that of Mr Martin on behalf of the Socialist Group , in praising the rapporteur for a very thorough and , on the whole , uncontroversial job on a very important subject .
As has already been pointed out both by the rapporteur herself and by Mr Martin , this is a consumer protection issue , an area in which we should all be concerned to protect the interests of our constituents and citizens .
There is only one amendment to Mrs Thors ' report in the name of my group .
It was an amendment which I put down in committee .
Because Mrs Thors , as rapporteur , was unhappy with it - she considered that it did not have much relevance in that particular context - I withdrew it before it was put to the vote , largely because I sit at the front of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and I could not see what was going on behind me .
I understand that my amendment would have been passed had I put it to the vote .
I would like to ask , in this instance , that all other groups in the House support that amendment , which is designed to ensure that where a partner to a financial transaction goes bankrupt , the consumer does not suffer any loss as a result .
I understand , from the rapporteur , that she may well be prepared to leave the decision to the wisdom of the House .
She is nodding , so I take that to be the case .
I hope that all the other groups , today , will be able to support the PPE amendment .
That is all I need to say at this stage on behalf of the PPE .
We shall support this proposal wholeheartedly .
Once again , many congratulations to the rapporteur .
We shall now interrupt the discussion so that the vote can start punctually .
The discussion on this item of the Agenda will continue this evening at 6.00 p.m.
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I am pleased to welcome a delegation of seven Members of the Swiss Parliament , headed by Mr Peter Biere , seated in the official gallery .
The delegation has come to Strasbourg to meet the members of the delegation from the European Parliament on the occasion of the 17th European Parliament-Swiss Parliament interparliamentary meeting .
Several meetings have taken place , yesterday and today , and topics such as the enlargement of the European Union , the forecasts for European Monetary Union , the bilateral negotiations between the European Union and Switzerland , the prospects of a common foreign and security policy and future relations were discussed amongst others .
I hope that the discussions have been productive for the delegation and that they have had a pleasant stay in Strasbourg .
Mr Kerr wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , on a point of order .
At the outset of the sitting this morning Mr Alex Smith raised the question of a letter which Mr Coates and I had sent out concerning the vote on the debate today .
The letter was intended to draw attention to Amendment No 12 tabled by the Green Group , asking him to vote against the war .
But Mr Smith was offended by the letter , so I withdraw the letter today and apologize to Mr Smith .
Votes
Mr President , according to the correspondence , implementation measures and rules we have received from the Bureau , could you please note my presence in the Chamber .
Mr President , pursuant to the rules brought in by the Bureau , I wish to put on record that I am present but did not partake in the vote .
Mr President , could I again have my presence noted in the Chamber ?
Very well , Mr Falconer .
( Through successive votes , Parliament adopted the two legislative resolutions )
Mr President , as regards Amendments Nos 11 and 12 , the Commission would like to make the following statement : in terms of the composition of feedingstuffs , the Commission wants to point out that current legislation lays down that all ingredients used must be declared in order of importance , but without any indication of their respective quantities .
In this respect , the Commission is carrying out a survey in order to see if it is technically possible to include not only the ingredients in their order of importance , but also an indication of their respective quantities .
Mr President , after this declaration by the Commission we must ask the rapporteur if she still has reservations about the matter .
For now , both our amendments make sense because they demand that the percentage share must be indicated .
Hitherto this was disputed by the Commission .
After this statement it is clear that our amendments are appropriate .
Mrs Poisson , could you let us know if you accept the amendments ?
Mr President , I wanted to reply to Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
I am not sure that the amendments he is proposing in any way provide more clarification .
Therefore , I am still sceptical about them .
Thank you very much , Mrs Poisson .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , in Article 11 the following technical amendment is necessary : a new , correct figure was inserted , but the old figure of ECU 3.3 billion was left in by mistake .
For the sake of correctness it must now be deleted , since it is the figure of 2.5 billion .
I also request the insertion , after " by the year end 1996 ' of " in the context of the EFRD ' , so that this sentence now reads " Criticizes emphatically the state of affairs whereby by the year end 1996 in the context of the EFRD , funds still need to be carried through from the period before 1994 amounting to ECU 2.5 billion ' , etc .
This is not a substantial alteration but a purely technical one .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , can my presence in the Chamber be noted .
I would simply like to point out that when a Member has shown that he does not want to take part in a vote , but has established that he is in the hemicycle , the Bureau will obviously take this into account for the following roll-call votes .
Mr President , that was a very important statement .
According to the interpreter you said that my presence would be recorded at all future roll-call votes .
That is not correct .
I participated in the Iraq roll-call votes and in the human rights roll-call votes .
Hopefully you will note my presence in the Chamber only when I indicate that I wish it to be noted .
On occasion I may wish to exercise my right to record my vote .
Very well , Mr Falconer .
Most of the Members prefer not to have to rise each time .
It is logical that if they do this is taken into account during the rest of the voting .
But if you would prefer to rise , then we will take note of this each time it happens and only then .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Those of us concerned with environmental matters know that landfills are an unacceptable method of eliminating waste , especially if we are looking for viable solutions .
For this reason , this Parliament rejected the common position in 1996 .
The new proposal sets out both clearer and stricter criteria which integrate some new elements into the process of eliminating waste : reduction , pre-treatment , control of methane gas emissions , recycling and recovery , etc .
This new regulation will provide for the closure of illegal landfills and the improvement of existing ones without necessarily having to resort to incineration .
It will oblige the Member States to draw up a national strategy aimed at reducing biodegradable waste by 50 % by the year 2005 and to ensure that only pre-treated waste , with the exception of inert material , is deposited in landfills .
There is no doubt that costs will be incurred in fulfilling these requirements and that a tax will have to be imposed on waste destined for landfills .
It would have been logical for the Commission , when presenting this Directive , to have included a financial estimate of the costs involved in implementing it .
However , it is a step in the right direction and will receive my vote .
We must take note of the long delay before the Commission 's re-introduction of its proposal to establish Community laws governing the hygienic burial of waste , granted the importance of the problem for the protection of the environment , the conservation of and respect for the ecosystem , and for the protection of our citizens ' health and quality of life .
However , the Commission 's new proposal , after the important changes it underwent thanks to the European Parliament 's decisive intervention and to the addition of new elements , is clearly along more positive lines than the initial draft .
For one thing , there is a smaller number of exceptions in its field of application , and less scope for the deviations that made it substantially ineffectual - if not burdensome - for exactly those regions which are supposedly facing particularly acute problems .
It is positive that the proposal finally includes the fact that along with the establishment of high standards for hygienic burial , there should clearly be an impetus towards preventing the production of waste , towards alternative waste management methods such as recycling and other ways of recovering materials , and against combustion and other ways of recovering energy which burden the environment .
This a very important improvement because it establishes the clear priority of recycling and composting as opposed to combustion , pyrolysis or gasification .
We must , however , draw the Commission 's attention to the need to adopt all the measures required to ensure that extensions of the transitional period will be granted for adaptation and modernization of existing landfills so that those extensions will have a constructive effect , and to ensure that there are no delays with adverse results for the environments ' viability and people 's health , so that all the prerequisites are secured for the best possible organization and support of the programme .
To achieve such a target , as much account as possible must be taken of local environmental needs , geological and hydrological conditions , and the solutions adopted must be individualized and adapted as much as possible towards achieving the best overall results in each particular area .
The problem of waste is a result of the lifestyle and throw-away mentality which a majority of the inhabitants of the industrial world have today .
That is why the issue of waste has become more and more alarming .
I therefore have great sympathy for the proposals which the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has put forward , demanding tough measures , partly to reduce the waste mountain through more recycling , and partly to ensure that what is dumped has a minimal environmental impact .
However , I am not sure that the question should be decided at the EU level .
Since the question does not concern environmentally dangerous waste , but just waste , it should still be a question for the national Member States to decide .
At the same time I am aware , however , that the rules which already exist at EU level are not being complied with to the desired extent which is very regrettable .
It would therefore be best to have minimum rules in the area of waste , so that individual countries can introduce tougher rules if they so wish .
I think , of course , that the EU should do all in its power to encourage the Member States to get to grips with this issue .
The proposal from the Committee on the Environment should without doubt form the basis for implementation at Member State level .
Through measures which encourage recycling and the minimum creation of waste , the waste mountain can be reduced , which is necessary .
Naturally , I think the question of environmentally dangerous waste should remain subject to international rules in future .
We have decided to support the Jackson report , as we believe its basic views are well-considered and sensible .
But we would like to point out that it contains a serious weakness : in its proposed amendments to the Council Directive ( COM ( 97 ) 105 ) , it does make any provision for Member States to be able to put a brake on the transport of waste across national borders .
It will still be lawful to treat waste as a commodity which enjoys free movement within the single European market .
In effect , this prevents parliaments in Member States from passing stricter national rules for handling waste .
Those who produce the waste will still be able to choose the ' cheapest ' solution if their national parliament decides to go further than the EU 's minimum rules and send their waste products to an EU Member State which only applies EU rules .
So , although in formal terms it is a minimum directive , the Directive should in fact be regarded as a maximum directive .
This report offers constructive proposals for the regulation of the landfill of waste .
Landfill can be a useful means for the disposal of waste but it must be properly regulated in order to avoid water , soil and air pollution .
In Northern Ireland we have had recent experience of the problem .
It was planned to locate a landfill waste disposal sit next to a lough of scientific interest even though it was believed that substance listed under current EU legislation would be discharged into the lough .
Fortunately the matter went to a public inquiry which ruled against the application .
However , it did highlight the problem of unsatisfactory regulation .
Part of the problem appeared to lie in poor implementation of legislation at national level .
I trust that national governments will do more in future to implement EU legislation in this regard .
Indeed , I would argue that national governments should be taking the initiative .
In regard to the disposal of tyres through landfill , there should be an exemption made for large tyres such as tractor tyres .
These can actually be of some use in landfill and are difficult to dispose of by other environmentally friendly means .
I must congratulate Mrs Jackson on her report on the European Commission 's proposal on the landfill of waste which has just been considered during first reading .
I would like to remind you that this current proposal for a Directive is actually the European Commission 's second attempt .
In fact , the common position adopted by the Council had been considered much too lax , particularly due to the numerous derogations it provided for , our Chamber rejected the proposal during the second reading , at the part-session in May 1996 .
I am glad that this new proposal incorporates much more precise and rigorous criteria as regards the derogations to the Directive 's field of application as well as some new elements , such as the pre-treatment of waste before sending it to landfills , a ban on the joint-disposal of dangerous and non-dangerous waste , etc ...
These new elements will undoubtably contribute to the application of higher standards in the elimination of waste throughout the European Union .
The work carried out by the rapporteur in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection is nevertheless important .
Some of the amendments provide necessary clarification , particularly as regards responsibility during and after the exploitation of sites .
I therefore support this report and sincerely hope that the European Commission will be able to respond favourably to the amendments that Parliament has just adopted .
Grosch report ( A4-0018 / 98 )
With the proposal for a directive we are considering , the Commission is trying to establish uniform specifications in respect of safety requirements and the professional competence of cabin crews in civil aviation .
That issue , however , is only one aspect of the more general problem of air safety . Others include the competence of the flight cabin crew , the technical specifications and maintenance requirements for aircraft , the safety policy and priorities of the air carrier , the rescue equipment available , the work rules and labour policy applied ( which neither the proposal nor the report mentions at all ) , etcetera .
From that standpoint the EU , with its policy of liberalization and the prevalence of full competition in air transport , combined with the world-wide opening of the markets after the GATT agreement , is in practice undermining the safety of flights , while the headlong race to maximize profits and cut operating expenses in every possible way has a high cost in human lives , as is proved by the worrying increase in the frequency of air accidents .
A basic prerequisite for safety is to employ permanent flight crews .
The special nature of their duties must preclude the use of seasonal or part-time crews , which inevitably cannot offer the requisite guarantee of adequate training and experience .
That , too , is something we are worried about , since we are witnessing procedures in which collective agreements are being broken and flexible labour relations are being imposed , as shown by the recent amendment passed by the Greek Government concerning Public Corporations and Organizations , and the plans to make Olympic Airways ' healthier ' .
We agree with the establishment of a minimum training level , and consider it necessary that aircrews should undergo periodic training whenever they are to transfer to a different type of aircraft ( this training being regarded as working time ) , to be concluded by appropriate testing for the renewal or award of a new certificate .
However , the responsibility for the programme and the assessment and awarding of the training certificate must lie with the Civil Aviation Authority in each state .
We oppose the concession of training in a field of particular public interest to private or other ' approved ' bodies , which are difficult to monitor in practice and can easily be drawn into competition .
Subject to that precondition , the principle of reciprocal ' attestation of professional training ' recognition which would guarantee that appropriate training had been given and the necessary requirements had been satisfied , would be a positive factor .
Owing to the strict health requirements which cabin crews must satisfy , they must undergo special annual medical examinations explicitly defined at EU level , confirmed by the issuing of a medical certificate guaranteeing that they are capable of doing their work .
In the event of a health problem ( defined homogeneously throughout the EU ) the crew member must be re-assigned as ground crew .
No provision has been made for monitoring the implementation of the directive .
We consider that monitoring should be carried out by a single independent authority to check requirements related to the cabin crews of all air carriers operating in the EU , without exception .
Infringements should result in sanctions amounting if necessary to the suspension or revocation of the operating licence .
The same requirements should apply to air carriers of third countries to the extent that they operate flights within the EU .
Le Rachinel report ( A4-0014 / 98 )
We have abstained from voting because we are opponents of centrally imposed EU labels and see this as a step in that direction .
We think the explanatory statement , which refers to a 1998 European Parliament resolution which demanded that the European flag should be on vehicle number plates ' in order to increase the citizens ' awareness of Europe ' , partly confirms this , and is absurd .
I am glad that , for once , the European institutions are taking up an idea which comes from the smallest country in the European Community .
In fact , in 1985 , Grand Duke Jean suggested to his Minister for Transport at the time that he design a European registration plate for cars registered in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg .
In response to this suggestion , two proposals were submitted to the government : one which corresponds to the Commission 's proposal and the other which , in the interest of European unity , does not incorporate any distinctive national sign .
The latter was approved by the Luxembourg government and , after a change in the highway code , introduced as the official plate for Luxembourg cars .
Since some European countries do not want to abandon a national sign on their registration plates , there should be no problem if the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg accepts the Commission 's proposal or if Luxembourg cars also have a registration plate with an L in the middle of 12 stars on a blue background .
It will then be up to the Commission to find a way to ensure that this European initiative is recognized in the other countries , which still want to keep a distinctive , white , oval sign for the different countries .
I also believe that , now that European membership is clearly indicated externally , we should get rid of other registration plates such as the green or blue plates that we see from time to time , and why not have registration plates that show we are officials of the European institutions ?
Poisson report ( A4-0020 / 98 )
On behalf of the Danish Social Democrats , I have tabled an amendment to the report on foods for special nutritional purposes .
This amendment , which the committee has adopted , says that these kinds of foods which are given temporarily to meet specific animal requirements must not under any circumstances contain antibiotic growth agents .
This amendment is an important step towards guaranteeing consumers healthier foods .
In matters like this , the EU should be out in front in world terms , so that consumers can feel secure about the foods they eat .
The reports received on the possible implications for health are far too serious to ignore .
There is a risk that people will become resistant to important drugs if they eat products treated with growth promoting agents .
It is also a recognizedd fact that if farmers ensure good stall hygiene , using growth agents is totally unnecessary .
This is an important step in the right direction towards imposing a ban on using antibiotic growth agents in connection with foods for special nutritional purposes .
Producers should not be able to use such substances as part of temporary additives to animal feed .
The WTO recommends that all growth promotors should be banned .
I therefore call on the Commission to support this amendment , and at the same time I demand that the Commission conduct a risk analysis into all antibiotic growth promotors .
Saying no to the use of antibiotic growth promoters in this context will hopefully open the way for us to obtain a general ban in the EU on using these toxic substances in the long run .
Berend report ( A4-0016 / 98 )
Mr President , I have voted in favour of this report although the parts containing the evaluation of the grants appear to be too slight .
Nevertheless I consider the report to be justified and voted positively .
The report emphasizes that under-implementation of the Structural Funds is mainly due to incomplete planning and the administrative fragmentation to which they are subject .
We support the rapporteur in welcoming the concentration , simplification and reduction in the number of forms of intervention proposed by the Commission in Agenda 2000 .
However , this simplification should not lead to a reduction in regional aid to Sweden ( also in view of the fact that Sweden is one of the largest net contributors to the EU 's budget ) , particularly to the Objective 6 area .
On the other hand , we cannot support the content of paragraphs 32 and 38 , which involve trying to avoid any repayment to the Member States .
A reform of structural funds is currently under debate within the framework of a timetable which provides for a new plan from the year 2000 .
It is natural and normal , given the experiences of the 89-94 and 94-99 plans , to reconsider the criteria and conditions of application of these structural funds and I agree with the demands for more transparency , coherence , decentralization and precision .
I am concerned about the risk of a reform which would in fact be designed to face up to the consequences of the Union 's enlargement and the budgetary austerity of the Member States , in helping the new Member States from Eastern Europe , without sufficiently increasing the European budgets .
Since I represent a region which has benefited from having Objective 1 status since 1994 and Objective 2 status since 1989 , I know the importance of such aid . There would be dramatic consequences if this aid were to brutally disappear .
We certainly need new criteria but only on the condition that they are aimed at improving the new system and not turning it upside down .
In all cases , if there are modifications for certain areas , then provisional measures will be called for in order to avoid " cut-off ' and threshold effects .
My final concern is to ensure that the construction of Europe continues to be based on solidarity and harmony .
The dominant liberal ideology must not destroy our devices on behalf of principles and an ancient law which only represent " the law of the strongest ' and its consequences .
I welcome the production of the report by Mr Berend .
Obviously the teething problems that resulted in only 75 % of funds being spent in 1994 have been resolved to the extent that this figure has risen to 95 % in 1996 .
Part of the problem is due to the unnecessary red tape that exists and I welcome the fact that the reform of future structural fund regulations lays great emphasis on reducing this further .
I also support Mr Berend 's view that devolution to the regions will provide further improvement .
From an Irish point of view , we have always been efficient in spending structural funds .
The generosity of our EU partners in this regard has played a significant part in the performance of what is now termed the ' Celtic Tiger ' economy .
Although we cannot and should not expect the same level of structural fund aid in the future , it is nonetheless important that there is a reasonable transition period .
A too abrupt turning off of the ' EU tap ' could jeopardize the very successful performance of the Irish economy .
This report is important because we are on the eve of a new period of structural programming , the period 2000-2006 .
We must make use of it to learn lessons from mistakes made in the past .
I would like to thank Mr Berend for his meticulous work which provides us with a clear and precise analysis of the problems experienced during the period 1994-1999 , as well as a description of the improvements noted .
These problems are due to many , varied reasons according to the administrative organization of each Member State .
As regards my country and my region , Nord-Pas-de-Calais , one of the main recipients of Community aid , it must be pointed out that the delays are for the most part caused by France and by the Commission : delays in the presentation of SPDs by the Member State , delays in the co-financing for which the Member State is responsible , delays in the forwarding of appropriations to final recipients , etc .
However , the Commission is no longer free from all reproach in this process !
It is responsible for the numerous regulations and the lack of transparency in the funds as well as for the complexity of the procedures and the difficulty countries experience in responding to the criteria laid down .
We should learn from these errors and draw up a new regulation which gives priority to the partnership between the Commission and Member State as well as to decentralization , particularly within the Member State , with the participation of all the social , economic and environmental partners in order to make all the players aware of their responsibilities .
We should take advantage of this occasion to draw up a new regulation with clearly defined rules on cofinancing for which the Member States will be responsible .
This is what the Berend report is inviting us to do .
Let us hope that the Council and the Commission are listening !
We all appreciate that negotiations are under way at an advanced state with regard to the share-out of the next EU Structural Fund round 2000-2006 .
Some general yardsticks have been put in place by means of the ' Agenda 2000 ' document launched by the European Commission last year , but extensive fine-tuning remains to be carried out with regards to specific allocations of Structural Funds to each Member State .
I fully welcome the statement of Regional Affairs Commissioner Monika Wulf-Mathies when she stated that countries which presently are in receipt of EU Structural Funds will continue to be in receipt of such monies under the next EU Structural Fund round .
From an Irish perspective , the border county region and the province of Connaught merit to be designated Objective 1 status for the period 2000-2006 .
This will entitle these regions to the maximum amount of European Regional , Social , Agricultural and Fisheries funds .
The province of Connaught and the border county region are not as wealthy as the east coast of Ireland and should not be put in the same bracket when it comes to the disbursing of EU Structural Funds monies .
I furthermore would like to welcome comments of Jacques Santer , when he stated that he supports the continuation of the Leader II Rural Development scheme and the INTERREG II cross-border scheme during the period 2000 / 2006 .
The Leader II scheme is a highly successful programme , worth £ 100 million to Ireland , at this juncture , in terms of the jobs that it assists in creating in rural Ireland .
The Interred II Cross-Border programme is similarly an important initiative in terms of the jobs that it creates in border regions .
The European Commission will shortly table its proposals for the future operation of the structural funds .
It seems likely that the Commission will propose a reduction of the amount of funding available to some parts of the Union because of the progress made in recent years in generating economic growth and development , notably in Ireland .
I believe that the Commission must ensure that its proposals for transitional arrangements for countries such as Ireland do not undermine the progress made over the last few years .
The phasing-out of maximum grant aid should occur over the longest possible period of time with a view to minimising the impact of this reduction on the Irish economy .
Secondly , despite the fact that the Irish economy as a whole has exceeded the threshold level for Objective I status , many parts of the country are still well below the threshold level and should still qualify for maximum aid rates .
The different situations which exist in the different parts of the country should be taken on board by the European Commission in formulating its proposals .
Regions of the country which have still not reached the threshold level in terms of their economic growth should not be penalised because of the strong growth level recorded in other parts of the country .
The Commission must recognize the importance of appropriate transitional arrangements and the need to differentiate between regions with strong growth levels and those with weak growth levels within individual countries , prior to formulating their proposals .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Berend Report on the Structural Funds comes just at the right time .
Particularly now when we are discussing the continuation and future form of the structural fund the report offers a good basis upon which we can build the future constructively .
European structural policy must support effectively and efficiently the efforts of the Member States , the Regions and others involved in order to contribute to the reduction of the backlog in the development of the economically weakest areas .
It is , however , no more than a supplement to local initiatives in the process of necessary innovative structural change .
This supplementary factor becomes clear in the relevant co-financing of the Member States .
We know that it is precisely the raising of local resources which inhibits applications for EU resources .
Nevertheless we must continue to adhere to this criterion in the future .
For only someone who pays his share of something ascribes any value to the project , and things which we get for nothing are also known to be worth nothing .
When considering the table of applications for funds we find that in 1996 100 % of the funds for Objective 5b were applied for .
Objective 5b is one of the objectives which concentrates in particular on rural areas .
The rural area thus , as I see it , has its special place of value in the Member States , in the regions .
Therefore we must draw up a specific and comprehensive initiative for the future of the rural areas , in order to promote their positive development .
That means creating infrastructure and jobs .
I come from the rural area .
We educate our children as best we can , send them to schools and universities .
But we do not only educate them , but we send them away because , with their good education , they cannot find jobs in rural areas .
Let us leave more decision making authority in the use of funds in the regions and let us give the regional committees more say .
The people on the spot know where the shoe pinches and how it can be made to fit .
The report gives a clear picture of how the Structural Funds have been managed .
It also describes the initial difficulties the Member States had which resulted in an under-implementation of appropriations .
The proposal to start the next programme planning period in a different way is therefore welcomed .
What I think is missing , apart from a quantitative analysis of the economic means , is a qualitative analysis of how the money has been used .
Such an analysis should also investigate any dynamic effects and side-effects in various areas , both negative and positive .
I have voted in favour of the Berend report because it is a comprehensive analysis of the causes of under-implementation of resources .
Structural fund actions are the key budgetary tool which Europe has to tackle unemployment , support job creation and underpin the Treaty objective of economic and social cohesion .
The Socialist Group amendment to paragraph 32 was tabled in order not to give carte blanche to the Commission to penalize or sanction Member States for the non-utilization of resources .
Our prime objective must be to improve the flow of resources to the final beneficiaries and to support those regions in most need .
The arbitrary removal of resources without a defined set of criteria potentially undermines our actions in achieving economic and social cohesion and tackling unemployment .
Reinforcing the Commission 's power of sanctions to arbitrarily reallocate resources is not in the spirit of decentralization and subsidiarity .
Any financial penalties or sanctions with an impact on programmes in regions and local areas therefore needs careful consideration by all partners .
I am pleased that the rapporteur and the PPE Group chose finally to support the PSE Amendment No 8 in plenary vote .
This is a well-written report which addresses the urgent need for improvement in the implementation of Structural Fund appropriations .
Those of us who represent regions where there is a strong Structural Fund dimension to economic and social development have been calling for improvements in the implementation of the entire programme for a long time .
If funding is to bring real benefit then it must be implemented efficiently and transparently .
I support the case for decision-making being taken as far as possible in the regions .
The closer decisions are taken to the people , the more efficient and transparent the programme will be .
I make the same point in regard to structural funding as I do on most social issues which is that the expertise at national and local level should be used as much as possible .
My primary concern in regard to the funds is under-utilization .
By failing to utilize all the available resources , we are failing our regions .
However , we should note that the Commission has endeavoured to ameliorate this problem with some success .
The presentation of this report on the implementation of the Structural Funds presents our group with the opportunity to make a brief point on the very future of the Structural Funds .
In fact , within the framework of Agenda 2000 , it is the European Union 's duty to welcome in some of the CEECs and Cyprus , which , as I recall , will all be eligible for Objective 1 status , while respecting the inescapable financial framework of the 0.46 % of GDP laid down for Member States of the European Union .
The proposals drawn up by the Commission in its Agenda 2000 communication are deceptive since they underestimate the economic consequences of enlargement .
The future of structural policy would therefore seem to be uncertain and will have to undergo significant reform .
In order to provide the Structural Funds with the efficiency they are lacking , it is essential to simplify the administrative procedures , to stop spreading funds too thinly and concentrate efforts on the only integrated , Community policies , that is , the CAP and the CFP .
Moreover , there is a fear that the rural regions , although they are affected differently by the effects of the CAP and the CFP , will be the main victims of this bitter pill .
According to the Commission , the new Objective 2 should only benefit 18 % of the Community population .
Nowadays , it is the rural regions in the European Union that benefit from having Objective 5a status .
In future , the percentage of rural regions benefiting from aid will be minimal .
It is essential to remind ourselves that structural aid to help the rural world was developed in 1992 / 1993 in order to compensate for the reform of the CAP and to respond to the devastating effects of internationalization and the GATT .
This is why we are once more calling for the creation of specific secondary objectives within the future Objective 2 : one for rural areas and the other for maritime and shore areas .
The stakes are even higher than those concerningagriculture : we must maintain a model of European economic development which encourages the balanced development of our territory so as to preserve our natural and cultural heritage which is both rich and fragile .
In his report , Mr Berend presents a detailed analysis of the implementation of Structural Fund appropriations ; however , many of his conclusions , as well as certain underlying postulates , cannot receive our support .
For example , the rapporteur tries to highlight the reasons why some appropriations are not always fully used .
In reality , there are two obstacles to using all the Structural Fund appropriations .
The first is due to the administrative constraints imposed by the Commission .
In fact , the administrative process generally takes between one and two years to allocate the funds .
Many of those responsible for projects are therefore discouraged by this procedure since it leads to both additional internal , administrative costs as well as financial costs in releasing appropriations .
The second obstacle , in his opinion , is much more political .
In fact , to make better use of the funds , the European Commission demands that they be co-financed by Member States and / or local or regional authorities .
In addition , these Member States are obliged , given the convergence criteria they must fulfill to be part of economic and monetary union ( single currency ) , to bring their budgetary deficit under control .
Consequently , they prefer not to commit to programmes so that they are not obliged to get involved in co-financing .
Finally , we must remember that the portion of the European budget which is not spent is returned to the Member States in accordance with their contribution to the budget , thereby leading to some " pocket receipts ' which themselves allow the Member States to somewhat control their budgetary deficit .
In conclusion , if the Structural Funds are not being distributed to an acceptable level , we should maybe look further than the end of our noses and analyze the real consequences the single currency will have for the decisions made by the Ministers for Finance from the different Member States .
Joint motion for a resolution on the Kyoto Summit
Just a few months after the Kyoto Conference , the first signs of that agreement 's inadequacy to deal with the serious environmental problems faced by our planet and mankind are beginning to emerge .
The desperate cries about the rapidly approaching destructive consequences towards which the economic policies pursued today are leading us with mathematical certainty , echo in the ears of those who will not listen .
The multinational companies and , more generally , multinational capital do not permit any changes that could cut profits and control the markets .
Thus , any half-measures decided upon are essentially based on the opportunities created for those enterprises to increase their profits and consolidate their dominance .
The same factors characterize the effort to commercialize pollution rights , which will further delay measures for the reduction of environmental pollution in the more developed industrial countries and will directly influence the development capabilities of the less developed countries .
As we approach the Fourth Conference of the Parties to the Framework Convention on Climatic Change , we must not forget that the European Union , with 6 % of the world 's population , produces over 14 % of CO2 and other greenhouse gas emissions .
The reduction of those emissions by 15 % in the European Union should be regarded as a minimum contribution , which alongside the application of appropriate policies and technology , could result in lower costs .
Support for programmes promoting the use of renewable energy sources must become a prime objective of the Union and its Member States , as well as appropriate planning of the reduction of emissions in each sector , for example transport , industry , energy , etc .
The European Union must not take advantage of the options provided by the Kyoto protocol to distance itself from the targets it set itself and must not have anything to do with agreements on the trading of pollution rights .
The need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is now a matter of urgency .
The more highly industrially developed countries , which are mainly responsible for the phenomenon , must assume the responsibilities that fall to them and not use it to perpetuate their dominant economic position .
In the context of a different policy for the benefit of mankind , it is now necessary to assist the development of third countries and transfer resources and technology that will enable them to combine their development with their contribution towards reducing pollution .
Such action must constitute an important factor in the orientation of preparations for the Fourth Conference in Buenos Aires .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of the resolution putting pressure on the EU Commission and Council to get them to go furthest and provide a good example at the climate negotiations .
The EU 's original proposals contained a 15 % reduction of greenhouse gases by the year 2010 for three selected greenhouse gases .
At Kyoto , it was decided to reduce six different gases in our part of the world by 8 % between 2008 and 2012 .
The Danish Social Democrats think this is a good idea , but there are two things which should be emphasised .
First , it is essential that the EU put pressure on the USA , other OECD countries and Russia to avoid delays in ratifying the Kyoto protocol .
Second , it is essential that the EU should go furthest : we have the resources to do so , and we have the opportunities .
There are many areas the EU could get involved in - transport , energy supplies and the like in the EU , but also via the EU 's programme of assistance to Eastern Europe , with a view to more energy efficiency and developing cleaner technology .
Joint motion for a resolution on Iraq
Mr President , I cannot in all conscience vote for the resolution we supported here today , primarily because of paragraphs 4 and 5 which I find to be totally offensive and repugnant in the way in which they seek to disguise their intention .
These weasel words are designed to cover up the legitimization of military force and only compound the shame of launching an attack which , far from achieving any military objective , will result in the death of other human beings already suffering under the yoke of Saddam Hussein and economic sanctions .
Of course I would insist that Iraq respects the UN resolutions but why are we so selective ?
What of other nations such as Israel and the United States of America which defy UN resolutions at will ?
Why do we feel entitled to adopt a moral tone ?
The possession and threatened use of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction is morally indefensible no matter who is the possessor or who poses the threat .
After 2000 years of Christianity we still revert to bomb , to maim and to kill .
Suffer the little children indeed !
We cannot support a military intervention against Iraq .
However , the UN Charter does provide the possibility of using military means as a last resort when peace is threatened .
However , such a decision must be taken by the UN Security Council .
Therefore we have voted for Amendment No. 1 .
Like my colleagues , I , too , sincerely hope that a diplomatic solution can be found to resolve the crisis in Iraq .
I fear , however , that Saddam Hussein 's recent attitude has not been moving in this direction .
The UN experts must be able to carry out their work in accordance with Resolution 687 of the Security Council .
As long as Saddam Hussein does not accept this , no compromise can be made .
He must firstly abandon his projects to develop chemical and biological weapons .
This is a service which must be carried out for the Iraqi people who have been living under economic conditions which are worse than critical , since most of the country 's budget is devoted to weapons .
Only Saddam Hussein can be blamed for the deplorable living conditions they experience and we must not consider them to be a direct repercussion of the international embargo .
If Saddam Hussein continues with this attitude , there will only be disagreeable solutions involving constraints which will obviously not be totally satisfying .
I therefore embrace the total support given to the Secretary General of the United Nations for the mission he has undertaken in Iraq .
However , if military action was attempted , only Saddam Hussein would be morally responsible .
We are glad that the Secretary General of the United Nations is making a visit to Baghdad tomorrow , a visit which we sincerely hope will be a success for multilateral diplomacy .
However , irrespective of the outcome of these negotiations , we would not accept any actions against Iraq that are not authorized by the Security Council of the United Nations .
Any other solution would be harmful both to the principle of international law and , more importantly , the credibility of the arguments that the Western powers employ against Iraq .
We are still very uncertain about the effectiveness of a military option which should not be envisaged unless all diplomatic instruments have failed .
We are convinced that unilateral action , and potentially a military response , is neither effective nor justified .
Unfortunately , in this matter , we can only regret the fact that we lack a real common foreign and security policy .
Europe is running the risk of continuing to be an economic giant who is only a political dwarf .
During the first Gulf Crisis , after the invasion of Kuwait , I supported military intervention against Iraq .
We had a mandate from the UN and enormous international support , including Arab support .
Europe was active and present .
We won " that war ' , but we saw its consequences and limits .
There were many victims in both camps and Saddam Hussein remained in power .
This is why , today , if we wish to ensure that the UN resolutions are respected , we need to do all in our power to avoid a military adventure which would set the region ablaze .
We therefore demand a clear mandate from the UN .
It is still necessary to explore as well all the diplomatic routes and , above all , to avoid a confrontation between the West and the Arab world .
Until then , we must not follow Mr Clinton 's strategy whose domestic origin is much too obvious .
Europe must assert itself and Tony Blair must move away from his visceral Atlanticism and remember that he holds the Presidency of the Union .
France must continue to play its own role , which it does very seriously .
If , in order to achieve peace , we need to know how to make war , then this must only ever come as an extreme and last resort .
This resolution on the situation in Iraq can only lead us to regret the fact that the European Union lacks a common security and defence policy .
Every time there is a serious situation , Europe seems to be absent .
We deplore this fact .
Thus , as a French socialist , I cannot favour the diplomatic route nor give my entire support to the mission undertaken by the UN 's Secretary General .
We are placing all our hopes in his trip .
For us , the military option can only come as a last resort , after the failure of all other diplomatic efforts .
It must only be contemplated on the basis of a formal and written mandate from the United Nations .
Besides , if military action were chosen , what good would it serve ?
I doubt that Saddam Hussein would be the victim .
Seven years ago , the Americans were responsible for a horrible massacre of the Iraqi people on behalf of their President , Mr Bush . It was a slaughter that was presented to public opinion by a unanimous media - and this is a prime example of Anglo-Saxon humour - as a clean , surgical war .
Today , American arrogance is intact and the Iraqi people , who have already lived through seven years of misery , deprived of medicine , electricity and food , watching their children die from hunger and disease , are about to experience this new tragedy .
There is absolutely no proof that Iraq represents a military threat , either to its neighbours or the world .
However , it is essential for Mr William Clinton to make us forget his pitiful macho behaviour when playing the fascist and , a few months before the next presidential elections , to satisfy the demands of the Israeli extreme right and the aggressive Mr Netanyahu .
It is our duty as Europeans to stop Israel and the United States of America in their murdering madness .
It is time to provide us with the means to do this .
The motion for a resolution on the situation in Iraq determines the framework for a positive compromise on the attitude which Europeans should defend within international bodies , in particular the idea that military intervention should not be used to ensure that international law is respected unless all diplomatic options have been explored and exploited .
However , we should have highlighted better the essential requirement that the only body authorized to decide what action should be taken to settle this conflict is the Security Council of the UN .
This is why I would have like the amendment aimed at replacing the phrase " formal deliberation ' by the Security Council with formal " decision ' , since it is out of the question that the USA can intervene or decide to act while the Security Council is content to exchange views or to indicate its reservations .
The European Union show that it is determined to ensure that the UN is recognized as the decision-making body , and refuse the de facto leadership of a single country , in this case the United States of America .
In this crisis , the European Union should have acted more coherently and we regret that certain heads of state rushed to the side of the American President to support his plan for military intervention .
Unfortunately , we can clearly see here the terrible and harmful consequences of the lack of institutional progress as regards the CFSP : Europe is powerless on the international stage !
Apart from the disastrous human effects military intervention in Iraq would have , we have the right to question the effectiveness of such a decision if the desired aims are actually those stated : the respect of international rules and the refusal to allow Iraq to arm itself with chemical and nuclear weapons .
It is frightening to think that after such intervention , the Iraqi regime might still be anti-democratic , inspections more difficult and the country might continue to arm itself on its own territory or elsewhere .
The only people to be punished will be those who had no choice : the country 's inhabitants .
The diplomatic options should therefore be explored with conviction until they are exhausted .
Finally , the policy of double standards should not be applied within the framework of international law and of the respect for agreements signed .
Our Parliament and Europe must endeavour to ensure that the peace process in the Middle East continues as expected and , along with the UN , take useful steps in respect of the commitments made .
We must not be taken in by the allegation that there is an urgent need for a massive counter-attack in Iraq .
The USA suddenly became more alarmist only after the UN 's decision to establish the " oil for food ' process , which would have affected the price of petrol , and when considerations regarding internal policy seemed to push President Clinton towards a spectacular external initiative .
Europe must , whatever the circumstances , maintain its autonomous assessments and its independence .
Peace in Iraq , in the Middle East , is the result of sustained , balanced action based solely on the application of law .
The route chosen by the United States is not the right route .
Military intervention is not acceptable .
On behalf of my colleague , Mrs Ewing , and myself , I wish to state that the Scottish National Party condemns the actions of Saddam Hussein in flouting the will of the international community and seeking continually to evade the completion of UN arms inspections .
Iraq must abide by the terms set up by the UN , and the SNP accepts that the UN has the right to use force in order to secure acceptance as a last resort if all other means fail .
However , the SNP questions the clarity of the present war aims as enunciated by both the US and British Governments .
The SNP fully supports UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his mission to Baghdad .
In addition , the SNP commends proper consideration of the proposals to establish ' no drive ' zones to augment the existing ' no fly ' zones , and to set up in these areas a provisional administration as the first step to bringing about pluralist and democratic government for the whole of Iraq .
These proposals would also alleviate the plight of the Kurds and the Marsh Arabs , who have been persecuted over decades by the Ba 'athist regime .
The SNP believes that such proposals would weaken the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein , rather than run the risk of strengthening it , and would avoid the civilian casualties which could result , for example , from air strikes against military targets near civilian centres .
Joint motion for a resolution on the 54th United Nations Assembly
It is very disappointing that although the EU will be taking effective action on Nigeria , Burma and the rights of women and children , there will not be a similar initiative on human rights abuses in China .
It is appalling that there is no consensus within the Council on this issue .
The obvious reason for this state of affairs is that too many Member States consider that commercial and trading interests should take precedence over human rights concerns .
How can we speak with moral authority on the issue of human rights elsewhere in the world if we choose to ignore the situation in China ?
Those Member States which are prostituting themselves for thirty pieces of silver should be ashamed .
Their lack of action on this issue makes a nonsense of the European Union 's Common Foreign and Security Policy .
We have voted for the resolution in all its parts .
However , we would like to make some comments .
Paragraph 1 names a whole list of countries in which breaches of human rights take place , and which the report particularly wants to point out .
We agree completely that all of these countries should be criticized for these breaches , but at the same time we think that a number of other countries could have been included in this list .
Cuba , for example , is mentioned in the statement .
We agree that breaches of human rights happen in Cuba , but in Latin America there are also a number of other countries where these breaches are considerably worse than in Cuba .
Mexico , Brazil and Peru are examples of states in which defenceless union and farming activists and other civilians have been murdered by various paramilitary groups .
For this and other reasons , the choice of states on the list is somewhat misleading .
In paragraph 2 special priority is given to Algeria .
We agree that this is necessary in view of the serious situation in the country , but some other states could also be mentioned here , such as Colombia , where the state-sponsored terrorism against large parts of the country 's population is getting worse .
Finally , we agree with the statement 's severe criticism of the situation in China .
We think it would be correct to say that no progress has been made in China as far as human rights are concerned .
Seal report ( A4-0015 / 98 )
I wish to place on record my support for Amendment No 3 in the name of the GUE / NGL Group .
This amendment expresses support for the right of Ryanair workers to join a trade union and have that trade union represent them in negotiations with their employers .
As a strong supporter of the Social Chapter I am disappointed that the body of EU legislation that emanates from it does not enshrine this right and this is something we should remedy as a matter of urgency .
The downward slope of unrestrained competition and deregulation seems to have no end .
Even before completion of the third liberalization package , the Commission , within the scope of its ' justification ' , is announcing a further hardening of its attitude , provocatively ignoring any social parameters and concepts of public interest and service , and emerging in essence as the official agent of the powerful multinational interests of the air .
Thousands of redundancies , the overturning of collective agreements in the name of competitiveness , the invocation of the Damoclean sword of company closures , the abolition of routes or concession of flights to private capital , accelerated privatizations , the appearance of companies with doubtful guarantees which call into question the quality of their services , flight safety and labour relations , all these are what makes up the landscape of a liberalized air transport market , even before the attempt concerned has been completed .
For the Commission , of course , all this does not represent an ' explosive ' change .
It is simply aware of the ' possible consequences ' for employment and is ' preparing a study ' .
As for the celebrated argument that competition leads to price reductions , it acknowledges that this has not happened and denies that wherever the newly arrived competitors have led to a minimal proportional differentiation , this is because costs are being cut as never before , with adverse consequences for the safety of working people who are employed under third-world conditions , and for the quality of the services offered .
In its statement it ignores the consequences , for airports and those working there , of the directive on the liberalization of handling and of the regulation on the liberalization of cabotage .
It calls for more rapid privatization and for restructuring in the branch , it demands ' strict ' application of the rules of competition , it announces the further restriction of state aid , it directly calls into question the principle of an overall service , speaking about ' excessive use of the obligations to provide a public service ' and about the need to examine ' the extent to which those obligations are a hidden means to restrict access to the market ' .
Needless to say , it does not bother to explain how the demands of management based on the private investment principle are to be reconciled with the increased and specific obligations of national air carriers to provide means of communication , connection and development for remote areas .
Nor is it worried by its finding that such lines are usually unprofitable and consequently of no interest to anyone acting on the basis of market forces alone .
The rapporteur fully accepts the EU 's entire policy and rationale .
Indeed , he urges the Commission and the Council to accelerate ' decisively ' the furtherance of matters still outstanding , calls for stricter application of the guidelines on state aid and for the rejection of any ' special treatment ' for national carriers , asks that the turnovers of ' strong ' companies in Europe should be improved - obviously , to the cost of the weaker companies , which risk bankruptcy because of the public interest obligations they have - , and accepts the liberalization of cabotage while admitting that most internal routes are unprofitable operations .
We cannot accept the contradiction between the complete acceptance of unrestrained competition and simple ' concern ' lest that might entail some risk to safety and employment , favouring social dumping .
We refuse to be content with ' noting ' or ' expressing concern ' about the retrograde steps which some wish to impose .
We consider that the interests of the people , the workers , the users of air transport are more important than the interests that are trying to maximize the market share of the powerful groups of air transport companies .
We will therefore vote against the report .
The liberalization of air transport has certainly had some good effects on the market .
However , at the same time , in spite of the fact that it is ' controlled ' , it has led to several negative effects , which I think are far too lightly dealt with in this report .
The rapporteur states clearly that liberalization has led to an increase in size of the whole air transport market and that the forecasts for the coming decade are an annual growth rate of 6-7 per cent ( observations J and L respectively ) .
Personally I see this as disturbing , partly because it means an additional burden on the environment because aircraft are not a particularly environmentally friendly means of transport , and partly because the airspace over Europe is already congested . This could lead to a decline in air safety if traffic increases .
Social issues are not often referred to here or in the Commission 's document , which is regrettable .
It is clear that in certain cases liberalization has led to reduced influence for union bodies and therefore for employees .
Keppelhoff-Wiechert report ( A4-0037 / 98 )
We are now aware of the consequences of using genetic engineering in agriculture .
Using genetically modified plants in open natural systems can have damaging effects which we have no way of assessing today .
In this report , the rapporteur demands that this practice be supported .
We cannot support it .
It has been shown time and time again that using plants which have been made resistant to diseases or toxic to pests has had directly the opposite consequences .
Using corn which was toxic to insect larvae , for instance , led in fact to those pests becoming resistant to the plants .
In this case , the advantage of spraying that the pests are only affected for a short period and so cannot become resistant .
Without wishing to defend this method of pest control in any way , we wish to point out that it has also emerged that using genetic weapons has made the problem of pests harder to deal with .
This report wishes to encourage research into genetic engineering in agriculture , and says this should be done to encourage people to use it .
This is by no means unproblematic .
Apart from the environmental implications and risks which genetic engineering involves , we cannot be sure that genetically modified organisms will not have an adverse effect on human health , even if no such health problems can be shown in connection with such organisms today .
We know that using genetic engineering can threaten biodiversity and that using it will lead to a monopoly of the crop market .
We cannot allow the profit motive in agriculture to take precedence over human health and the environment .
Instead of putting resources into researching methods as uncertain as genetic engineering , we should focus on an area which is largely unresearched : that is , we should put more resources into finding out how Nature 's own mechanisms combat pests and plants .
Agriculture in the next millennium must face up to a two-fold challenge : feeding a world population which will double over the next 30 years while respecting man and the environment .
In order to maintain its competitiveness , European agriculture , as well as related industries , must be able to benefit from technologies adapted to global competition .
In the Commission 's proposals in Agenda 2000 , we clearly see a desire to advance the globalization of European agriculture by lowering administered prices and decreasing the level of aid .
We need to have a coherent position .
It is , in fact , the same people who want both to decrease aid to agriculture and delay the development of technological agriculture .
Personally , I do not believe that the globalization of European agriculture is the right solution .
However , in this context , where the Commission , along with a certain number of Members of this Parliament , hopes for further advances , I do not see how we could miss out on the development of biotechnology .
To allow this revolution to pass us by outside European frontiers , while at the same time abolishing Community preferences , would lead to the total destruction of our agriculture .
As regards legislation , the European Union and the Member States must guarantee both a certain flexibility to allow the development of private and public initiatives and health safety for consumers .
The principle of precaution must be the main element behind legislation and evaluations must be carried out on a strict , scientific basis .
I voted against the Keppelhoff-Wiechert report .
I fear that it is too sanguine about the possibility of controlling biotechnology and about the part biotechnology could play in feeding the world .
Biotechnology is being promoted by huge , inadequately controlled economic interests .
The likelihood , at present , is that an expansion of biotechnology will serve those interests , not the environment and not humanity .
Mr President , we see in the Chamber today that at one point it was a very important matter for the individual concerned to explain to the rest of the House why he was voting in a particular way .
That right has been removed .
If you look round you will see that there are only two or three Members present , four including yourself .
Is it not a disgrace that the right of Members has been taken away in this manner ?
The only people who are suffering are the interpreters who stay here loyally to hear one explanation of vote .
It is a disgrace how the President and the Bureau are handling these matters .
It is time that you , who was elected to look after Members ' rights , start to exercise your authority in the Bureau and give the Members back their rights .
Otherwise this Chamber will fall into further discredit .
Very well , Mr Falconer , I will pass on your opinion to the Bureau .
In addition , they will be noted in the verbatim report of proceedings .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolution :
B4-0189 / 98 by Mr Dell 'Alba and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in Afghanistan ; -B4-0191 / 98 by Mrs Roth and others , on behalf of the V Group , on Afghanistan ; -B4-0211 / 98 by Mrs Lulling and Mrs Oomen-Ruitjen , on behalf of the PPE Group , on Afghanistan ; -B4-0220 / 98 by Mrs André-Léonard and others , on Afghanistan ; -B4-0228 / 98 by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the UPE Group , on Afghanistan ; - B4-0233 / 98 by Mr Sornosa Martínez and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Afghanistan ; -B4-0253 / 98 by Mrs Hoff , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Afghanistan .
Madam President , Mr Vice President of the Commission , I am very pleased that , every so often , our group is the first to be able to talk about the situation in Afghanistan .
We have before us the rare tragic pictures of the earthquake that has affected thousands of people and the difficulties encountered by the humanitarian organizations , such as ECHO which is currently in the region to provide aid for the population ; we also have before us the dramatic and rare pictures of events under the medieval Taliban regime , equally illustrating the situation of women in particular .

This debate is also a tribute paid by Parliament to the cause of Afghan women , a cause which the Commission has so admirably sought to resume by launching the campaign , " a flower for the women of Kabul ' .
This campaign is probably the most significant gesture that could be made to show that we are not ignoring or accepting as inevitable as inevitable the many evils afflicting this society : racial segregation and , according to some , a sexual apartheid that offend the conscience of both the western and the Islamic world .
The best way forward is a vote for a resolution that not only firmly condemns the Taliban regime and all its supporters , including trustworthy western powers , but also asks forcefully for support for the Commission and that all possible measures to be taken to overthrow the Taliban regime , contrary to what some organizations are doing , such as the UNDCP , which is trying to reach an agreement with the regime .
Madam President , the Taliban regime in Afghanistan is using religious arguments to suppress the rights of women ; worse still , they try to make it impossible for women to take part in public society .
Education and health care have become taboo for women , and they are not allowed to show themselves in the street unless they are accompanied by their brother , their husband or their father , let alone voice an opinion in public .
This is a flagrant violation of human rights , and therefore also of the rights of women , which has become a daily occurrence in the region of Afghanistan where the Taliban rule .
There is no other country in the world where this type of human rights violation is as acute as in Afghanistan .
But the Taliban are in fact a bunch of common scoundrels , power-mad men who want complete control of the entire society , and they keep their regime going through international trade in heroin .
This has nothing , absolutely nothing , to do with religion .
We should realize that women in Afghanistan enjoyed much more freedom in the recent past , and that women from all strata of society are affected .
How would the international community react if somewhere in this world women were muzzling men the way the Taliban muzzle women in Afghanistan ?
It is unthinkable that this would meet simply with mild toleration
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention once more to Article 11 , because the Taliban regime is partly kept in the saddle by a number of nations which recognize the country .
With these countries we , the European Union , maintain political and economic relations without too much difficulty .
A stop should be put to this .
Humanitarian aid should continue , in particular now that the effects of the earthquake have become so obvious , but the regime must be isolated .
Madam President , women - as I am sure you will agree - have been used to all types of discrimination for centuries .
The imagination that certain men , certain ideologies and certain regimes have developed over thousands of years in order to bully women , individually or collectively , deserves a place in the Book of Records .
But the way in which they are treated by the odious Taliban regime in Afghanistan , a country which has been ravaged for many years since it was occupied by the Soviet Union , far surpasses the limits of our imagination now at the end of the 20th century .
Unfortunately , we have few illusions as to the direct consequences of the initiative we launched as the Committee on Women 's Rights , in conjunction with the Commission , under the auspices of International Women 's Day .
We want to make use of this day , 8 March , to make public opinion aware of the distress of Afghan women , who are deprived of the most fundamental human rights by the Taliban regime .
In depriving the Afghan women of their freedom of movement , freedom of expression , access to education and basic health care , the Talibans are turning them into the most deprived , pitiful and unfortunate human beings on the face of the earth . God knows , in this world there are already thousands of other women suffering discrimination , but none to this extent .
We cannot remain silent in the face of such misery .
We must denounce this hateful regime and try to find a way of getting humanitarian aid to them , particularly to the Afghan women , without it being regarded as a recognition of the Taliban regime
We want them to know that they are not alone in their exceedingly difficult and dangerous opposition .
Having lived through the monstrosities of the Nazi occupation during the Second World War , I know how much value those who are resisting such a regime place on moral support .
Let the Afghan women know that we are suffering , that we are struggling with them and that together we will manage to free them from a regime whose leaders are not worthy of being called human beings .
Madam President , can you imagine a woman not being able to work because it is against the law to earn a living ?
Imagine you had to tell your daughter that she could no longer go to school .
Imagine you had to live in a house where the curtains and windows had to remain closed .
Imagine you had no longer any right to health care .
Imagine the only use women had was to bear children .
I would like to address the Afghan women , who are the target of an apartheid regime which is without precedent , and who are today deprived of fundamental human rights .
While the international community prepares to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , when discussing these women we need to take another look at ourselves and all around us .
If we want more than just the usual cooperation , then we must manage to highlight the inescapable problem of these women .
The questions this discrimination raises are at the heart of the debate on the vision of law and the rule of law .
I would like to express my solidarity with the Afghan women who , despite the oppression they suffer and the unspeakable threats of the Talibans , continually demonstrate against the violation of their fundamental rights and for their right simply to exist .
Mr President , we have already heard a great deal .
We know about the situation of women unfortunate enough to have been born in Afghanistan and now living there .
This debate is taking place a short time before the festival for women .
In the Committee on Womens ' Rights we had decided to adopt an initiative on behalf of the women of Afghanistan . I also think , however , that this movement taking place here is very appropriate .
Womens ' day is approaching ; we all know that each year we celebrate women with various events , some meaningful and others not and we say various things which are very often never followed up .
Of course , anything that awakens public opinion is important and anything that can make us aware of the huge problems that exist is important .
In that corner of the world , appalling things are going on right now , which we talk about when the occasion arises and then forget until the next time they reappear , while the fate of women in Afghanistan is perhaps the worst fate of oppressed women anywhere in the world .
The Commission 's initiative is very praiseworthy , and the slogan a flower for the women of Kabul is also a very kind and somewhat romantic one .
Let us ask , however , what our own responsibilities are - I mean in the broadest sense - in the matter .
Because we often speak about illiberal regimes , we often speak about the fate of people living under such regimes , but seldom do we think that many of those regimes would never have seen the light of day , that much of the misery of people living in those countries would not exist , if the countries of the so-called free and civilized world did not have a share of responsibility for those misfortunes .
It is an open secret , it has appeared throughout the press , and no theory has been put forward to question the hypothesis that the United States played a very ' good ' and specific part in putting the Talibans into power .
Feminists in the United States have recently tried to block investments in Afghanistan .
Perhaps the feminists will find a solution , because although we often speak about human rights , we frequently do all we can in the free world to prevent human rights from flourishing .
Madam President , Afghanistan has become a strategic challenge on the international stage , thanks in particular to its proximity to oil resources in Central Asia .
This is what explains the tolerance , not to say the complicity , of the United States which , with the support of Pakistan , has allowed the Talibans to take power there .
In the name of a totally mistaken , obscurantist interpretation of Islam , the Talibans inflict every kind of discrimination on the Afghan women and deny them the right to live normally .
They do not have the right to participate in civil life , they have no access to education , or to medical care .
They have no freedom of movement or expression .
To go out , they are obliged to wear a veil which is like prison bars ; their clothes are only shackles .
It demonstrates an unprecedented hatred .
This situation is intolerable .
We must increase our efforts in order to lift the veil of silence .
I am therefore glad that the International Women 's Day on 8 March is being devoted to Afghan women , as a symbol of our solidarity and to raise the awareness of international opinion .
This Day should not be a last-ditch struggle but the starting point for a campaign to express our support for the Afghan women who struggle for their freedom and their dignity , by applying in their own way the belief of the Algerian poet Jean Senac , that a hunted life invents another life .
Ladies and gentlemen , please imagine for a brief moment - above all the gentlemen - that you may no longer show your face in public , that boys may no longer take part in lessons at school , that public buses may no longer be used , that you may walk down the street only with your nearest female relatives and that you no longer have any claim on the medical services .
That is exactly what is happening to Afghanistani women - a horror scenario forced on them by the Taliban Militia ruling in Kabul .
With fanaticism veiled in religion the women are deprived of their most elementary human rights and the Taliban are not the slightest bit timid in sweeping away all international conventions and humanitarian agreements with unimaginable brutality , financed and supported by the international heroin trade .
The women of Afghanistan have been robbed of their voice .
They need our solidarity .
If they attempt to denounce abroad the violation of their most elementary rights they do so - on pain of death .
The courageous Roses of Afghanistan , as I would like to call these women , need our solidarity , and the European Parliament , above all the women , supports all organizations , all projects which might improve the situation of women in Afghanistan .
The European Parliament , the Council and the Commission must combine their forces and use the humanitarian aid just agreed on worth 34 million German marks in particular for the women , who are especially burdened and needy .
The Taliban have denied foreign aid for women .
We should not allow that !
One emphasis of this year 's International Women 's Day on 8 March will be to draw attention to the glaring violation of women 's rights in Afghanistan and exert international pressure on the government in Kabul .
The Mullah dictatorship must be ended .
The sexual apartheid must disappear from the world stage like a passing nightmare !
Madam President , " life under rubble ' was the name of a television documentary after the earthquake in Afghanistan .
Life under the veil - as we have already heard - is the fate of Afghanistan 's women .
Not only is this veil extremely unusual even for Islams , but it is a walking prison ; those who wear it can see the outside world only through a double grill .
They may not go out alone , they may not go to school , they have practically no access to health care .
This is all because - and I do not like to say this - fanatical men have enslaved their own people , the mothers of their own children , a people who knew about education , whose women practised academic professions .
They are destroying their own dignity along with the well-being and the education of their own children as free people .
What on earth is going to become of these children ?
If on 8 March the International Women 's Day really has any meaning , then it is for these women who cannot fight against their repression .
Flowers for Kabul must mean many voices for the women of Afghanistan .
We can of course argue about the differences in cultures , but not about a culture which for reasons of gender puts half a nation in prison , simply because the fanatics - the men - see themselves as bearers of their culture , but at the same time earn their money through drugs and weapons .
What kind of concept of honour is that ?
Not only all the women of this world but also all the men should rise up against it in the name of the dignity of every human being .
We appeal to the Commission to see to it that the humanitarian aid for Afghanistan goes directly to the women .
For human rights , which are also women 's rights , as we know , will remain hollow and meaningless if this does not happen and will lose their impact . And , ladies and gentlemen , this is all taking place in the year of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Madam President , the case of Afghanistan leads us to further reflections than those already made .
Often , when we are dealing with the problems of the developing countries , we unintentionally mistake the perspective . We have passed from a critical over-assessment of the western civilizations and their values to just as critical an acceptance of everything that takes place outside Europe , owing to a misunderstood sense of respect for other cultures .
The west has values that really belong to the whole of humanity : the rule of law , democracy , respect for human rights and , in this case , in particular , women 's rights .
We therefore cannot accept the lack of respect for these principles by the current Kabul regime , particularly with regard to respect for women 's rights .
We should not forget that the tolerance and recognition of other people are a common wealth of the three large monotheistic religions and therefore that of Islam too , whose distorted interpretation cannot be adopted to justify any political or other measure contrary to those principles .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , the European Union , concerned about the prolonged civil war in Afghanistan , has recently delivered a common position on the ongoing struggle , the continuing instability in the region , the human rights situation in the country as well as the drugs and terrorism which come from Afghanistan .
As can be seen in the common position , the European Union wants to ensure that there is no sexual discrimination and that the donating of aid takes place in accordance with the needs of the most vulnerable sections of the population .
Faced with possible discrimination in new or ongoing projects , the Commission will put a hold on these projects .
As regards the situation of women , the Commission is very much in favour of a coordinated approach with the other donors in order to create sufficient incentive .
In this respect , the European Commission 's position is the following : recently , Angela King , Assistant Secretary General of the United Nations and special adviser on women 's issues , visited Afghanistan and her report has just been published .
The Commission proposes that all positions on this sensitive matter conform to the guidelines set out in this report .
This does not mean that the Commission is abandoning having its own view on the Afghan problem and , in particular , the problem of the situation of women . However , we believe that , taking into account the situation in the country , and the war , it is much better to concentrate all efforts by using the guidelines that have just been set out by the United Nations as a basis .
The European Commission warmly welcomes the solidarity maintained by Parliament with respect to the situation of women in Afghanistan , as well as its support for the campaign on the 8 March , " A flower for the women of Kabul ' , which it is organizing to mark International Women 's Day .
As regards the drugs situation , which is a very sensitive topic , heroin and opium are at the moment a major concern for the whole society , since we are certain that in Afghanistan the cultivation of opium is becoming more and more popular , precisely in order to manufacture heroin .
Nevertheless , we ourselves , along with Parliament , share the doubts concerning the viability of the programme aimed at substituting large-scale cultivations proposed by the UNIDCP ( United Nations International Drug Control Programme ) .
This does not mean that the European Commission is against alternative development - we practise it in other parts of the world , such as in the Mediterranean with Morocco , Latin America , Bolivia , Colombia and Peru .
We agree with alternative developments but we do not believe that , at the moment , the situation in Afghanistan , currently at war , is capable of implementing a programme of alternative development to fight against the cultivation of opium , at least until things change radically in the country .
As regards the earthquake in Tajar , we are working via ECHO and through emergency operations with the Red Cross and Médecins sans frontières ( Belgium ) , and when there is a bit more breathing space , the Commission will have no problem in moving on to rehabilitation efforts .
In terms of some of the questions just raised by Members here , the global plan for humanitarian aid to Afghanistan for 1998 comes to ECU 17 million .
This will be the course of action the Commission will follow and naturally , to answer some of the questions raised , we are aware that the situation in Afghanistan is very difficult .
Finally , we should not deceive ourselves : what is happening in Afghanistan , as in other conflicts , comes in response to a new form of geopolitics , a series of interests linked to drugs , terrorism and discrimination , which are converging . But they are also linked to Afghanistan 's geopolitical position , basically due to future gas and oil projects .
You know exactly what I am saying : the Cold War in that part of the world has been replaced by a war of interests .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0184 / 98 by Mr Bertinotti and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the Cermis tragedy ; -B4-0187 / 98 by Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the Cermis tragedy ; -B4-0209 / 98 by Mr Bianco and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the Cermis accident ; -B4-0210 / 98 by Mr Azzolini and Mr Santini , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the accident in Italy caused by an American military plane ; -B4-0221 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the Cavalese catastrophe ; -B4-0243 / 98 by Mrs Aglietta and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the Cermis tragedy ; -B4-0250 / 98 by Mr Colajanni and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the death of 20 people caused by an American plane in Cavalese ( Italy ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , what happened on Mount Cermis was a tragedy that has been widely reported .
It has been reported by the repeated accusations made by the local authorities which , on several occasions , had presented the danger of the aviation games that started from the Aviano base and , through the Trentino valleys , tested the bravery of the pilots from the US base who tried to fly under bridges , under electricity cables and under cableway cables .
A tragedy had to happen sooner or later , and now it has done .
We are faced with a basic problem , which is that of the meaning of the bases of a foreign power in the territory of an EU Member State .
In my opinion , this needs to be discussed .
There is , however , an immediate problem : we need to prevent , immediately , a repetition of low-altitude military flights and revise the regulations governing military flights , which I believe should be carried out in specific and fairly restricted areas , and at least in uninhabited regions .
There is one further point I would like to bring to the Commissioner 's attention , a point on which the Commission ought to have an opinion , if not an initiative .
I believe it is necessary to ensure that the United States waive jurisdiction on the proceedings over the tragedy and allow the proceedings to be heard in Italy as soon as possible .
I would like to remind you that the victims of this tragedy belong to six European countries , five of which are part of the European Community .
I think it would be too much if , after such a tragedy , responsibilities were not even identified , not for revenge or punishment , but to ensure that such tragedies do not recur in the future .
Madam President , I would like to tell Mr Pettinari that , just a few minutes ago , I heard from a news agency that this morning the Italian judiciary formally asked for the file , in a certain sense asking the Americans for release from the London Convention .
If that were the case , it would be my intention , at 17 : 30 , on agreement with the other authors of the resolution , to submit an oral amendment to note this important fact .
On the same lines as the previous speaker , I would like to say , and I don 't know how much the Commission can help us in this , that provisions which in 1951 , in the midst of a cold war , could be justified ( with a kind of extraterritoriality , a bit like that enjoyed by the Church in the Middle Ages and in other times ) now seem obsolete and constitute an offence to the victims and to the judiciary who have every possibility of investigating and doing justice where it is very often a case of acrobatics in the air rather than real military requirements .
Madam President , it has already been said but I wish to confirm that , on 3 February , twenty innocent citizens of German , Belgian , Italian , Polish , Austrian and Dutch nationality in an Italian tourist spot , Cavalese , enjoying a few days ' rest and leisure , lost their lives owing to an accident caused during a military exercise from a US air base in Aviano , which cut the cables of the Mount Cermis cableway and caused the tragedy .
The draft resolution presented seeks not only to express due sympathy to the relatives of the victims , but also to bring to the attention of the European Parliament questions ranging from the establishment of the causes , the truth , to respect for the international regulations governing training for civilian and military flights .
In confirming what has been stressed several times by the local Trentino-Alto Adige authorities on the dangers of military flights in low-altitude exercises over territory in the Trentino and Alto Adige valleys , and therefore on the need to suspend them , the draft resolution asks the US civilian and military authorities to cooperate fully in the investigation aimed at establishing causes and responsibilities , with the transparent use of all sources of information and evidence .
A further agreement on safety procedure is requested between the US and Member States of the EU involved in the NATO , with a total prohibition of low-altitude military flights in regions at great risk of safety to the civilian populations .
Madam President , when a tragedy happens in which many individuals lose their lives , the International Community is dumbfounded , upset and often takes measures to provide aid .
When the tragedy is absurd , like the Cermis tragedy , the first reaction is one of anger and disbelief .
There is no reason justifying what happened on 3 February in Cavalese , in Trentino-Alto Adige , where , unfortunately , there was a further demonstration of the terrible consequences of men 's stupidity when it is applied to powerful means , built for our defence , but capable of being transformed into means of destruction , if used incorrectly .
In Cavalese , a US military aircraft , probably involved in a crazy game played by its occupants , flew at a foolish speed several metres from the ground , in a region used for sports tourism , and , in so doing , cut the cables of a cableway , causing the cabin and its unfortunate occupants to crash to the ground .
I do not wish to accuse the Atlantic Alliance forces , whose historic merit should be recognized for defending the free world when the planet was divided into blocks and for continuing to defend it today .
However , we cannot tolerate absurd and tragic accidents , such as that on Cermis , caused in the best of cases by atrocious thoughtlessness , and in the worst by malicious stupidity .
For this reason , the Union for Europe group supports the compromise resolution brought to the attention of Parliament today and hopes that , if it is approved , it will be followed by specific measures resulting in its implementation .
Madam President , an incident like the tragedy on Mount Cermis should be firmly condemned .
No political consideration can be higher than the protection of human life which any political action and therefore any armed forces have the specific task of serving .
That is why the US authorities should cooperate with every means and as far as possible with the Italian authorities for clarity to be established .
I have to point out that this requirement is reinforced even further by the status of a great power enjoyed by the USA ; real power is not , in fact , measured in military but above in all in moral terms ; the US first have to prove this morality , of which they have so often been the champions !
Madam President , I think that , as pointed out by previous speakers , everyone is aware that non-observance of the rules laid down and agreed for military aviation exercises has led to a serious tragedy .
This tragedy also highlights other aspects , such as the fact that , although the South Tyrol and Trentino authorities have often reported aircraft flying over inhabited regions at very low altitude , at the limits of suicide and homicide , as we have finally unfortunately witnessed , these flights have continued unperturbed for a very long time .
What is puzzling is that , despite the fact that exercises of this type have been reported as dangerous for a long time , no solution has been found .
The solutions are for training to be provided in areas suitably chosen for that purpose , areas in which there is no danger to people or property , that are defined as safe aerodromes .
But nothing of the kind has been done .
It is therefore obvious that , to safeguard the physical safety of people and property , strict regulations need to be established at European level , or the States need to be asked to do so , with regard to the use of aircraft in exercises .
This accident also shows another aspect , which is the problem of the limited sovereignty of the European countries with NATO or American bases .
In fact , not only do these bases not fall under the jurisdiction of the host countries , but any offences committed by the American personnel at these bases lie outside the jurisdictional scope of the country in which they have been committed and fall into the sphere of competence of the American judges .
We therefore urge a revision of Article 7 of the London Convention governing jurisdictional competence .
Madam President , the tragedy of the Cermis cableway has firstly affected the families of the victims and their grief will certainly not find solace in our words .
We obviously hope that we can at least give them a message of respect for their grief .
The tragedy has affected Trentino and Alto Adige , provinces in which military exercises had given rise to protests that had unfortunately remained unheeded for some time .
Citizens , mayors , advisers and even MPs had unfortunately pointed out the risks in vain .
We certainly all know that the bulk of these exercises were connected with the peace mission in Bosnia , in which in recent years our involvement also extended to the pilots and soldiers ensuring the success of the mission .
The protests were rightly made , however , in view of the excessive risks taken ; new regulations on exercises were therefore necessary and urgent .
Those who turned a deaf ear at first are guilty of pride and vanity at least , attitudes that do not go with respect for the life of the citizens , of all the inhabitants of Bosnia , the aircraft pilots , the inhabitants and tourists in the valleys of Trentino and Alto Adige .
Madam President , the tragedy has affected the population of my province , Bologna , in particular , because , seven years ago , a damaged military aircraft , abandoned by the pilot , fell on a school , causing the death of 12 children and a further 60 wounded .
It was on 6 December 1990 , Mrs Fontaine .
You will not remember , but they were in Israel together .
We had just been visiting the Yad Vashem Museum , when the ambassador for my country ' phoned me with the news .
Just a few days before the tragedy on Cermis , the three people accused of the disaster in Bologna were finally acquitted , the judges believing that the event did not constitute a crime .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is embarrassing to have to meet the parents who lost their children only guilty of being at school , and tell them that justice has been done .
The proposals contained in the resolution we are going to approve , as a group , have this object : to avoid a repetition of the proceedings that ended with the words : no-one is guilty !
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a good thing that the European Parliament is taking a position in response to the accident in Cavalese , because not only should there be stricter rules , but it appears from an investigation which has progressed a little further today that the existing rules have not been complied with .
The crew may say it feels sympathy for the relatives of the victims , and it may declare , I quote , that they would never do anything to endanger the lives of others , but it has been proven beyond the shadow of a doubt that the aeroplane did not respect the primary rules .
It was flying at barely 150 meters where the permitted minimum flying height is 300 meters , or according to Italian standards , as much as 600 meters .
Moreover , witnesses have stated that they saw the aeroplane involved in a kind of joy riding , and for years the local population has been complaining bitterly about the genuine nuisance of these flights .
It also turned out the pilot was flying with American ordnance survey maps which do not even show the ski lift , instead of using Italian ordnance survey maps which do show it .
Talk of arrogance .
From all of this , ladies and gentlemen , we can only draw the following conclusions .
From now on the American authorities must cooperate with the Italian judiciary , in an atmosphere of great openness , otherwise the investigation cannot move forward .
Low level military exercise flights must be forbidden where there is a danger to civilians .
Stricter rules coupled with enforcement must be introduced , and stricter rules for all air force units , anywhere in Europe .
To conclude , the local Italian judiciary should be authorized in this case to set up complete investigations , and moreover to administer the necessary justice .
It would be even more dramatic if we were not to draw the necessary conclusions from what happened .
Madam President , I wish to express profound grief on the part of the Alleanza Nazionale for the victims of the Cermis tragedy and accuse the sharks and the intellectuals of making an outward show of antimilitarism , jumping at every opportunity to flaunt their sentiments and their sermons against the armed forces which , if they are not reformed and if they do not continue to operate as they are doing in Italy , we too are convinced will be useless and out of time .
We wonder , however , how the Trentino and Alto Adige valleys can have become a exhibition theatre for the supersonic military aircraft flying at very low altitude , without our authorities intervening , with the authorization of the Ministry of Defence , despite the protests of the populations and the local authorities .
We are certainly asking the American authorities to cooperate with the Italian judiciary to establish responsibility and penalize non-observance of the safety regulations that would otherwise have averted the tragedy .
We believe it is necessary for the work of Council to give greater authority to the governments of the member countries , to ensure observance of the rules laid down by the regulations in force so that military exercises do not jeopardize the daily lives of the citizens .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I find myself in a very difficult position because , naturally , the European Commission shares the sorrow felt by the Members for the victims and understands the irrationality of the accident , which should never be repeated .
However , as you know , the Commission has no authority in this matter to implement many of the measures you ask for in your resolution .
Nevertheless , to the best of our ability , we will forward them to the two parties concerned - the American government and the Italian government - with the aim of ensuring that , at the very least , they pay fair compensation to the victims . In addition , of course , as regards the use of the Aviano base , which is a NATO base and thus outside the Community 's authority , we will try to ensure that they review all plans for flights at low altitude .
Having said this , we believe that the best solution is for the Italian courts to establish the facts , to decide who is responsible for the events and to determine what type of action will need to be taken in the future .
Madam President , I support the statement of the British Council Presidency that the fatwa against Salman Rushdie is null and void because it is a violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and it is illegal because it is an attempy to interfere in national sovereignty .
I would add on behalf of my group I request the suspension of the critical dialogue with Iran .
A dialogue presupposes a common basis of the parties talking to each other .
Between those who are convinced of the tradition of human rights and bound by a religious tradition , one of the core precepts of which is " Thou shalt not kill ! ' , and those who call for the murder of writers or seek to force a prisoner to accept a religion with death threats , there can be no dialogue , only an unconditional condemnation .
Madam President , time again criminal justice in Iran is arouses our aversion .
We as Europeans have , rightly , I think , have respect for Islam and Muslim culture , but political Islam as it reaches us from Iran , damages the reputation of Muslim culture , an damages in my view the respectable position of Muslims within the European Union .
For that reason I would like to say that I fully understand people getting annoyed with people who overstep the limits of courtesy , or who insult someone 's religion on purpose , but the punishment which is administered from government beats everything .
We are thinking of Salman Rushdie , of course , it was said earlier , who even abroad is heavily persecuted .
This literally oversteps all limits .
The punishment imposed on Helmut Hofer , who oversteps the limits of courtesy in Iran , is of course out of all proportion .
The punishment of a publisher who publishes matters which are not agreeable to the government , is another example of something of which it can be said that a country which has signed the United Nations Charter cannot inflict punishment of this kind .
I am also thinking the 99 strokes of the cane for the lady who was involved in the incident with Helmut Hofer .
It is truly out of all proportion for a civilized nation to do something like this .
The fact that Iran is nonetheless open to criticism and to an urgent call to turn from its ways , is demonstrated by the release of editor Faraj Sarkouhi .
I think that from within this Parliament we need to make an urgent and civilized plea to the Iranian government to turn from the path that we consider damaging to Muslim culture and Europe 's reputation .
Madam President , the election of Dr. Khatami as president showed great promise in principle .
At least he spoke out about the need for reform and democratization .
But if you have nothing , it is difficult to measure the degree of such reform or democratization .
He was given encouragement by the Union to put his ideas into practice , and not for nothing .
The actions of the Iranian regime appear to be heading in a different direction at the moment .
The official reaffirmation of the fatwa against Salman Rushdie , as Mr Oostlander said quite rightly , and the subsequent proposals to raise the price on his head , incredible as it sounds , are clear indications of this .
Vigilance is called for and the internal political events will have to be followed carefully .
The Union must naturally turn itself forcefully against the human rights violations in Iran , this we already know , and this will act as support for the country 's reform minded forces .
International attention must also be paid to the individual cases as mentioned in the resolution , so that this may save the lives of citizens .
Madam President , the editor of Iran News , a German national , an Iranian woman , and a writer all have the death threat hanging over them in a country with a centuries old civilization in which religious dictatorship lays down the law .
A few thoughts on this , Madam President .
The editor of Iran News did not receive a public trial .
How can one threaten someone , coincidentally a European citizen , with execution because he fell in love with a woman ?
During its final phase , the previous government in Iran declared that it would not carry out his execution .
For a long time attempts were made to propagate this as a positive step during the ' so-called ' critical dialogue which never amounted to anything .
But now it has been very clearly stated that the fatwa against Rushdie is irrevocable , and there are even reports that the price on his head has been raised .
If you are familiar with the fact , Mr President , that the current President Khatami was the Minister of Culture nine years ago and the fatwa against Rushdie came under his responsibility , then one has to seriously question the call this same Khatami now makes as President for dialogue and relaxation in the sphere of culture .
When , moreover , official government officials compare the Rushdie affair with pronouncements made by Roger Garaudy , who denies the genocide of six million Jews , then we may conclude that we are a long way off from any relaxation with and within the Iranian regime .
All these horrific events are taking place in a country which offers enormous economic potential .
Apart from the d 'Amato Law , absolutely apart from this , which badly frustrates and hampers the EU , apart from this law , one may ask oneself if one should invest in such a dictatorship .
We are told that the government 's story is for internal use , and that it has another story for external use .
But what is the true face of Iran ?
With so much oil in the back garden , the production of long-range rockets , the export of terrorism , and religious terrorism , well , Mr President , this true face of Iran , I feel very uneasy about this .
If Iran does have good intentions , and if the positive signal of the release of the editor really does mean something , then the concrete step-by-step dialogue will start , and today 's resolution in which we ask for these people not to be executed , might be a good example of this .
Madam President , Commissioner , for the umpteenth time we have to deal with serious cases of violation of human rights in Iran .
We were all under the illusion that the new course of Khatami would have made it unnecessary , but that was an illusion !
Reality is dramatically different .
Only in recent months have tens of death sentences by stoning been pronounced in Iran .
Stoning is not just a death sentence , but something more , a barbarous and unacceptable method for any civilian society .
One of these sentences by stoning was pronounced against a girl who was still breathing an hour after being stoned and died later in hospital .
As recalled , Morteza Firouzi , the editor of Iran News , has recently been sentenced to death .
The citizen Helmut Hofer has also been given a first-degree death sentence .
Another barbarity is that of the 99 lashes inflicted on the young woman accused of having sexual relations with the German citizen .
Finally , the death sentence against Rushdie has been confirmed and the reward for killing him has been increased !
I think that these incidents show that the Iranian regime cannot offer any guarantee today , not so much with regard to democracy but over the minimum values of human civility .
I think that Council and the Commission should exert all possible pressure , at all levels , to guarantee at least a minimum level of civility .
Commissioner Marín , do you not think that the critical dialogue the Commission rightly undertook should at least be subject to this minimum level of civility and should now be reviewed ?
Madam President , my colleagues from the various groups have reiterated the concern we all have .
Far from having improved , we all have the impression that the human rights situation in Iran is getting worse and that , despite the countries of the European Union holding out their hand , the Iranian regime is answering with provocations with respect to the two European citizens that have been mentioned .
In fact , in the case of Mr Rushdie , they are even threatening to increase the reward for whoever kills him on behalf of the Iranian regime .
Individual cases have been mentioned here , but we do not how many other cases and situations we are unaware of , due to the situation in the country where the regime does not permit the basic rules of democracy and transparency .
We should devote our solidarity and concern to them . I also support the points which have been made here .
It seems to me that , rather than improving , the human rights situation has deteriorated ; the Community institutions must therefore reflect seriously and set out the reasons why they believe that this is the case .
I get the impression , Commissioner and Madam President-in-office of the Council , that the situation has deteriorated , and I believe that reflection on our political relations , whether it be called critical dialogue or something else , must also be reviewed .
I would like to mention a point made by Mrs van Bladel , because I believe that mixing human rights and economic interests or economic relations is tremendously cynical . We here in the Parliament are left with the impression that this reflection - that the situation has not improved - should lead to a more critical reflection on the policy favoured by the Council and the Commission .
Mr President , the election last year of Dr Mohamed Khatami as President of Iran was expected in a number of quarters to herald a substantial improvement in the state 's attitude on human rights issues .
Sadly , these expectations have not been fulfilled and it is becoming increasingly clear that the influence of the Ayatollah Ali Khamenei and of the most fanatical sections of the revolutionary guards is continuing to shape the regime 's policies on human rights and that the new president is apparently in complete accord with this .
This is demonstrated most clearly in the reaffirmation of the fatwa against Salman Rushdie and the death sentence by stoning on the German businessman , Helmut Hofer , which has already been referred to by many Members in this House .
In the last six months , there have apparently been seven official executions in which individuals convicted by an Iranian court have been stoned to death .
In the last 12 months , some 200 executions are estimated to have taken place in all , 9 in public in the last week alone .
At the same time , there has been no let-up in policies which have led to other violations of human and women 's rights by the regime and the case of Morteza Firouzi is referred to in our resolution today .
The conclusion must therefore be that there has been no improvement in the human rights situation in the Iranian Republic .
In some respects the situation is actually getting worse .
In these circumstances , it is important that Parliament reiterates its appeal to the Council and to European Union Member States to maintain and increase the pressure on the Iranian regime on human rights issues .
This has been called for from every quarter of this House and I hope that the Commission will in fact respond positively to our appeal today .
Mr President , what is really serious about what is happening in Iran , with the repeated attacks on human rights , is that it is taking place in the name of Islam and in reference to the Koran .
In this way people are given a false impression .
Respect for this great world religion is undermined , not only among Europeans and Americans , but throughout the world .
Obviously it is Parliament 's business to protest against what is happening in Iran , and not only there , but also in Algeria and other places .
But it is even more important that the Muslims who feel the same as we do , i.e. that this cannot be right and that it must be changed , now have the courage to speak out and to unite with us in a clear repudiation of attacks on human rights in the Muslim world wherever they may take place .
Mauritania
Mr President , I would like to thank the different groups that supported the European Radical Alliance 's initiative concerning Mauritania and I would like to give you some details about the resolution .
The Mauritanian authorities were disturbed at the fact that our text , according to them , exposed the practice of slavery in Mauritania .
Our text does nothing of the sort .
It condemns slavery in general and points out , on the contrary , that , according to the Mauritanian government , slavery no longer exists in their country .
We hope that these declarations correspond to the reality of the situation , and we note that , in all cases , neither the Mauritanian authorities nor foreign observers have been in agreement on this point .
Moreover , if slavery has disappeared , why do they refuse to accept the legal existence and right of expression of organizations trying to ensure that slavery is effectively and definitively abolished ?
The aim of our resolution was precisely to defend this right of expression and , in the case of legal proceedings , to ensure that everyone receives a fair trial .
It is clear in this matter that the Mauritanian public authorities , in pursuing people who had expressed their opinions on a French television programme , wanted and obtained the justice that it denied political opponents and supporters of human rights . This is shown perfectly through the type of accusations they made , that is , the membership of unauthorized organizations and the propagation of false news abroad for shameful political ends .
You can see right through it .
I believe that our Parliament must firmly reiterate through its vote that all signatory countries to the Lomé Convention must submit to the democratic rules that form the basis of our partnership . It should also point out that the Mauritanian government would stand to gain if it abandoned the legal proceedings it had begun and the sentences it had imposed , and that all forms of slavery in all countries should be universally eradicated .
It is now up to the Mauritanian authorities to demonstrate , through a liberal attitude , the truthfulness of their statements on this last point .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 12 February four Mauritanian people were convicted .
People who are all active in human rights organizations , or in an organization called SOS Esclavage .
But the strange thing is , and I would like to draw my colleagues ' attention to this , that these two organizations are recognized and have observer status with the African Commission on Human Rights , and with the nations belonging to the Organization of African Unity .
If they are given recognition on this level , it must mean that these organizations mean something .
The only thing I wish to draw attention to in this debate is the severity , the weight of the punishment which was pronounced , compared to the facts .
Because only one out of the four people made declarations during the broadcast in question .
The others did not even do so .
Yet they have been sentenced to thirteen months unconditional imprisonment and extremely high fines .
This does arouse suspicion .
I believe the Mauritanian authorities when they say that they have legally abolished slavery , but then they should be interested in cooperating with all those who also want to see the last remote corners of this practice removed .
Commissioner , it is already quite some time that here in Parliament we talked about Mauritania , and I am afraid that this is because this country is spiritually so far away from us and also unfortunately because we have to some extent expelled it from our minds .
I am fully convinced that we , as Europeans , bear much of the responsibility for the present situation in Mauritania .
Of course , what is condemned only in cases of emergency must be condemned absolutely .
But we should consider what we can do better .
If we look at the situation and consider that in the 1960s Mauritania - on a very low basis - was still a relatively wellfunctioning nomadic state and really only the great famine and our utterly wrongly applied development aid led to the situation there which we now see , namely that all the nomadic inhabitants have gathered around Nouakchoff , the capital , just waiting for the aeroplanes which came with aid , which has led to the situation that they no longer in any way lead their normal lives with their normal social structure , this should really give us food for thought and we should consider how we can manage things better in future .
The fact is , - and that has been appropriately documented on television - that there still exist horrors such as slavery .
But we must also consider and say that the international community of states is really called upon to do everything in its power - and this applies not just to Mauritania , but also to other states where slavery still exists - to bring this situation to an end .
The old slave route still of course operates in Africa unfortunately .
There are of course other states - I am thinking for example of Mali - which have a similar situation , with which we must all be concerned , but then please in cooperation with the Arab League .
For we cannot do it alone , we must work along with our partners on the spot in the appropriate manner .
If a country like Mauritania wants to meet its obligations , keep the Lome-Agreement and accept appropriate standards , then it must also take full heed of certain standards which we set .
Madam President , Commissioner , the shocking images on television have revealed that slavery does exist in Mauritania .
This is contrary to the official statements which say that slavery was abolished in 1981 .
The government 's response leaves no doubt .
Instead of tackling abuse the messengers were detained .
The present reaction from the Union is right .
You are aware that Mauritania belongs to the Lomé Convention , so human rights ought to be respected and slavery naturally banned .
The arrest of anti-slavery activists must be rectified immediately .
The Commissioner knows what I am talking about .
He has often witnessed this in ACP situations .
During the next session of the ACP Assembly , Mauritania will have to have its obligations with respect to the Lomé Convention clearly spelled out .
Quick changes are needed , and I obviously call on the Council , but also the Commission , to follow the developments in Mauritania closely , and to come up with proposals if the problems in Mauritania turn out to be structural .
I hope as they do that this is not the case .
Mr President , like other African countries , Mauritania is in the process of institutional reform .
Compared with several years ago , several significant steps have certainly been taken , although they are anything but perfect , on electoral matters and on the organization of the institutional and political system .
Our resolution , however , rightly seeks to point out and denounce a series of events and situations , that have been echoed in the international press in recent weeks , that risk jeopardizing this process and that highlight several disturbing aspects .
Firstly , we should note that , despite being abolished by law , the practice of slavery still exists , at least in certain parts of the country .
What we are asking is that , in addition to the existing legal regulations , the Mauritanian authorities should firmly undertake to eliminate any situation of unacceptable limitation and degradation of the dignity and individual rights involved in slavery .
For this purpose , the role that can be played by the associations and organizations of civilian society is very important , both in denouncing existing situations and in providing specific , moral support for past and present victims of slavery .
From this point of view , the position of the Mauritanian authorities therefore seemed surprising and unacceptable to us , for they have begun a campaign of repression against the exponents of associations committed to the defence of human rights .
What the militants of these associations are accused of ( those who have been arrested and , in some cases , sentenced to long prison sentences ) solely comprise expressions of opinion as an offence .
The fact that activities carried out for humanitarian purposes is considered a prosecutable offence casts a fatal shadow on the nature of the process of institutional reform and on the wishes of the Mauritanian authorities .
We well know that Mauritanian society is based on a delicate ethnic balance between the various members of the population .
It is precisely for this reason that we are urging the application of the basic principles of any democratic regulations , including freedom of association , abolition of expressions of opinion as an offence and , naturally , the total abolition of any remains of slavery .
The first gesture we are asking of the Mauritanian authorities is the immediate and unconditional release of the exponents of the humanitarian organizations imprisoned and the end of all proceedings brought against them .
Chile
Mr President , it is with much regret that the whole world has heard the news that in March the Chilean dictator , Pinochet , will be able to become a senator for life .
As also stated in the resolution of the Partito Popolare , it is true that a basic constitution still exists in Chile whereby all former Presidents of the Republic , democratically elected , become senators for life ; it is amazing , however , that this political group here present has nothing to say , either on the fact that Pinochet may be considered a former President democratically elected , or on the torture he has practised .
At the moment , Pinochet is accused of genocide , not just in his own country , but also in an EU country , Spain , as genocide has been committed against the populations of Spanish origin , as maintained by a Spanish court .
For these reasons , we cannot accept logic of this kind and we believe it necessary to help the Chilean population and the Chilean MPs opposed to this initiative .
In particular , we believe it necessary to amend the Chilean Constitution , not as an act of interference but as political support for those suffering the consequences of a criminal dictatorship .
Mr President , we are all aware of the complicated transition process experienced by Chile , that the progression from an awful dictatorship to democracy has not exactly been easy and that it caused many scars which still remain .
I would like to point out two of them : some of the sections of the current constitution , and the fact that General Pinochet has been active as head of the Armed Forces and is trying to continue in the same way as a senator for life .
Pinochet is today the clearest example of the impunity in Latin America , and I would say in the world .
Can you imagine , Mr von Habsburg , having to sit alongside Mr Karadzic in this House for the rest of your life ?
I think that many legitimate , Chilean representatives feel disgusted , not only at a personal but also at a political level , at the possibility they face .
A large section of Chilean civil society is opposed to this situation .
This includes the Christian Democrats , whose political judgment in this matter is support by socialists and supporters of other tendencies .
There is also the application from the Communist Party to have Pinochet brought to trial for genocide .
We do not want interference from here , but we do want to help the democrats in Chile to complete their transition period and to put Pinochet in his place , because human rights are inviolable , indivisible and have no boundaries .
How , for example , could this House not help the family of Carmelo Soria , who is calling for the two murderers who are free , despite it being known that they carried out that terrible crime against an international official of Spanish origin , to be brought to justice ?
How can we not come out in solidarity with Judge García Castellón 's initiatives , which are trying to find justice for so many murder victims and missing persons , who also came from my country ?
In the European Union , there are unfortunately still some people - for example , Attorney General Cardenal or the prosecutor for the National Criminal Court , Mr Fungairiño - who do not understand that in Chile there was a dictatorship and that those responsible for it are still active .
In effect , this is not interference ; rather , we are supporting the democrats , and I hope that everyone here in this House understands , precisely because credibility is becoming easier to win every day and in every case .
Mr President , it is obvious that this is a democratic Parliament which makes democracy the focus and objective of its actions and which has always displayed enormous interest in and concern for the evolution of countries which have come out of a dictatorship , and particularly in Chile .
We have showed such interest in Chile that during the time of the dictatorship and over the following years we have been able to have a budget heading devoted exclusively to Chile 's transition to democracy .
In addition , at the same time , we gave our support and approval to the process of democratization , and we can today gladly state that Chile is a democratic country .
I am totally against those who argue that this type of intervention is interference in external affairs of another country .
I believe that in the global village the world has become , we all have the right and the obligation to give our own opinion , particularly when there is a case of interference in human rights .
Through this resolution we are showing our support for the Chilean government , the political parties , the institutions and the citizens in general who are looking for justice .
We know how difficult it has been for them on many occasions and how they have had to overcome many obstacles .
However , we believe that it is illogical and incomprehensible , as well as the fact that it presents a bad image of the country to the outside world , that the greatest representative of the dictatorship and of the attack on the government and on the people be appointed a senator for life without a vote , particularly when there are clear judicial grounds against it , as laid out here .
Whatever the result of the vote may be , and I hope it will be positive , it will not upset the relations between the European Parliament and the people and democratic government of Chile .
I believe , as stated here , that it is a direct action against impunity , and the best way to prevent future dictatorships .
Mr President , the European Parliament has a strong record of condemning violations in Chile under the former military dictatorship of General Pinochet and of welcoming the return to civilian rule and the genuine progress which is being achieved in the observance of human rights in that country .
This is why we cannot allow the appointment of Pinochet to Chile 's Senate , due on the 11 of next month , and subject to protest by all the main political parties in Chile , to pass without international protest from ourselves .
We do not forget the 3 , 000 people killed at the hands of the military despots .
We know that today there are still 542 outstanding cases of disappearances , of which no evidence is known .
We were watching , when just last September , political activist Gladys Marin was jailed for five weeks , simply for speaking of Pinochet 's human rights violations .
So why , when this House voted to debate this question yesterday , did the Christian Democrats vote against ?
It was only by the narrow margin of 206 votes to 200 that we were able to hold this debate at all .
It cannot be , as Mr von Habsburg says , because this is regarded in Chile as international interference , when the main political parties and civil society have communicated to us in advance that they are supporting the terms of this resolution .
It cannot be because this would be injurious to the process of national reconciliation in Chile .
What could do more damage to that than the continued public office of a man with one of the bloodiest records in Latin America 's bloody history ?
And it cannot be out of some misinformed support for constitutional principles in Chile , which Pinochet is seeking to exploit , because critics have long known how the military wrote the rules of transition precisely to protect Pinochet from being removed as chief and to allow him to serve now as a non-elected senator .
Europe understands only too well how the tools of democracy can be seized by dictators to undermine democracy itself .
We should condemn Pinochet with a single and united voice , and I hope the Conservatives and Christian Democrats will examine their consciences before they decide to do otherwise .
Mr President , when you ask the man in the street in the Netherlands who is the president of Chile , you will get a deafening silence .
When they say , well , is it not Pinochet ?
Yes , that rings a bell , because it links in with what we experienced , or at least Chileans experienced as one the darkest periods in their otherwise illustrious and democratic history .
That is why we show solidarity with the actions , the amazement and the protest against the appointment of presidents or senators for life .
It is a good thing we do not have this in the Netherlands .
So be it , because we are very modest , as you know .
To get to the point , I do not think it right that the Chilean people , the Chilean government , which has been on the right path to democracy for years now , award this honour to this man who was the model , the negative model of the terrors of the time .
Belarus
Mr President , the resolution before us is long overdue .
It was discussed for a long time and is a compromise ..
Many suggestions and alterations from various groups in the House were incorporated into it before it was submitted .
Therefore I do not claim that it is a green resolution but I believe that it is a resolution of this House .
The news about arbitrary arrests and deprivation of freedom , about repression of the free press - for example the film maker Saschewatzki was attacked in his apartment because he showed a critical film on German television - requires a response from the European Parliament .
We have been exposed for a long time now to the questions ; why is the European Parliament silent when faced with the fact that there is practically a war against the media in Belarus ?
Is it perhaps that we do not care about the fate of people ?
Is there maybe a creeping acceptance of Lukaschenko 's policies ?
I hope that with this resolution we give a clear answer .
Lukaschenko has long recognizedd the isolation into which he has driven his country and its people , and he is very interested in international recognition .
But he is not prepared to make concessions in the direction of democratisation .
Therefore any demand for international human rights is a precondition of recognition .
I hope that we do not betray the trust of the Belarus people and that the resolution receives the broad agreement of this House .
Mr President . Thank you , Mrs Schroedter .
Of course I must say that you have pointed out that we have worked it out together .
You are right .
We have discussed it , of course we have not at this precise moment spoken about this resolution .
But we do not want to debate it now , that is not important .
It is certainly important to mention that the European Parliament is not silent .
The European Parliament has several times pronounced on Belarus .
Moreover it has always been you who , with others , have pointed out very emphatically that we must do something , and we are naturally very grateful to you for this .
Allow me to refer briefly to a few points .
The European Parliament is not silent and something is being done in Belarus .
Not driven by the government , that is true , but we are pleased to note that there is once more an opposition which is re-forming , which is finding its feet and which clearly has the chance , with the aid of the international community , with the aid of the European Union actually to become a political force .
We confirm that we have succeeded in equipping the OSCE mission , that the government has made concessions and that is a step towards a positive future and we want and ought to do everything together with the Commission to ensure survival and hope that we quickly achieve positive results .
We confirm that hopefully - the Commission will perhaps be able to say something about this - we have re-established the TACIS Democracy Programme .
Mrs Schroedter has rightly referred in her resolution to the fact that we must extend it to the exchange of young students who can come to us to gain experience .
The programme which we have now is too narrow but we are grateful that we have been able to set it up .
Something is being done , and we must do everything possible to show Lukaschenko again that democratically stable and healthy circumstances must be created so that the integration of Belarus into the European context can finally succeed .
The European Parliament has moreover always said : " The door is open and it will remain open ' , but of course on condition that general , universal human rights are recognizedd , and I hope that we in the European Parliament can continue to speak positively in favour of this .
Mr President , I too would like at this point to thank Mrs Schroedter for her efforts on behalf of White Russia .
I believe that , simply because it is one of the last major dictatorships on European soil , it is necessary to give appropriate signals and to say that we in the European Parliament do not want such a regime in our immediate neighbourhood .
I would however also like to thank Mrs Mann and say : Something has undoubtedly been done in White Russia , something has changed for the better .
Organisations today can become active , albeit on a restricted basis , which was not all that long ago really not the case , and we should admit that here in this Parliament .
Of course it is clear that these steps do not go far enough .
I believe we must also cast a glance at the conditions under which Belarus exists at the moment .
The fact is that the relationship of dependency on Russia is a very close one , that the cooperation between Belarus and Russia is very , very close .
I once permitted myself at question time - if I remember rightly it was two months ago - to ask the responsible Council Representative the question , whether there might be a possibility during the next negotiations with the Russian government to insist that Russia makes its influence on Mr Lukaschenko tell , to improve these circumstances .
This was accepted at the time very positively .
I would also be very grateful if Commissioner Marin would take this idea further and say : we cannot apply the lever in White Russia .
We must undoubtedly apply it in Russia in order to achieve a better result there .
Nevertheless the resolution is necessary and it is important that we state our case .
But we must also be quite clear that as soon as something really changes for the better we must also honour it appropriately .
Congo
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when Mobutu 's dictatorial regime fell in May 1997 , the international community expected and hoped that in an era of pacification and democratisation would finally dawn in the Congo ( formerly Zaire ) .
However , almost a year on , it appears that a very different situation has emerged .
As stated yesterday in Geneva by the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Kabila has done no better than his predecessor Mobutu .
A number of facts bear out this statement , in particular , frequent public executions by firing-squad following summary trials by military tribunals , as occurred recently in a number of cities including Goma , Kizangani or Kinshasa , the banning of all political activities and of all parties ( the Minister for the Interior has stated that they will be severely castigated ) , beatings and all forms of corporal punishment , obstruction of the United Nations mission responsible for investigating the massacre of Hutu refugees in which Kabila 's's troops participated , with the result that last December the mission was obliged to leave the country at a moment 's notice , imprisonment and deportation of prominent members of the political opposition .
A few days ago , the opposition leader Tshisekedi was imprisoned and removed to an unknown destination , as reported by a number of news agencies , prompting fears for his personal safety and offering further unequivocal proof of the new government 's intentions .
It appears that this climate of violence is spawning an internal guerrilla movement which could spread to other central African countries such as Rwanda , Burundi or Uganda , causing a renewed upsurge of refugee movement .
In addition , the long and painful peace and democratisation process in Angola could suffer further set-backs on account of instability in neighbouring Congo , thereby jeopardizing the stability of the region as a whole .
For these reasons , the draft resolution submitted by this Group urges the Council and Member States to make every effort to guide the Congo back to the road of democratisation , and the Commission to review the terms and conditions of EU aid .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I had hoped that in this European Parliament I would never have to speak again about what we call the Republic of Congo , the country which until recently had been called Zaire for a long time .
The change of regime and Mobutu 's disappearance offered an excellent opportunity for this potentially rich country to finally be governed intelligently , honestly and ably .
What was required was of course trustworthy , reliable , and able people to help govern the country .
What needs to be done is not difficult to describe .
It is clear that attention must first be paid to public health , food supplies , to agriculture in other words , to transport which is in a state of chaos , improvements in education , if economic development is to be achieved .
In addition to political issues , the rule of law , human rights and reconciliation with the population .
This presupposes people working together to achieve this peace , this cooperation .
Under the Mobutu regime cooperation existed between the able opposition people .
They called the association within which they cooperated l 'Union sacrée : the holy union .
The holy union produced remarkable texts ; a draft constitution , a plan for a transitional regime and so no .
If these had been followed up , another regime could have assumed power without bloodshed .
But Mobutu never understood this , and now , to our disillusionment , we note that Mr Kabila has not really understood this either , and that he is not taking up the opportunities to work together with positive opposition powers of former times .
Mr Tshisekedi has expressed his willingness to cooperate , but Kabila has rejected this .
Worse still , Tshisekedi 's offer is not only being rejected , but he was arrested , as well a few young leaders and they are now - the terrible phrase crops up again - political prisoners .
Well , this Parliament must not let something like this slip passed , and must point out in all its relations that we defend the development , but also human rights , democracy , and the rule of law in this big African country .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Congo Democratic Republic , which had given rise to so many hopes at the time it was established , is profoundly disappointing and disregarding the legitimate expectations of the International Community .
The brutal arrest and unlawful internment of Etienne Fishekedi , in Kinshasa on 12 February are just the latest episode in a deliberate design of the authorities of that country to destroy any real opposition .
The restoration of the rule of law and the real commencement of a process of genuine democratization are the minimum conditions for maintaining EU aid .
The European Union , but also all the Member States , should send the Kinshasa government a firm reminder before it is too late for the Congo Democratic Republic as well , as has often happened in the past .
Just over ten years ago Tshisekedi was imprisoned on a number of occasions .
He was also banned to the interior , to his place of origin .
These are scenarios which repeat themselves .
I must say that I am not surprised that we are witnessing a repeat scenario , because the way in which Kabila came to power had little or nothing to do with a real uprising form within , but more with several countries surrounding the former Zaire wanting to settle something .
So we are having a situation which starts off with someone with weapons coming to power , who promises elections at some point in the far future , but in the meantime forbids political activities , creates problems with regard to free media and deals with political opponents in a completely impossible way .
I think what matters now is that measures and actions are taken , that we not only take note of what is happening , but try to gain influence , for example through the pressure which can be applied by the European Union and the Member States .
Mr President , I would like to clarify some of the various points on human rights put forward by the different speakers .
As regards Iran , the Commission is extremely concerned about the violations of human rights , which are clearly documented in the reports by Mr Garretón , the United Nations ' special rapporteur on human rights in Iran .
The Commission would be prepared to urge the Iranian government to permit the special rapporteur to enter the country as soon as possible , in order to allow him to draw up a report on the human rights situation in Iran .
As the Union has reiterated many times , the Commission still deeply regrets the existence of the fatwa against the British author , Salman Rushdie , which has already been in place for nine years .
I can confirm that this situation is contrary to international law and puts not only Mr Rushdie in danger , but also the people connected to him .
The Commission is seriously concerned about the recent measures taken by the Iranian authorities against a German citizen , Mr Helmut Hofer , and a publisher of an Iranian newspaper , Mr Mortesa Firuzi , who have been unjustifiably sentenced to death for crimes allegedly committed in Iran .
The Commission has already made its opinion known , and is counting on the Iranian authorities to ensure that these cases are reconsidered .
We welcome the recent liberation of Mr Faraj Sahouhi and we hope that his case will set a precedent for more liberal individual human rights policies on the part of the Iranian government .
The Commission also warmly welcomed the decision by the Council of General Subjects on 26 January to reconsider European Union relations with Iran under the current circumstances , and this question - relations with Iran - will in fact be one of the main points at the meeting of the Council of General Subjects next Monday .
As regards Mauritania , the Commission has , through the usual channels , followed with great concern the arrest and sentencing of Mauritanians who were demonstrating in favour of human rights , and it has informed the Mauritanian ambassador in Brussels of our concerns and also that we want to be kept informed about the situation .
In general , cooperation between Mauritania and the European Commission has been aimed at consolidating democracy and the rule of law , as well as respect for human rights and fundamental liberties , and we must recognize that , at least in the case of Mauritania , very positive efforts have been made in recent years with respect to the country 's situation and a significant process of democratization has been started .
Naturally , in terms of the laws and the constitution , we all know that slavery is forbidden , but we must realize that traditional practices still survive - as reported - where , in certain regions , although not actually slavery , similar types of work relations are still practised .
We can therefore state that we are making the necessary political gestures to reveal this situation to the Mauritanian authorities , in order to resolve it through the normal diplomatic channels .
Having said this , however , the Commission , as you know , is financing a whole range of activities aimed precisely at promoting the rule of law by way of the Mauritanian Indicative Programme .
As regards Chile , as most of the Members have pointed out , the process of democratization is - or has been - one of this Parliament 's concerns and I believe that it was Mr Pons Grau who noted that it is one of the rare budget headings in the Community budget where there has been constant financial support for political parties , trade unions and civic organizations during recent years in the country .
Nevertheless , the Commission must admit that it is a complex process , and consequently it is inevitable that it will involve contradictions which may seem difficult to understand from a European standpoint . Objectively speaking , we all know that there was a dictatorship - who would deny that ? - but in the case of Chile , the country is undergoing an internal process which must be understood in all its complexity , and by this , I am in no way excusing the crimes or abuse which took place under the dictatorship .
In fact , you know that the Chilean government has already made it known that it will not accept this resolution .
It is a matter which must obviously be considered with much subtlety and delicacy .
But I am here to represent the institutional position of the Commission .
I have my own opinion on the matter .
And , in the same way as if don Otto were here , I would have no problem saying - because he used to point out that he was older than General Pinochet - " long live Mr don Otto ' , but I would not dare to say " long live the other younger veteran ' .
I would never say that .
As regards Belarus , the violations of human rights of individuals or groups opposed to the Belorussian regime are unfortunately true .
However , European Union relations with Belarus depend on two delicate matters . I admit , as one speaker pointed out , that an element concerning working in Belarus is that it also means operating in cooperation with Russia .
But I also have to take into consideration the Commission 's institutional position .
The two delicate matters are : firstly , the creation of an OSCE inspection and advisory group in Minsk , in the field , which is planned , in principle , for the end of February , and the execution of its mandate ; and secondly , the possible adoption by the Belorussian authorities of the TACIS programme for the development of civil society , expected , in principle , in March .
If Belarus - either the government or the President - cooperates constructively with the OSCE and accepts the European Union 's programme , we will reevaluate our relations with them , since we are allowed to do this under the Council 's resolutions .
Therefore , these two conditions are going to be set out in February and March .
If , on the contrary , instead of receiving a positive response , we received a negative one in this respect - if there was no group set up in Minsk , if obstacles were put in the way of the development of the programme to support civil society - , the European Union would consequently apply the Council 's decision and we would have to declare that it was not possible to work with the Belarus government .
For that reason , you will have an answer regarding the OSCE in Minsk after February , and regarding the negotiations with the government after March , and the Commission will present its evaluation to the Council and Parliament in April .
As regards the Democratic Republic of Congo , I must point out that we all need to show - particularly given the concern of a veteran of the Lomé Convention such as Mr Tindemans for the country- that we thought that , with the fall of Mobutu , things were going to change .
Arbitrary arrests are taking place and certain leaders of the Congolese opposition are moving outside the city . In this respect , the Commission , along with the Member States , and certain ones in particular , is in contact with the new authorities in the Democratic Republic of Congo to inform them of our point of view on this matter .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p. m .
The next item is the joint debate on the following draft resolutions :
B4-0185 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on sub-critical nuclear testing ; -B4-0195 / 98 by Mr McKenna and Mr Schroedter , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on sub-critical nuclear testing ; -B4-0237 / 98 by Mr Manisco and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on sub-critical nuclear testing ; -B4-0245 / 98 by Mrs Theorin , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons .
Mr President , I am pleased that what we started in the Subcommittee on Security and Disarmament , a treatment of the so-called sub-critical testing , has a follow-up , a sequel in an urgent debate .
It is vital that the European Union makes efforts to convince America to abandon these nuclear tests .
These sub-critical tests - I will briefly explain , they are tests to see whether one 's nuclear material is still in good condition - are not contrary to the letter nuclear test ban treaty , the CTBT , but they do violate its spirit very seriously .
This treaty will only enter into force with difficulty , because it requires the ratification of countries such as India and Pakistan .
And it is these countries which use their resistance against the American tests to not ratify the CTBT .
These developments might mean the entire house of cards of international disarmament might collapse .
The nuclear nonproliferation treaty is linked to the CTBT and will therefore be under great pressure .
The opportunities offered by the end of the cold war to get rid of large categories of weapons of mass destruction , are thus lost .
It is very unpleasant and very peculiar that this is the result of American actions at the same time that this big America is coming down so strongly on Iraqi weapons of mass destruction , and rightly , by the way .
The Member States of the Union are wrongly keeping very quiet .
Instead , the EU Member States should lodge a protest with the United States , and invite them to end these tests .
Moreover , the Union should make a joint effort to get other countries to ratify the CTBT Treaty .
European efforts are needed to save this treaty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , classical case for the EU to prove that it is serious about a common foreign and security policy , for the comprehensive banning of these tests has been signed by all EU Member States .
Thus the Member States assume the responsibility for ensuring genuine adherence to this treaty .
The danger that it will be surreptitiously undermined - Mr Bertens has already said this , - is very great if the USA continues to test and , above all , confidence in this treaty will be greatly undermined .
It must therefore be made clear : this treaty is valid and it must not be secretly destroyed by the USA 's tests , for there is no international verification system by which it can be determined whether or not the test is subcritical .
Atomic weapons are weapons of mass destruction and the USA is demonstrating to us right now the methods it would use against weapons of mass destruction .
I am in any case of the opinion that it is absurd to use military methods and I prefer a diplomatic solution .
The EU must in this case prove its qualifications in the diplomatic sphere .
I hope that it now puts massive support behind making the agreement work .
I believe Mr Marin owes us an answer about exactly how this is going to happen .
Mr President , after many years of negotiations and strong opposition both from nuclear powers and threshold states , it was finally decided to have a comprehensive ban on all nuclear weapons testing .
In September 1996 the treaty was opened for signature and all the countries of the EU have signed up to this treaty .
The intention of a comprehensive test ban treaty was to stop further development of nuclear weapons .
After the end of the Cold War this was an obvious thing , even if France , against strong world opinion , first reserved the right to carry out a series of nuclear weapons tests to improve its nuclear weapons .
Many citizens were not convinced of the goodwill of the nuclear powers and warned that development of new nuclear weapons could take place through laboratory testing .
In the treaty the signatories commit themselves to refrain from any action which would defeat its object and purpose .
Unfortunately , we are now forced to note that the USA has carried out a series of subcritical nuclear tests and intends to carry out four more before September this year .
Some of the world 's leading nuclear weapon scientists have strongly questioned whether these tests are indeed subcritical , not least because they are taking place underground and are not verified .
The argument that these tests have to be carried out in order to be sure about the safety and reliability of existing nuclear weapons stocks fails on its own absurdity .
It is true that tritium slowly deteriorates after many years , but not in such a way that there is no longer any risk that nuclear weapons will explode and cause the devastation for which they are intended .
Many countries and a large number of members of the American Congress have expressed their concern over these tests .
The crux of the matter , however , is that these tests and new nuclear weapons development seriously jeopardize the international test ban treaty .
Even if , contrary to expectations , they did not contravene the letter of the test ban treaty , it is clear that they contravene the spirit of the treaty .
This is one of our most important international treaties , and it is unacceptable for the USA to seriously undermine the treaty through these tests .
Our resolution therefore demands consequently that the American government should stop these tests , that it should state in an official declaration that these tests are not part of a new weapons development programme and that the development of new nuclear weapons is not part of the USA 's policy .
Mr President , the position of the Group of the European People 's Party 's on the other resolutions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is well known .
This is the first resolution to be presented on the topic of nuclear weapon testing and sub-critical testing .
We have submitted no motion for a resolution , we are not going to table any amendments and , in fact , the Group of the European People 's Party intends to vote against all of these resolutions .
It plans to do this for one reason only and that is because we believe that it is not the right time to submit them .
At the moment , there is a serious situation in the Gulf , and we are talking about a weapon whose main strength is deterrence . Taking into consideration the fact that the only thing which can change the situation in the Gulf is dissuasion , we believe that it is the worst possible time to talk about such things .
That is why the Group of the European People 's Party is going to vote against all the resolutions .
Moreover , it would be better if we gave it some time and the United States Senate ratified the CTBT Treaty .
Mr President , I can immediately follow on from what the previous speaker has said and I also share his estimate relating to the choice of time and agree with him that it is not necessarily a matter which requires great urgency .
I also have doubts whether the authors of these resolutions have really taken the trouble to find out exactly what subcritical tests are , for they are tests in which no chain reactions ensue , in which no radioactive substances are released above the tolerance limits .
Here the question arises why the reasons given by the USA cannot be accepted , namely that this amongst other things serves to check the safety of existing stocks .
Each of us would prefer if we could do without all these things , but since we have people in the world like Saddam Hussein and the like we cannot in my opinion afford as it were to divest ourselves completely of all our defence capabilities whilst Saddam Hussein for his part has no thoughts of following a good example which under certain circumstances could be given here .
Nowhere have I read that one of the countries which even today still produces weapons of mass destruction including anti-personnel mines would consider supporting the test ban treaties and destroying its own weapons of mass destruction if these subcritical tests were now halted .
Again I ask for this proof to be offered .
It might perhaps be appropriate to explain to Günther that the reason for our criticism is precisely that it has not been possible to check that these tests really are subcritical .
We base this on information from the world 's leading nuclear weapons scientists .
That is what we are demanding , i.e. that these tests should be stopped until it can be proven that they are subcritical .
There is every reason in the world to question these tests . The Americans still have nuclear weapons .
All the nuclear powers still have nuclear weapons . But we should not develop new nuclear weapons .
Mr President , the Commission supports the work carried out by the European Union and participates in it in order to convince third countries which have not yet done so to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty .
In this respect , within the Union , all the Member States have begun national procedures to quickly ratify the Treaty .
The entry into force of this Treaty will undoubtedly lead to a crucial stage of disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation at international level .
And any element which obstructs this ratification or any delay which might take place in any of the ratifications , as Mr Fabra Vallés pointed out , would cause great concern .
That is the Commission 's view on this matter .
We want a rapid and unanimous ratification of the Treaty .
Mr President , I had asked the Commissioner to tell us in concrete terms what the Commission plans .
Will the Commission make a proposal to the " Foreign Affairs ' council , about how this test ban , on the assumption that everyone is ready to ratify it , even on w worldwide basis , can be implemented really effectively by everybody ?
Is there in this respect a concrete proposal , is there a plan ?
And when will the Commission present this to the Council ?
Madam speaker , I am as in favour of the suspension of nuclear testing as I can be , but the fact is that it is very difficult for the Commission to make a proposal since , as you all know , it has no authority to do so .
This is why I did not respond ; if I could do it , I would , but , as you know , we have no authority in this matter .
Thank you , Commissioner , Marín .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following draft resolutions :
Floods in Greece -B4-0216 / 98 by Mr Trakatellis and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the disastrous floods that have occurred recently in various parts of northern Greece and in the Greek islands of the Aegean Sea ; -B4-0226 / 98 by Mr Daskalaki and Mr Kaklamanis , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on the floods in northern Greece and in the Greek islands of the Aegean Sea ; -B4-0238 / 98 by Mr Alavanos , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the disaster caused by floods in Greece ; -B4-0251 / 98 by Mr Avgerinos and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the floods in northern Greece and the Aegean islands .
Storm in Malaga -B4-0257 / 98 by Mr Galeote Quecedo and Mr Hernández Mollar , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on storms in the province of Malaga .
Floods in Greece
Mr President , on 2 and 5 February catastrophic floods of unprecedented severity afflicted many parts of Eastern Macedonia , Thrace , and some islands in the East and North Aegean .
They caused the death of 4 people and injured many others , resulted in great damage to buildings , vehicles , crops and to the infrastructure of the areas , such as roads and bridges .
With this motion we are calling for an expression of solidarity and expressing our deepest sympathy for the families of the victims and the dwellers in those areas who have suffered .
We are also asking the European Commission and the Council of the European Union to contribute towards the effort to make good the damage , with urgent economic aid .
I think the natural disasters which unfortunately take place every year in various parts of the European Union provide us all with an opportunity , and the European Union 's bodies as well , to demonstrate our presence at the side of our citizens who sustain such damage and trials as those brought about by the recent disastrous floods in Greece .
Mr President , as a subject , natural disasters repeatedly come up in the European Parliament and every time that a Member State or even a third country is afflicted by weather conditions , fire , earthquake or whatever else , there is a lot of debating .
This time it is parts of Greece which have been hit , and it is natural for us to ask the Commission and the European Parliament to express solidarity with those affected , and therein lies the problem . Because each time , we decide unanimously that those affected must be helped - and the Commission too agrees about this aid - and we ask that the often enormous damage caused should be made good , each time we in here vote for all that unanimously , but the aid often remains confined to words alone because thereafter the matter passes into the hands of the governments involved , of course , and then grinds to a halt .
So besides adopting specific resolutions - and there are clearly no objections to that , which is why we are debating it here - , perhaps we ought in future to examine another more effective way not just of expressing solidarity but of becoming more effective in substance .
Because in this specific instance , in Eastern Macedonia , Thrace and the Aegean islands and elsewhere where entire regions were flooded , not only were estates destroyed but there have been human victims and enormous damage was caused . So in this case something more is needed besides an emergency resolution .
What we vote for and decide upon must come to pass . Perhaps , besides the legitimate appeal for aid and for its approval by the Commission , this is an opportunity to re-think the whole procedure and see how we can act more effectively .
Mr President , my colleagues have told us what happened as a result of the floods , it is stated in the resolution , and I do not want to spend time needlessly .
I just want to draw Parliament 's attention and that of Mr Marín who is present today , to the type and manner and timing of aid .
It must be direct , and must be enough to make good the damage and help those people who have been left without incomes , whose products have been destroyed , who have been left homeless , with no water supply , no trace of transport and communications and other infrastructure .
All that must be made good at once .
But that , Mr Marín , is not enough .
Such disasters take place every so often , usually in border areas among the poorest in the Community , and they must be given special treatment .
There should be a scale of aid in the sense of the Community 's structural policy so that such natural disasters will result in less damage .
They need special protection .
Instead , what do you do ?
You exclude the islands of the North and East Aegean from the operational programmes of the structural policy .
Energy , transport and other such programmes .
And consequently you leave them unprotected while they are the most vulnerable to natural disasters .
Since these are border regions , there towards the Aegean , towards Evros and Turkey , they also fail to attract investment because everyone is uneasy about stability in those areas because of the notorious policy of the Turkish leadership .
Consequently , Mr Marín , please look to those two phases , immediate aid and a scale of regular aid for the protection of those areas by means of structural programmes , so that disasters will not cause such widespread damage .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the severe bad weather that has recently affected many countries in Europe and all over the world is the result of man 's ill-considered intervention in the environment .
Huge areas of forest have been destroyed , lakes have dried up , rivers have been blocked up .
Nature warns but also takes its revenge .
The same thing has happened in Greece , where last week enormous destruction was caused by severe rainstorms .
People lost their lives , crops were destroyed and people who had toiled to create their estates lost them .
We express our sympathy to the victims and to all those who suffered destruction , and Mr President , we ask the European Commission to express its sensitivity in practical ways by providing financial aid as soon as possible .
Storm in Malaga .
Mr President , I presume that you , as a neighbour from the region , although from another country , are aware of the heavy rains and violent winds experienced in Malaga from 31 January to 5 February .
This damaged farming and livestock products , land and woodland infrastructures and capital assets of all forms .
The damages represent more than 21 000 million pesetas .
I , on behalf , I would say , of almost all of the Spanish delegation , regardless of the group they belong to , would ask the Commission , through this resolution , to secure emergency aid to relieve the damage in the province of Malaga .
I am sure that Vice-President Marín will have the same degree of interest in the problem in Greece and the problem in Spain , but the truth is , Mr Marín , that in this case we have you as our defending counsel .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission shares in the suffering of the families of the victims in both Greece and in Malaga , and it regrets the physical damage caused . But I must tell you that you have put me in a difficult position , since the problem we have is that the budget heading relating to emergency aid for Community citizens who have been the victims of catastrophes has been cancelled precisely on the initiative of the European Parliament .
Therefore , it seems a bit dramatic for the Commission to have to remind you of it and maybe ask you to include it in the budget again for the coming year .
Thank you , Commissioner Marín .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended for 15 minutes while awaiting Voting Time )
We shall now proceed to the vote on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
During the vote on the accident caused by a plane in Italy :
Mr President , as the news has been published today that the Italian Government has asked the US Government to allow proceedings to be heard on the incident in Cavalese in Italy , we believe this new fact should be included in the resolution and , with the agreement of many colleagues , I would therefore like to submit the following oral amendment : " notes the formal request made by the Italian Government to the US Government to allow proceedings to be heard in Italy ' .
If everyone agrees , we can approve it .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment and adopted the resolution )
After the vote on floods in Greece :
Mr President , concerning the four resolutions on floods which the House has just voted for , three-quarters of an hour ago an insult was offered to the dignity of Parliament .
After the toil and trouble taken to prepare the resolutions , and after we took the trouble to listen to them for over half an hour , the Commissioner responsible , Mr Marín , rose and though he is not a cynic , told us most cynically that none of all that was worth a groat , because the budget line providing compensation aid has been abolished , for which Parliament shares co-responsibility .
I raise the issue as a question .
In that case , why did the Bureau accept that we could table resolutions that can have no force ?
For what reason ?
Besides , even when that budget line had not been abolished , such aid was non-existent , very limited , or it never reached its target .
Now , he tells us most cynically that it is no longer even provided for .
Then why this debate ?
Why this trick against Parliament ?
Mr. President , I am not raising the issue personally , nor out of national egoism .
Today it concerns Greece .
Tomorrow it will concern other countries .
Are we to continue playing this game ?
And if the budget line in question has been abolished , it is impossible for us to tolerate that and as a body with special responsibility for the budget we must bring it back , because it is unacceptable that fellow-humans should be suffering , afflicted by floods and natural disasters , while the Community sits there twiddling its thumbs .
Mr President , this House should know that Mr Marin is absolutely right : we were party to removing that budget line .
That is one of the reasons why Mr Avgerinos , your colleague in the Bureau , is in the process of re-examining the system of urgencies .
So it is no news to most of us .
What is ridiculous is that we keep tabling motions asking for money to be spent when there is no budget line , and Members should know that when they table resolutions .
Mr President , our Greek colleague is partly right .
Mrs Green is also only partly right .
In the resolution on Greece we are not asking for money from the Diaster Fund , but from the Structural Funds , and therefore not the ECU 5 million from before .
That was my first point .
Secondly , Tuesday afternoon , but perhaps Mrs Green did not receive a complete copy of the report , the man sitting behind you , myself and a number of colleagues agreed to ask the Presidency to consider once more whether we should discuss these resolutions on calamities in future , and to come back to this point the next time we are re-examining everything related to urgencies .
The Greek possibilities continue to exist .
In fact , before the vote , I had to explain , particularly to Mr Ephremidis - and I believe I did so calmly - that I was sorry to have to say that we cannot secure any aid for natural catastrophes because the budget heading B4-3400 has been removed .
Secondly , as regards the Structural Funds , there is another problem : the Structural Funds Regulation does not allow for payments to cover natural catastrophes .
Consequently , there is no legal basis for doing so .
Mr President , I had already risen to speak .
I would like to support Colleague Ephremidis in his efforts on behalf of the flood victims but not in his demands to the President to declare such resolutions to be inadmissible .
It is my view that it is better for us to discuss the crime which actually exists all around buildings in Brussels - discussion on this was rejected - instead of a budget line which does not really exist .
I am of the opinion that it is not the President who should make such decisions but this House .
Mr President , clearly there has been a misunderstanding by the interpreter .
I , on the contrary , said quite clearly that Mr Marín , though he is not a cynic , ... etc .
I did not say he is a cynic , but indeed , said : ' though he is not a cynic ' , but that with cynicism , in other words with extreme composure , he said that the budget does not provide for it .
I want to state that , Mr President , because I have served in this Chamber for about 20 years and never have I directed personal comments against a colleague and far less against holders of office in the Council or the European Commission .
That concludes the vote on topical and urgent subjects of major importance
Mr President , I would simply like to point out that , to my knowledge , the bell did not ring to announce the votes , or else it did not ring everywhere .
I arrived ten minutes late .
I was listening very carefully for the bell because I had a meeting .
I should have looked at my watch , but I believe that , given the stakes which have become quite significant during voting time , it would be better to ensure that the bell does ring .
Thank you .
We will check that but your presence will be recorded .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.50 p.m. and resumed at 6 p.m. )

Confidence in electronic means of payment ( continuation )
We are now taking the continuation of the debate on confidence in electronic means of payment .
Mr President , it is possible to keep the interests of consumers very clearly in view and yet at the same time be fully open to the possibilities of new technical developments .
Madame rapporteur has given us convincing proof of this by shedding bright light with her report on legal problems arising from the Commission 's communication , - for example the question which has not yet been solved satisfactorily , about the definition of the methods of payment covered by the communication and \ or a directive still to be drawn up .
Is this now to include only physical or also purely electronic payments - for instance via the Internet ?
No less urgent are the liability problems dealt with in detail by the rapporteur , which are of prime importance for the consumer .
On both questions I consider a response from the Commission , also with regard to any directive which might be issued , to be urgently necessary .
The Committee on Legal Affairs passed the report by Mrs Thors unanimously .
It would be desirable if this high House could do the same - in the interests of the modernisation of our payment systems .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Thors ' excellent report tackles with determination an extremely new and complex field in which the traditional psychology of the consumer plays a significant role .
The current market economy is still largely based on the consumer 's physical assessment of the materiality of the currency and the quality of the retailer .
This assessment also determines to a large extent the consumer 's confidence , with attitudes which , in addition , are quite different throughout the European Union .
Indeed , we are currently undergoing a revolution which is vastly upsetting our traditional attitudes . It is a revolution of a size similar to that which , in the past , saw the introduction of physical currency and the substitution of the barter economy with the market economy .
It is clear today that physical currency is disappearing and being replaced by a simple electronic record ; in particular , the sector known as cybereconomy is developing and the retailer is disappearing to be replaced by a network of electronic exchanges which are no longer represented by the faces of millions of shop assistants , but by a few multinationals which face up to the consumer and which are out of his reach .
It is this change which is leading to the consumer 's distrust .
It is therefore the consumer that needs to be taken into consideration if we want to instil new confidence in modern , technological procedures .
In a few years , as President Clinton said in a speech on 1 July 1997 , billions of dollars will be exchanged in this way . Thus , it is not enough to worry about organizing consumer protection in terms of electronic payment cards .
We must firstly create the conditions for emergence of a legal framework in order to allow for competition in the provision of exchange of procedures , by establishing rules which prevent the setting up of monopolies providing software and servers through discriminatory procedures .
Certain societies are in fact already trying to control this burgeoning cybereconomy .
Moreover , many people are amazed at the success of Bill Gates , for example .
These companies are so powerful that they already elude the reach of most of our governments .
The United States seems to want to establish only those rules which will be necessary from now on to best serve the interests of American societies simultaneously .
The European Union must assume its role as a great world economic power .
It must therefore , in our opinion , establish a directive , which defines , classifies and standardizes the exchange procedures , as well as organizing them into a hierarchy .
That will be a first defining step in the setting up of a competition law in this new field and in forming consumers ' confidence in the new technologies .
It is in this spirit that the Group of the European Radical Alliance will give its support to Mrs Thor 's report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say how satisfied I am with the report and to emphasize its many positive elements .
Firstly , the report agrees with the Commission 's policy in respect of new payment methods , including electronic methods .
The Commission also believes that it is advisable to avoid imposing unnecessary administrative requirements which hinder innovation , growth and competitiveness in the sector .
Therefore , faced with the arrival of this new generation of products - particularly electronic money - which is still at a relatively early stage , the Commission decided to propose a non-binding recommendation .
Before the end of 1998 , the Commission will carry out a study analysing the extent to which the principles included in the recommendation have been applied .
If it appears that their application is unsatisfactory , it will propose a directive .
The Commission will , of course , keep Parliament informed of the progress in this matter .
Secondly , the Commission agrees with the principle stating that a free and open market economy must prevail in the sector , as provided for in the Treaty , and that , in principle , it must not thus be unduly regulated .
Thirdly , the Commission believes that the main objectives should be to increase confidence and consumer acceptance as regards electronic means of payment as well as to promote the single market and encourage electronic commerce in this area .
Fourthly , the Commission considers that , for the single market to work at full capacity and for electronic commerce and the information society to develop , then electronic money products and electronic payments must be solvent , easy to use , efficient and safe , as the Commission highlighted in its communication on a European initiative on electronic commerce .
Finally , the Commission believes that transparent and safe electronic money products would make the change to the single currency easier , particularly during the transition period .
Mr President , I would like to move on to make a few points about the follow-up planned for the communication and Parliament report .
As we stated in the communication , the Commission is prepared to draw up initiatives in the field of new means of payment with a view to promoting electronic commerce and the information society .
In this respect , the Commission issued a recommendation in July 1997 where it pointed out that transparency , responsibility and compensation for damage were the principles which should govern the relations between the issuer and the holder of the payment instrument .
And , in the future , the Commission intends to clear up the application of the Community competition standards in these markets with a view to achieving a balance between an adequate level of interoperability and healthy and vigorous competition . It also aims to propose a draft directive on the issuing of electronic money whose aim would be to guarantee the stability and the solvency of the issuer of electronic payment instruments , since we believe that this also serves to promote consumer confidence .
On the other hand , to respond to a specific solution from the Amsterdam European Council , the Commission is also studying different possibilities in the field of fraud and the falsification of the means of payment , including , of course , electronic money .
In conclusion , as outlined in the report , the Commission intends to study specific initiatives in the field of the digital electronic sector whose objective would be to establish a Community framework in this area and thus do away with any obstacles within the European Union .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Simpler legislation for the internal market ( SLIM )
The next item is the report ( A4-0033 / 98 ) by Mr Crowley , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on simpler legislation for the internal market ( SLIM ) and the results of the second phase and the follow-up of the implementation of the first phase recommendations ( COM ( 97 ) 0618 - C4-0660 / 97 )
Mr President , in the absence of my colleague , Mr Crowley , I wish , at the outset to place on the record of the House his appreciation to the Secretariat of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights for all its assistance and advice in preparing this second SLIM report and also , to thank the other draftsmen for their additions to the text .
He also wishes me to put on the record his thanks to the Commission for taking on board some of the committee 's concerns with regard to prior consultation .
I am sure that it is obvious to all Members of the House that the easier and more accessible we make legislation the greater the opportunity for real business and commerce to expand which will lead to bigger growth and more employment .
We must take seriously our responsibilities under the Treaties not to impose unnecessary administrative or financial burdens on smalland medium-sized enterprises which are recognized as the greatest engine for growth in employment terms .
Within the report there are a number of areas specifically mentioned : extension of the scope of SLIM actions in the agricultural area ; use of plainer and simpler language ; it also points out that codification is a useful tool to improve the situation - for example , 16 fertilizer directives being reduced to a single directive .
The report also recommends that Member State governments should establish SLIM teams as there is evidence that some of the hindrances to the internal market are a result of the non-implementation or non-transposition of EU legislation .
It suggests that the duration of the SLIM teams should be extended to a minimum of six months and that the third phase of SLIM should address freedom of movement and social security for migrant workers .
It should also address health and safety at work , public procurement and directives on the maintenance of dangerous substances .
For the fourth phase the rapporteur suggests a machinery directive , an environmental waste management directive , a telecommunications equipment directive , an electromagnetic compatibility directive and the implementation of pollution controls .
Finally , as all Members will know , many times Member States use the European Union as a scapegoat for unpopular national rules .
This practice must not continue and must be responded to vigorously by the European Parliament offices in each Member State .
The rapporteur wishes me to commend this report to the House .
Mr President , I would like to commence by apologizing on behalf of the draftsman for the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
Like Mr Hyland I have been asked to step in and it would seem that Mr Hyland and I are the godparents of this report in the European Parliament while the real parents are elsewhere .
I would also like to note the success with which the Luxembourg Presidency really kicked off the SLIM programme .
As a British Member , I am optimistic that the British Presidency can maintain the momentum that was picked up originally by the Luxembourg Presidency and that will be carried on through the Austrian and German presidencies because there is much to do in this particular area .
At issue is improving the environment for business .
It is an essential part , as the single market action plan pointed out , of the completion of that programme .
Red tape , when it is reduced and when those rules are simplified , will make things much clearer for businesses and much easier for business to operate within the single market .
It will be a particular help to small and medium-sized enterprises who must spend more money proportionally in order to comply with EU legislation and national legislation when it has been transposed .
In particular , more money must be spent on decoding some of the complex texts when they arrive in their language in their respective Member States .
It will also promote enhanced economic activity which can only be good for the single market because the outcome would be an increased number of jobs .
Some of the prime examples of the areas that have been covered are , in particular , directives that can be codified into a single directive - in the case of fertilizers , for example , or , clearly , machinery , environmental waste , telecommunications equipment and electromagnetic compatibility across the electrical equipment and , indeed , pollution control .
The other issue is transposition which needs to be dealt with effectively .
Much of the legislation , when transposed at the Member State level , is transposed into very weighty legislation .
This is partly due to some of the complexity in the original text but it is mainly , I believe , due to bureaucratic interference at national level as civil servants wish to include bits of their own interpretation of legislation as well as their own pet projects in national legislation .
SLIM is a plan meant to reduce the bureaucrat 's appetite for legislation and to propose wholesome legislation which will provide a healthy framework for the operation of the single market .
A healthy single market is one which will create jobs and therefore I commend Mr Crowley 's report to this House .
Mr President , on behalf of my group may I very , very sincerely thank the rapporteur in his absence for his report and his continuing commitment to the SLIM initiative .
The SLIM initiative receives cross-group support in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights of this House and with minor exceptions is unopposed .
However technical and detailed the work in the context of the SLIM initiative may seem to be we must never lose sight of the fact that it is a matter of a central project for the acceptance of European Union amongst its citizens .
However great may be the enthusiasm for Europe , if daily life is determined , particularly for companies , by incomprehensible rules , innumerable statistical forms and complicated VAT procedures , then even the greatest enthusiasm will totter and fall into discontent and annoyance .
Apart from these problems of acceptance and the costs associated with the carrying out of many regulations - and often it is not Community regulations but actually national regulations - it must also be of some concern to us to guarantee and increase legal certainty is ensuring that legal requirements are comprehensible and enforceable .
Initiatives so far by the Commission are certainly welcome but go too slowly and not far enough .
I can therefore only support the rapporteur in his demand for the acceleration and extension of the process of simplifying the law and for the rapid implementation of the proposals drawn up by the SLIM teams .
A sphere which would be very suitable for many successes in this area would certainly be that of agriculture .
If however we complain about excessively complicated regulations we should not lose sight of the deeper reasons for them .
One of these causes is surely that in the European Council in many matters unanimity is required or when where it is not formally required the broadest possible agreement is sought .
In order to be fair to everybody or to as many people as possible exceptions to the exceptions and very hairsplitting adjustments must be laid down .
I also believe that in our capacity as the European Parliament and as law makers in matter we must take ourselves in hand and more often keep to the basic principle that " less is more ' .
I would thus like to propose in conclusion that this Parliament creates an instrument whereby we can check whether we can frame our legislative proposals in simpler and more comprehensible terms .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the activities of the Commission in the context of the SLIM programme started back in 1996 are extraordinarily welcome .
The report now before us represents a further step towards improvement and simplification of Community law , even if it is only a small step , considering the massive and urgent necessity to create simple regulations for the single market .
Of course I wish that the SLIM programme would be reflected very much more quickly and more clearly in solid results which everyone can see .
Then in addition a less important role is played by the series of projects subjected to the SLIM procedure .
I wish this programme would lead to perceptible relief for the medium , small and very small companies , but also for the big ones , thus strengthening their ability to compete and bringing more jobs .
The monitoring of Intrastat and the sphere of value added tax are really worthwhile objects in this respect .
I wish the SLIM programme to be perceived as a real blessing and that it would inspire the Member States to thin out their laws in the same way , voluntarily or even perhaps subject to deadlines .
Our laws must no longer be perceived to be the expression of blind legislative madness on the part of Brussels or national bureaucrats .
The legislature must not overstep a mark still recognizedd as reasonable with its frequently compulsorily burdensome effects on the citizens and companies .
These wishes and demands can of course be addressed only to the Commission .
The legislators , Council and European Parliament were and are also asked .
We , the European Parliament must ask ourselves self-critically : What is our contribution to the achievement of the goal which has been set ?
When I measures our resolution which we have put to the vote , with the same criteria of clarity , legibility , conciseness and focus then I am disappointed .
This is by no means a reproach for the rapporteur , absolutely not at all .
It is primarily the result of our own internal parliamentary voting procedures , at the end of which frequently many unconnected points are lined up together .
This statement applies quite generally .
Independent of this I find it hard to see what sense , for example , points 10 and 11 make in this resolution .
I of course unreservedly support the demand for a European form of company .
These points 10 and 11 really have very little to do in my opinion with the aims of the SLIM programme to improve and simplify the existing legal arrangements .
If Parliament is trying to implement the SLIM programme then I cannot quite work out why it wants to be included in point 15 and 16 even during the individual monitoring procedures of the Commission in the context of SLIM .
As co-legislator it should concentrate on cooperating in the conclusions and not drag out the process in its initial stages .
SLIM is a worthwhile undertaking .
I thank the rapporteur , the Commission and in particular Commissioner Monti for his perseverance and I am pleased that the current Council Presidency accords the SLIM programme a particularly prominent significance .
Mr President , the Dutch word ' slim ' means ' clever ' in English .
The English ' slim ' means ' thin ' in Dutch .
Neither qualification applies to the programme the Commission has put before us .
Because the Commission has as yet failed to meet its promise .
I think this is a pity that Commissioner Monti is not with us here tonight , because I would like to have a seen a firmer commitment from the Commission to get serious about both deregulation , simplification and consolidation of European legislation .
We have one actual example of consolidation .
This is Community customs legislation .
Those who see the fat volumes this consolidated legislation occupies , and those who know that relatively rudimentarily educated people throughout the Union have to work with this , know that we have failed to simplify Community legislation and make it more manageable .
When we see the tasks we set ourselves in Community legislation , for example , returning Tdocuments within 14 days , and when we know that over 85 % of these documents to not arrive back in time , what kind of legislation are dealing with , if we know that people cannot keep to it ?
When we know that , on driving and resting times for instance , we have only now , at the beginning of 1998 , the figures for 1993 and 1994 , whilst four Member States actually manage quite simply not to submit any figures at all , and the Commission is just sitting here , saying : yes , we are going to simplify , deregulate and improve legislation , then I would like to see genuine results !
The Commission will have to give its word .
Mr President , Mr Wijsenbeek , I would have thought that SLIM means slim in German - in any case I see that written in the shirts which unfortunately have long since ceased to fit me - slim also in the sense of slimming down the legal and administrative regulations which are obligatory throughout Europe .
The Austrian Economics Minister described this task , in agreement with the British Council representative , as a major theme of the Austrian Presidency .
We shall observe carefully whether and how the Austrian Council Presidency in the second half of the year 1998 comes to terms with mastering Parkinson 's Law , and we are already looking forward to positive effects of the initiative announced by the Austrian Economics Minister entitled " Better regulations are better for jobs . '
SLIM is one of the initiatives by which work we have started can be continued , and simplification can be pushed forward ; the financial burden due to the costs of bureaucracy is extremely high particularly for small and medium companies and its limitation by means of simplified legislation is therefore a necessity .
We are of course of the view that the general mandate proposed in point 21 of the report means a transfer of authority for the Commission , which we reject .
Of course we are in agreement with the report , which we think is excellent .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would of course like to join in the congratulations to Mr Crowley for the really great work which he has done towards the simplification of the administration in the context of the single market .
If one looks at what is required in terms of economic statistics even from some small and medium companies one gets the feeling that the strangers to reality who invented these statistics obviously believe that customers primarily pay their prices for the filling in of forms and not for a product .
This therefore requires something from a company which it cannot give .
The logical result is simply that jobs are lost .
Would it not be considerably better if the state , instead of as usual threatening fines if companies do not meet their statistical obligations , were instead to offer incentives , e.g. certain premiums , and then otherwise leave it up to these firms whether or not they produce statistics in the context of economic statistics .
For a historically-aware person this system inevitably calls to mind the compulsory labour of the Middle Ages , but in those days they had the advantage that they just had to supply one tenth , whereas today the State usually requires considerably more than 10 % of the income of the working time .
When we hear how for example today in Austria the Finance Minister thinks aloud about a reversal of the burden of proof in cases of suspected tax evasion , one can scarcely imagine what this would mean in terms of extra work for our small and medium firms and how this would be reflected in astronomical unemployment figures in Europe .
It is small and medium firms in particular where jobs are created and maintained .
In this sense the SLIM programme can really do some pioneering work on behalf of the individual European citizen , and I very much hope that the various parents and godparents of the SLIM programme continue their efforts to drive this SLIM programme forward and keep it alive .
Mr President , I wonder how long we are going to continue to speak in appreciative terms about the SLIM programme .
It is now 1998 .
The programme was launched in 1996 , but , as my colleague Mr Wijsenbeek said , we have still not seen a single proposal .
That is the first serious objection .
I would like to issue a final warning : don 't come back again and speak about the SLIM programme if we have not got any concrete proposals .
I am beginning to tire of this ' SLIM liturgy ' .
Secondly , I really hope that the message reaches the whole Commission , i.e. that we want these principles to be extended to cover all legislation within the Commission , since there is a need there also .
Furthermore , I would like to underline what Mr Murphy noted at the hearing of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , namely that one of the SLIM proposals which has been put forward , regarding the keeping of statistics , is not feasible .
I hope the Commission takes this seriously and that it revises it , since this proposal would lead to double bureaucracy and double nomenclatures for companies , and go in precisely the opposite direction to what all of us here wanted .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the SLIM initiative is a very important initiative because it makes Europe pleasant .
Pleasant because people are thinking about how existing rules can be made simple and how they can be made more useful .
When one considers that we have about 50 000 single market regulations then one knows the magnitude of the task which has to be faced .
When they talk about new public management then we know that SLIM has a very significant role here .
In addition to FICHE-IMPACT which is to try to simplify new legal regulations and to make them clear for the benefit of citizens then SLIM is designed to simplify the existing statute book .
We also need the bench marking system , so that we can see how the quantity , the quality , the various spheres develop , in other words so that we get comparable criteria for how efficiently we work .
We need these SLIM programmes so that the single market does not just exist on paper but can also be experienced in practice .
Simplified and standardised single market regulations will benefit not only the companies , no , particularly the Consumers , because they will make it possible for products to be cheaper .
The firms can then be more concerned with delivering the service or manufacturing the product instead of with the entering of statistics .
It is in fact possible , to obtain the documents and the necessary data for the statistics from other spheres .
We give sufficient information to the Treasury , the banks can measure turnovers , the social security offices get the data .
I believe that in this sphere we have some scope .
I would also suggest that for example the Economic and Social Committee should concern itself more intensively with these problems , for relieving the load on business leads to more jobs .
Mr President , people may well think this is a step in the right direction , but I believe it must be looked at in a much broader way .
It is good that people are dealing with legislative area by legislative area and can extend it to cover more areas if that should be of importance .
It is also good that the level of detail is examined properly , so that more of the principles are left to EU rules and EU law and more details are left to individual Member States regarding whatever may be concerned in agriculture , such as cucumbers , bananas or strawberries , so that this debate is avoided .
I have a serious objection , namely that we are starting with such a rule about SLIM , which in itself is good , but are not tackling the big problem - the constant flow of new EU rules .
In 1992 , when the principle of subsidiarity was introduced , there were around 8 050 EU rules affecting the Member States .
In 1996 it was 14 000 and the number is increasing year by year .
It is the mass of new rules and details which makes the problem so great .
That is where we must begin by leaving more of the principles to the EU and more details to the nation states .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Short-term statistics
The next item is the report ( A4-0047 / 98 ) by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on short-term statistics ( COM ( 97 ) 0313 - C4-0417 / 97-97 / 0171 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the topic we are looking at - the legislative resolution on a proposal for a Council Regulation on short-term statistics - has a technical dimension , but it also has a dimension which concerns the completion of the European Internal Market and the single currency , with the introduction of the euro .
It is becoming more and more evident that our economic reality at European Union level is already exceeding what the mere effectiveness of the Member States could be , since it is clear that with the Internal Market and especially with Monetary Union , it will be essential to have a political orientation for the economic and monetary policies of the Union , and this orientation will thus have to be based on statistics which are reliable .
This proposal for a regulation tries to ensure that these statistics are reliable , that is , that those aspects and economic quantities to be considered at economic and monetary level in the Union are comparable and reliable : that is the hope and the intention of this regulation .
It is important then that there have been two types of consultation before this regulation was drawn up : one in the European Monetary Institute - the embryo of what is to be the European Central Bank - in order to give the Union 's monetary policy the correct orientation ; and another in the Commission , in order to determine from its economic guidelines the type of shortterm statistics needed , the type of clarification needed and , therefore , the type of demands which must be established .
This leads to a range of proposals which are set out in the explanatory statement .
Eleven different characteristics are noted including monthly production indicators , manufacturing orders information , monthly information on stocks , production broken down by activity , employment and hours worked and , from the Commission , a range of indicators referring to small and medium-sized undertakings and to some specific sectors , such as construction and services .
These indicators are established through different types of modules which allow this comparison to be made .
This question was debated in committee and there was a large consensus .
I , as rapporteur , put forward two proposals : firstly , that we took into consideration the indicators at regional level , among other things , because there are regions which are of equal or superior weighting to some countries . In addition , if we abandoned this regional dimension , we would be losing a type of indicator which is also very necessary for the orientation of a range of policies of the European Commission itself , for example in cross-border cooperation , in some aspects of the application of the Structural Funds , in the follow-up to the changes in economic activity and in the fight for jobs .
There was then another much more complicated proposal which involved defining some modules in terms of the accounts concerning , for example , the number of hours worked by part-time workers , which is one of the questions which is now being studied most carefully .
Under this second heading there was a series of observations on the part of some PPE colleagues in reference to the SLIM programme stating that we should not excessively overload businesses when giving them statistic questionnaires to fill in , and in the search for agreement we dropped this second aspect .
We agreed on the remainder and this makes me , as rapporteur , very happy since the amendments that I am proposing to the report - accepting the initial Commission proposal , they are proposals or amendments which I see as improvements - received the unanimous support of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , so I am , therefore , presenting a report without discrepancies at committee level .
Mr President , a misinformed man or woman , a misinformed official and a misinformed population reacts badly and decides badly .
This statement of the obvious especially affects those who take the decisions in our European Union , who , if they are misinformed , or if the information they receive is false and , more particularly , incomparable , run the risk of taking bad decisions which could end up being to the detriment of the Union 's citizens .
This is why a regulation on short-term statistics is not only a question of statisticians or technicians , but also takes on a significant political importance .
That is also why Parliament is looking into the matter .
Following the evolution of businesses in order to be able correctly evaluate the evolution of the Internal Market , so as to define monetary , economic , social and industrial policies is , in fact , very important politically , in particular during this transition period we are currently undergoing , as we prepare for the single currency .
I learnt at university that using statistics can be the most sophisticated way of lying and that , after all , we should only trust statistics that we have fixed ourselves .
But since , in the European Union , we must trust the statistics provided by the 15 Member States , which have the responsibility of collecting the data , we must define standards , rules and definitions which are necessary in establishing comparable statistics .
We therefore agree with the regulation 's objective and with the approach proposed by the Commission .
We particularly approve of its desire to reconcile the burden on businesses , which must supply the data , with the increase in information needed to satisfy at the same time , for example , the European Monetary Institute and businesses themselves .
I am rapporteur on an aspect of the SLIM programme , namely the statistics on the exchange of goods in the Single Market .
Therefore , I know that we are torn between , on the one hand , the desire to lighten the burden on businesses , particularly the SMUs , which must supply the data , and on the other hand , the needs of the users , including businesses themselves which also need information , who often need very detailed information since it is essential for trade and investment policies .
We certainly understand some amendments to the Commission 's text , in particular as regards comparable statistics , not only at national level , but also at regional level , given that the short-term statistics will in future have to cover both the industrial and services sectors .
However , we must not exaggerate and guarantee that we cannot identify where the data collected at regional level comes from .
Nor must we exaggerate in another sense , like the amendments from the Greens , which , in terms of the variables , exceed what is necessary and useful .
We must not forget that we are talking here about short-term statistics which are not destined to replace the social statistics and those on the employment market .
If we try for too much , we will end up with less .
We must guarantee the availability of comparable short-term indicators for the European Union , no more and no less .
The superfluous is always very necessary , but it is not the path to take in this field and the rapporteur , whom I congratulate , has not done this .
We will follow his lead .
Mr President , the availability of statistical data is particularly important at times like these .
The introduction of the euro should also give us the opportunity to observe closely how the economic situation , in particular business activity , develops .
Therefore I very much welcome the report and I also congratulate the rapporteur - it is an excellent piece of work - and I am particularly pleased that he has pointed out that there should be no additional burden for the CMU but just the opposite , that in future we are striving for a reduction .
Reduction means that we are not starting a paper war , as in the Middle Ages - as somebody has already said today - but that we should try to collect data as automatically as possible .
It should be our aim to make available computer software so that the data can be piped as quickly , as up to date and as directly as possible into our systems .
If you travel round companies , and I myself am a smith and spend a lot of time out at my customers ' premises , and they often show me 20 page statistical declarations which they have to fill in - then you can understand the fury of these people against the statisticians and against this Europe that just loads red tape onto them for which they can see no immediate use .
I believe we should really try to create an incentive system in order to have data automatically , if possible with a modem , immediately and quickly available , so that no mechanical work is involved and not much paper gets sent backwards and forwards - that is of course a mammoth burden for the Central Statistics Office , when it is confronted by tonnes of paper .
Instead we should find an intelligent , clean solution , which makes it possible for our firms quite simply and if possible without cost to supply this data , whilst we at the same time receive exact and appropriate data for our really good future in Europe .
Mr President , the initiative taken by the Commission with a view to improving company performance statistics deserves our strongest support .
The introduction of the single currency and the enlargement of the market in line with the current action plan render such objectives all the more important .
This is the only way to obtain an accurate and continually up-dated perception of on-going developments , thereby permitting the necessary adjustment measures to be taken .
In this sphere , we cannot confine ourselves to the principle of subsidiarity , when the advent of monetary union means that responsibilities relating to the Union as a whole must be assumed .
I would like to congratulate Mr Gasòliba I Böhm on his report , which deserves our fullest support , particularly as regards the need more clearly to distinguish between internal and external movements and to provide regional statistics .
Indeed , these issues are connected , to a certain degree , since it important to be familiar with extra-Monetary Union movements , between Member States and , also , between regions .
Over and above such movements , it is only with an accurate and up-to-date knowledge of all indicators at the regional level at a given moment in time that it will be possible to take action that is appropriate for such diverse circumstances , with differences sometimes proving greater within countries than between countries .
I will not here discuss the survey of structural differences between regions , which are not covered by this regulation , but where a great deal remains to be done under the responsibility and with the support of the European Union , in order to guarantee the rigour of a policy which should occupy an increasingly important place in a stronger , more cohesive Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the regulation you are considering today is trying to provide the Community with harmonized short-term statistics for all economic sectors .
National statistical practices differ in this field between the Member States , so that the information available is often incomplete or incomparable .
Through its Decision of 18 June 1992 , the Council adopted a programme aimed at developing the statistics on services and particularly the trade sector .
The definition of new policies relating to the economy , competition , social affairs and businesses , calls for initiatives and decisions based - as Mr Gasòliba was saying - on statistics .
In addition , the sources of the statistics need to be complete and reliable in order to make the most exact calculation possible within the quarterly accounts system .
Moreover , we are moving increasingly quickly towards the next phase of Monetary Union and the Treaty on European Union has created a new , extremely important user of short-term statistics , the future European Central Bank .
And to apply an effective and objective monetary policy , it is essential that the ECB has complete short-term statistics which are totally comparable between the Member States and that it can also get hold of them quickly .
The draft regulation we are discussing on short-term statistics is trying to respond to all these demands .
However , the previous directives referred exclusively to the manufacturing industry and construction sectors , while the draft regulation rectifies this situation by including in its field of application all sectors , including services and trade .
I must warn you that the draft regulation does not try to satisfy all the needs of the Commission and the European Monetary Institute - since this would entail a massive burden for businesses - but it does try to fill the most obvious gaps , for example , those related to such an important aspect as the consumer price index .
As regards the greater harmonization of the results , the draft regulation sets out , for the first time , the level of breakdown of the results and the time limit for data-transfer .
The advances which have been made in data capture techniques lead us to believe that already it is no longer necessary to draw up costly and exhaustive lists . The draft regulation also allows the Member States to use sampling techniques and administrative information , thus offering them the possibility of relieving the burden imposed on businesses .
The Commission believes that Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 and 7 are acceptable .
However , we have problems in adopting Amendment No 8 since , in our opinion , it is redundant as a result of the adoption of Council Regulation No 322 on Community statistics , which defines the confidentiality standards applicable to all Community statistics : the so-called statistical confidentiality .
As regards the remaining amendments , Nos 9 to 26 , the Commission believes that they deal strictly with technical precision and , given that we do not want an excessively long-winded text , these amendments might mean that the normal work of companies would suffer .
Consequently , we include the majority of the amendments from the parliamentary committee and the rapporteur , Mr Gasòliba , apart from the difference we have in that we consider that the question of statistical confidentiality was already resolved in the previous regulation , and the fact that the other amendments seem , particularly to Eurostat and the Union 's statistical services , to concern details which are excessively technical and which would create more problems than benefits .
I would like to thank , then , Mr Gasòliba and the other members of the parliamentary committee for this favourable vision of the essential elements of providing security for and harmonizing short-term statistics while making them more reliable .
Commissioner , is the Commission prepared to offer a software package which in all participating States offers the same standard and the same data collection facility and makes possible the fully automated management of statistical recording ?
The Eurostat officials tell me that this would not be a problem .
Moreover , in fact , when this regulation enters into force , as with all the measures involving the Internal Market , there will be an almost inevitable harmonization .
And I do not believe that there is any difficulty with the technical advances , so it should thus be possible to have access in real time to any type of short-term statistics which can be recorded within Eurostat .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to make a short point about Mr Marín 's speech on the Commission 's position .
I would obviously like to express my satisfaction at the position he outlined and the inclusion of the amendments to which he referred .
Amendment No 8 did not include the regulation I mentioned , but surely it makes this amendment redundant ; as regards the others , my position as rapporteur is that they should not be adopted .
Therefore , during voting time tomorrow , I recommend that we do not vote in favour of them .
I wanted to mention a matter on which we were in agreement with the Commissioner , which seems to me important to consider , namely the fact that there will be a monetary policy and monetary management on the part of the European Central Bank , and that this will oblige us to review and analyze the precision of short-term statistics .
In other words , there is a monetary policy which , in economic jargon we can call fine tuning - that is , almost immediate and precise adjustment - and which can obviously not work if the statistics are not extremely precise .
Thus , we will be forced to look for a new balance between not placing an excessive burden on businesses in terms of the data needed , and not forgetting that the European Central Bank will demand more precise information , and so we will have to come back to this matter .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.05 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Thursday , 19 February 1998 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , having spent the previous twenty-four hours agonizing over how I should vote on Iraq , I was rather concerned to see that my vote was wrongly recorded on Amendment No 12 .
In fact I had voted against Amendment No 12 rather than for it .
Can that be corrected please ?


Mr President , it is indeed true , as Mr Habsburg-Lothringen and Mr Posselt said yesterday , that there has been no debate on crime in Brussels , but I would nevertheless like to draw Members ' attention to the fact that President GilRobles Gil-Delgado said in his letter to us : " Please rest assured that I share your concern and I shall press the Belgian authorities for a satisfactory solution , as far as the safety of Members and staff of the European Parliament is concerned ' .
Mr President , you will note from yesterday 's Minutes that I asked the President-in-Office to rule whether Mr Titley 's personal attack on me casting aspersions on my mental health was a crime against the rules of the House and I ask you to rule on that point .
You may share his opinion but , of course , I trust that you , as a good guardian of the rules of the House , can say whether under Rule 108 I am entitled to make a personal statement on that response .
Mr Kerr , it is a matter of interpretation whether Mr Titley questioned your mental health .
From reading the contribution it is not clear that was the intention of his remarks .
Mr President , in the Minutes it says that I asked for confirmation that Parliament would be able to give its views when the instructions were modified .
I think there has been a lot of editing , because what I said was that the changes in the rules - because I believe that is what they are - should be brought to this House for confirmation before they took effect .
That is a very important correction .
Mr President , in relation to Mr Kerr , all I said was that I was now convinced that in the United Kingdom care in the Community was no longer working .
There is a saying in the United Kingdom that if the cap fits you should wear it !
Mr Kerr , do you wish to make a personal statement ?
Votes
Mr President , there seems to be some confusion as to why I did not record my presence in the last vote .
The reason for it is quite simple .
I am not recording my presence when I indicate a roll-call vote out of solidarity with yourself and other colleagues who come here Monday to Friday regularly .
In any case , votes do not win prizes on Fridays . The roll-call vote does not count on a Friday .
Mr President , on a number of occasions this week mobile phones have again gone off in the Chamber ; this was particularly embarrassing when the President of Portugal was here .
I wonder if the services could put notices on the glass doors reminding Members to switch off their phones prior to entering the Chamber .
It is very easy to walk in having forgotten that , and it might just help to eliminate embarrassment in the future .
That is a very good suggestion .
The rapporteur has done his job well .
I have no comment to make in that respect , but I think reports of this kind should not be considered by Parliament .
Members of Parliament do not have the competence as far as competition statistics are concerned ( in this case ) , and anyway this is a question which should be referred to an administration and not to a parliament .
I do not think there is any other parliament in the world which concerns itself with detailed questions of this type .
Thors report ( A4-0028 / 98 )
There are many problems with the rapidly growing use of electronic means of payment .
Technical developments in this area are moving very fast , and legislation cannot keep up .
This applies , for example , to rules on liability when cards are lost , and the growing retail trade on the Internet .
However , people can lose their cards in countries other than the 15 EU Member States , and Internet selling is also not limited to EU countries .
In order to achieve good consumer protection , international rules are required .
Crowley report ( A4-0033 / 98 )
The quality of EC and EU legislation needs to be improved .
However , the question is whether SLIM is the right method to achieve this .
If you disregard the use of complicated language , the inability to find political solutions to problems , and bad compromises which leave legislation far too open to interpretation , SLIM can be critically examined from the following angles .
Firstly , simplification as such should not be an end in itself if it leads to legal certainty being jeopardized and complicated questions being oversimplified .
Secondly , we know what the flaws in Community legislation actually relate to , namely :
a lack of codification ; -endless references to other directives , regulations , treaties and rules of various kinds - apart from being user-unfriendly , if the contents of the reference are not always particularly well coordinated with what is found in the texts referred to , this also leads to problems of application and interpretation ; -an unwarranted use of annexes , which regulate substantial parts of the legislative areas in question , but whose contents may often be decided by other expert committees whose work nobody appears to have an insight into or responsibility for ( for example BSE ) .On the other hand , SLIM is itself something of a technocratic empire . A group of ' experts ' , five from national administrations and five from ' representatives of those who use directives ' ( it is not said who these are ) , slim down a directive .
It is thought that the outcome should be ' processed ' quickly and painlessly through Parliament and the Council .
My colleagues and I did not in fact succeed in finding anything apart from the packaging and packaging waste directive which could perhaps be in need of simplification according to the SLIM model .
Perhaps more could be found , but what is needed is better standard legislation rather than new special procedures .
System of own resources
The next item is the report ( A4-0041 / 98 ) by Mr Bardong , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC , EURATOM ) amending Council Regulation ( EEC , EURATOM ) No 1552 / 89 implementing Decision 94 / 728 / EC , EURATOM on the system of the Communities ' own resources ( COM ( 97 ) 0343 - C4-0395 / 97 -C4-0575 / 97-97 / 0188 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know the financing of the European Union is carried out neither through credits nor by means of European taxes , but through the so-called own resources , primarily duties and adjustment levies , proportions of VAT and GDPs .
The European Community sets the Common Duty Tariff , but the raising of the duties is carried out by the Member States , that is their civil servants .
The Member States must , on the basis of their legal and administrative regulations , take the required measures to guarantee the establishment , bookkeeping , inclusion and allocation of these own resources .
Of course , for doing this they get back 10 % of the duties , which really belong to the Community Budget , to cover their administrative work .
For a long time now the annual reports of the General Accounts Office have made it clear that there are significant defects in the collection process .
Also , the Investigating Committee on transit fraud uncovered considerable infringements and abuses in the dispatch procedure , which have not yet been satisfactorily eliminated .
In the context of SEM 2000 , the European Council of Madrid planned an intensification of the collection of the own resources , and the Commission is now presenting here a proposal for an order to amend Basic Order 55 / 89 relating to the system of the EU 's own resources with the intention of meeting this goal .
This does in fact mean two amendments .
Firstly , the own resources order has not so far dealt with the following cases : that the establishment of own resources has become impossible due to a mistake by the customs authorities ; or that those owing customs duty have not been informed of the amount due within the specified time limit .
The Member States should be liable for these mistakes , and beyond a certain level they should therefore even be expelled .
Such sums can then under certain conditions be claimed from the Member States .
Secondly , within the various Member States the cancellation of indebted sums is governed by widely differing regulations .
The readiness of the Member States to issue communications about such cancellations is expressed in quite different ways .
The Court of Auditors discovered that in 1995 .
Of course , the Member States do not need to declare to the Commission amounts of money which have become resistant to inspection because of greater force or for reasons for which they do not themselves have responsibility .
But the Commission must be in a position to be able to assess the care taken by the Member States , and in certain circumstances be able to require the payment of sums of money .
We are absolutely convinced that the Commission could be somewhat stricter in this matter , according to our own resolutions , for instance for the approval of the Commission for the financial year 1995 , and according to the view of the Court of Auditors on this amendment .
This proposed amending order is simply not a contribution to the reform of the finance order which everyone expects and recognizes as necessary .
It is only a considerably delayed completion of this existing finance order .
As far as the task of reforming the finance order is concerned , the Commission considers itself to be fully covered on the whole line .
Meanwhile , in some Member States the front lines are being drawn for the so-called net-payers ' discussion .
Several states complain that they are paying more into the Community budget than they can get out of it .
However , the Commission also does absolutely nothing to correct publicly the false impression that individual Member States could get out exactly as much as they pay in .
Many Community payments flow directly to third countries or cannot clearly be attributed to a specific Member State .
Therefore the net-payer calculations are often based on false assumptions .
The duties should not of course be included in the netpayer calculations . They are not even something achieved by the country in which they are collected - at most they are an achievement of the end-users who then pay the prices , in some circumstances , in a completely different country .
The Commission has hitherto constantly refused requests from Parliament and the Council to publish its own calculations or assessments of the net-payer items .
It is therefore to a considerable extent equally guilty of creating the current disarray in discussions on the financial order of the Community .
It is high time the public was better informed on this matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , this report by Mr Bardong is another example of a report with such an off-putting title that nobody will read it .
It is presented on a particularly attractive day at a particularly attractive time , and nobody will take any notice of it , especially since we are all in agreement .
We shall follow Mr Bardong 's proposals in all respects without question , and everyone will say : " What happened there ?
Did anything actually happen there , and why are they talking about it ? '
However , Mr Bardong has addressed the basic problem .
It is a question of the Union 's own resources and the way we treat them , the correct way to collect them and pass them on to the European Union .
Even if the Member States collect the own resources it is in fact our money and not theirs .
We cannot stress that too much , and Mr Bardong has also given us the background to it .
There was a small but interesting debate on this report in the committee , and I would like to confine myself to this .
The debate has not really been conducted between the Member States , but between the Members and the Commission .
It was in fact about whether we should adopt a certain threshold value .
The Commission took ECU 50 000 as its starting point and we took ECU 10 000 , as Mr Bardong suggested .
The argument now was that with a threshold value of ECU 50 000 , one covers in principle the same as if one is so small-minded that one takes ECU 10 000 as the threshold value .
There is another aspect that really must be considered : this is all much too complicated .
The administration is too expensive .
This is no longer a cost-benefit calculation , and it is important to recognize when it is time to stop inspecting .
Inspection is becoming too expensive .
Now we can talk about it , administration is supposed to be efficient . Also , the cost-benefit calculation should play an important part in the administration .
We support that .
But in doing so we send out signals .
We are saying that whatever is below this threshold is not worth bothering about .
We then check only if the inspection is financially worthwhile .
In doing so , we overlook the fact that certain existing rules were not brought in so that they could be viable and pay for themselves , but because they helped us achieve other things .
Duties are not there simply to put money in the kitty - in that case we would have to keep increasing them . Duties are also specific regulatory mechanisms .
We protect ourselves , to some extent we protect our industries , we protect our standards and we tie them to conditions if we reduce duties .
That is politics .
That is not bookkeeping .
To that extent it is very important what standards we set when we check adherence to these regulations , as expressed , for example , in the duties .
It is not even just a question of whether the calculation works out , but a question of sending out a signal .
We do not take it by any means so seriously . It is too complicated for us .
It is much too expensive .
If it is just a certain amount - forget it , we do not look too closely at it .
That costs more than it brings in .
Even then , ECU 10 000 or ECU 50 000 - what difference does it make ?
So are all the authorities , all the tax authorities of our Community so indulgent in the case of ECU 10 000 when they are dealing with the tax of an employee ?
Whole families can live on ECU 50 000 for a whole year , and ECU 10 000 - well , who pays ECU 10 000 in tax in a year ?
What if they were to refuse to pay the tax ?
It costs too much to chase that .
It costs more than it brings in .
It would be convincing .
Maybe we could look at it like that - I know it is an unfair comparison - and perhaps we would come to another judgment .
Mr President , the Community 's own resources are made up of gross domestic product , value added tax and customs duties .
Of these , the most open to interpretation is customs duties , because the Community does not have its own monitoring mechanism , but has to rely completely on that of individual states .
I agree with Mr Bardong , the rapporteur , that there is no justification for reckoning customs duty as net contributions from individual states .
For example , Holland charges a considerable amount of customs duty for transit traffic , adds it to its own net contribution and says it is paying money to the EU , although , in actual fact , it is EU money which it is only accounting for to the EU .
Thus these customs duties , which are collection items very hard to categorize , are also distorting the picture we have of net payments .
So in this regard it would be a radically better idea if customs payments were not accountable to the EU at all , but were kept by individual countries themselves .
A corresponding sum could then be due to the EU in the shape of GDP .
In this way , the Member States would have a keen interest in collecting all these customs duties , as they would keep them themselves .
So there would be no malpractice arising from whether to collect duty and account to the EU for it or not .
It would solve the problem , but it would be a very radical solution .
Member States do not gain from the fact that they do not collect customs duty according to common regulations .
From the point of view of the common interest , however , we are justified in making regulations so that Member States will suffer if they flout them .
In assessing depreciation in bookkeeping , Member States might thereby try to shake off responsibility for mistakes .
That is why these depreciation laws cannot be free , and the business of each individual country alone .
Because of growing administrative costs it is right that we should not start to examine minor depreciation laws , and should endeavour not to inherit areas of malpractice .
It is important to focus sufficient attention on big issues like this .
Mr President , as part of the work on SEM 2000 it is intended to improve the financial administration of the EU 's own resources .
This report by Mr Bardong on the EU 's own resources , which the Member States are responsible for collecting , says that the Member States have a duty to take greater responsibility for what is required in matters of bookkeeping , collection and so on of the funds , in order to ensure that it works .
However , there are significant weaknesses in the system , as has been shown by the European Parliament 's ad-hoc committee of inquiry into questions of customs transits , among others .
The Commission 's proposal that the Member States should be financially responsible for serious administrative errors is logical and welcome .
Not everything is the fault of the EU , even if it often is .
This technical report is not going to solve all the problems , but it is a simple first step in the right direction .
It is important to note that at the same time as the Commission is trying to strengthen the legislation , the proposal also contributes to making the legislation even more complex , which is less good .
The Green Group is going to support the report in its entirety .
Personally I think that Seppänen 's contribution on a total reform is interesting , and something which the Commission should look at in future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the amendments in Mr Bardong 's report on the Commission 's proposal to tighten up the rules relating to the administration of the Union 's own resources reveal the extent of Parliament 's interest in the own-resources system , and the importance it ascribes to the transparency by which these resources are administered .
On the amendments , the Commission has adopted the following position .
The amendments which aim at both editorial simplification and a more transparent and just procedure are accepted .
This applies firstly to that part of Amendment No 1 which aims to specify the cases in which the Member States must take financial responsibility for mistakes which result in a loss of own resources ; secondly , to that part of Amendment No 2 which aims to clarify the conditions under which amounts are not recoverable or are declared to be non-recoverable ; thirdly , for that part of Amendment No 4 which provides that amounts included in the cancelled debt , which are not accepted by the Commission , should be calculated according to the book .
Likewise , the Commission will change the procedure for cancellations which it has allowed .
In this case this agreement should no longer be implicit , but the Member States should be informed in writing .
On the other hand , the Commission cannot follow the European Parliament on certain amendments or parts thereof .
This applies particularly to the amendment relating to the retention of the threshold value of ECU 10 000 for the notification of cancellations , that is , Amendment No 3 .
If this amendment were accepted the result would be an enormous increase in the administrative costs .
The suggested rise in the amount to ECU 50 000 would have the effect that about 69 % fewer cases would have to be checked , but 90 % of the income at stake would be covered .
Mrs Wernheuer , I must say to you in this respect that this does not mean that these cases below ECU 50 000 are not subject to any kind of inspection .
Of course these would also be checked under the usual system of inspection .
It is just that they would not be included in these specific procedures .
Even the reduction of the threshold value for the cases in which the national administrations will be held financially responsible would result in excessively high administrative costs and therefore cannot be accepted .
That is part of Amendment No 1 .
Amendment No 5 on the other hand appears to the Commission to be superfluous , since the information requested about cancellations is already given to Parliament in the Four-Year Report , that is the 1993 to 1996 Report , and for the latest year it is in the next report which will , according to the planned sequence , be in the year 2000 .
However , information relating to cases of fraud is already available in the Annual Report .
The Commission understands and fully shares the concern of Parliament to subject the Community 's own resources to a strictly precise system of inspection .
It does however seek understanding for its requirement of a reasonable cost-benefit ratio .
In conclusion , the Commission thanks Mr Bardong again for his report .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
I cannot support this report .
The rapporteur rejects the Commission 's limit of ECU 2 000 , and wants instead to keep the unofficial limit of ECU 10 .
However , in my opinion that will lead to an unreasonable number of small cases of no economic significance having to be considered by the national authorities .
The costs of this increased bureaucracy are not compensated for by the income .
The Union should not be small-minded in its relations with the national authorities .
Development finance
The next item is the report ( A4-0050 / 98 ) by Mr Wynn , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the draft Financial Regulation applicable to development finance cooperation under the Fourth ACP-EEC Convention amended by the Agreement of 4 November 1995 ( COM ( 96 ) 0676 - C4-0101 / 97-96 / 0307 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , this is one of those Friday morning reports , with no amendments . It went through committee quite smoothly and , I suppose , no-one is going to lose any sleep over it .
It is interesting to be heckled by Mr Falconer , because I have just looked at yesterday 's voting record .
Some things do change : I notice that he has actually voted for nuclear power !
I am very pleased about that , Alex .
It is extremely good that you have been converted at last .
This report in effect is saying that there comes a time when Parliament has to say enough is enough ( ' sod it ' in colloquial terms ) ; we go so far and we can go no further .
We are not going through the motions any longer of trying to give some legitimacy to something that we have no part in .
Let us stop the pretence ; let us stop kidding ourselves that if we were to give an opinion on this Financial Regulation , things would be any different - they would not .
The eighth European Development Fund , and our reaction to it in this report , cannot be considered in isolation .
You have to know the history to it , and that is quite simply that Parliament has always advocated the budgetization of the EDF .
It has been a consistent approach that we have always taken .
If we look at what has happened in the past , at the scenario to see where we are at present , we base our case on Article 199 of the Treaty which states that ' all items of revenue and expenditure of the Community ... shall be shown in the budget ' .
We have said , therefore , that the EDF should be budgetized and Parliament should have some say in the matter .
In fairness to the Commission , it supports us in that .
In fact , when I first came here in 1989 the Commission made it quite clear then that it expected the eighth EDF to be budgetized and it made the case at Amsterdam .
So our criticism is not of the Commission but of the Council , which has resisted the inclusion of the EDF .
Proposals were put to the Council at Amsterdam and they were ignored .
When the seventh EDF came before Parliament , Parliament was once again consulted and we said that , because of Article 199 of the Treaty , it should be budgetized and we therefore delayed somewhat in giving our opinion .
Because of that delay the Council then adopted the regulation without our opinion .
That was bad enough , so we went to the Court of Justice and said that the Council should not have done this and we expected the Court to rule in our favour .
However , the case hinged on whether the EDF was Community expenditure or not .
The Court said that the EDFs were not Community expenditure : it was Community financial assistance that was paid in the Lomé Convention .
In other words , the Commission was a subcontractor for Member States which were paying money into the Lomé Convention and the Commission administered that money .
As someone said at the time : ' Never expect the Court to rule against the Council in a dispute with Parliament ' .
It is the Council , of course , which appoints the judges but , more importantly , reappoints the judges .
Therefore , although we thought it was a logical argument , we were not surprised when the case went against us .
When we come to the 1996 discharge in the next month or so , it will be seen that the sixth and seventh EDF monies are actually being used already to finance the eighth EDF .
We have no financial regulation for the eighth EDF but the Commission is taking monies from the sixth and seventh EDFs already without a legal base .
I have to say that I am glad we are not associated with that practice .
But you can see the root cause of this .
Even when we had the 1994 discharge , and we refused to give discharge in 1994 to the EDF , the Court of Auditors said that the legal framework for the EDF was directly responsible for many of the failings in terms of sound financial management .
We have a problem , and it is a big problem .
But you have to look at the statement from the Commission in the explanatory statement which states : ' The Council must give its opinion by a qualified majority , having first received the opinions of the European Investment Bank and the Court of Auditors on this draft ' .
It does not ask for our opinion .
Then so be it , we are not going to give it !
Mr President , I should just like to draw to Mr Wynn 's attention the fact that I took part in the vote on Amendment No 3 on the Kyoto Summit .
This was the amendment from the Green Party which , if you voted for it , was actually saying that nuclear power could not be regarded as a safe means of energy .
I , along with the majority of the Labour Members and my socialist colleagues , voted for that particular amendment .
Mr Wynn , unfortunately , was in the minority on that occasion .
Mr President , I should like to tell Mr Falconer that in the Minutes it says that those who intended to vote against Amendment No 3 included Mr Falconer .


Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our colleague Terence Wynn has said what had to be said and he can say it very much better than I could .
There will no doubt be other things said on the subject .
It is a long story .
It is to one very particular point in this long and unhappy story that we shall return .
I speak on behalf of my group in order to thank Terence Wynn publicly for his work , for only what is said publicly finds its proper place and is not completely forgotten .
Terence has looked after this report for a long time with great commitment and he will continue to do so .
Terence Wynn has refuted the prejudice that housekeepers are people who concern themselves with figures and nothing else .
He has done so much work in this sphere and shows that he was always a committed housekeeper , but also a man who was personally committed in development politics and who has been very successful in bringing both together .
This can be seen from his speeches , from his report and from his commitment .
I know we can support him here in only one way , and that is by accepting his report unanimously and also by supporting him in the future .
But I would just like to say this clearly in front of this House : simply , personal thanks , Terence Wynn , and please carry on the good work !
We need people who can so convincingly combine the thrifty and the substantial !
If only other Members of this House would see for once that we are not just concerned with figures and narrow-minded bookkeeping , but there is always also a political aspect in the background , and we can sometimes represent this even with passion and emotion . Maybe then the acceptance of our work , and also of the work of this Parliament , might be somewhat greater than it is .
Mr President , if it does not embarrass Mr Wynn too much , I would like to heap further praise upon him .
( Laughter ) It is nice to see him blush .
The Committee has been entirely behind Mr Wynn in the stand he has taken over the years on this particular point .
It seems odd that the Court of Justice rules that our opinion may not be necessary .
But if we look back to the isoglucose case , it says that no legislation can pass unless Parliament has given its opinion .
Here , Mr Wynn is proposing to Parliament that we should not give an opinion .
How does this silly situation arise between Parliament and the Member States ?
I think it is due to two rather simple things .
Firstly , donor countries look for gratitude of some form for the fact that their national money is going to help in a particular part of the world .
That argument might fall away when every currency is called the euro , and no longer the franc , pound , peseta or lira .
We shall wait and see .
The other is the rather interesting point that the civil servants in the Member States have convinced their ministers that there is a better cost-benefit for national aid going to developing countries than for aid from the European Union .
I think this is wrong , but I would not expect the civil servants , whose jobs are involved , to say anything different .
We come up against these two rather simple things and get into a very complicated , legalistic argument with the Member States and the Council .
It is about time the Court of Justice saw a little bit of sense in this and argued that money which is being handled corporately on behalf of the Member States should be considered a part of the European Union budget and be budgetized accordingly .
I support Mr Wynn 's report , and my group supports it too .
I would be amazed if any Member of this House voted against .
Mr President , Mr Wynn 's proposal that the European Parliament should not express an opinion on the Commission 's draft Financial Regulation , applicable to the European Development Fund in the question of development cooperation with ACP countries , is a logical consequence of the absurd situation which is prevailing .
The Green Group does , of course , support Mr Wynn 's proposal .
This Financial Regulation is going to be adopted with or without the European Parliament 's opinion .
That is quite clear . The EDF is outside the European Parliament 's budgetary mandate , but we are still expected to grant exoneration and give our views on possible legislation concerning budgets .
This procedure is absurd !
The only reason for this absurd situation in the Regulation is to try to get a democratic alibi for this ' story ' .
The European Parliament should not cooperate in being a democratic alibi .
On the other hand , there should be no doubt that the Green Group supports and is strongly committed to the development work with the ACP countries .
Mr President , Mr Wynn takes a very unusual position in his report .
The Council asks Parliament for its advice , but if it was up to him Parliament would refuse to give it .
His reasoning is : " We want to integrate the European Development Fund into Community budgets .
We will not put up with a meagre little recommendation on financial regulations ' !
Parliament proves itself a bad loser when it takes such a line .
The European Treaty contains no provision for the inclusion of the EDF in the Community budget .
Nor was this altered in the Amsterdam Treaty .
The Court of Justice has completely ruled against Parliament with respect to the nature of the expenditure .
The Court does not think it is Community expenditure .
The Council is therefore not obliged to ask for Parliament 's advice on the financial regulations of the EDF .
Refusing to give one 's opinion reminds me of a petulant child which does not get what it wants , and therefore pushes aside everything it does get .
By refusing , Parliament is not applying any political pressure , otherwise I might understand it .
As a Council , I would not lose any sleep over this kind of attitude : " You do not want to give your opinion ?
Fine , we will sort it out without you . '
My criticism of the report is not only procedural , but also substantive .
It is true that Parliament has been arguing for years for the budgetization of EDF expenditure .
But there are quite a number of arguments against it .
We have to realize that in the Lomé Convention we are dealing with the Member States ' contractual obligations towards Lomé countries .
The Member States fulfil an important role in the implementation of this agreement , which is by nature intergovernmental .
Bearing that in mind , there is much to be said for not letting the funding go via the Community budget .
Of course , coordination between the Community and the Member States is necessary .
But this necessity does not disappear when the EDF is included in the Union budget .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this week we have already had several opportunities ( on the occasion of reports on tourism ) to reconstruct above all how seriously this House takes its task of representing the interests of taxpayers in the European Union .
We have also seen how necessary it is that we perceive these interests solidly and with great determination .
We see here - and our rapporteur stated it at the end of the arguments he put forward - how the Commission regards our concern for greater involvement in development policy , namely , and I quote : " The Council must give its opinion by a qualified majority having first received the opinions of the European Investment Bank and the Court of Auditors on this draft . '
We are talking about development policy , in theory , because it is not present in the European Budget . It is the fourth largest Budget item , the fourth largest expenditure item which the European taxpayers have to make .
At the same time , we see ourselves confronted by the fact that the Council - and in this connection apparently also the Commission - really places no value on being appropriately inspected by the institution which ultimately is responsible for monitoring the implementation of European policies .
Mr van Dam , I believe we shall have no problems at all , not even in public , in following our rapporteur 's arguments .
As Mr Pasty has said , we should stop frittering away our time with things which they obviously think are nothing to do with us .
The only thing is , the taxpayers are sitting there and we have to say to them quite clearly that the gentlemen of the Council - and probably those of the Commission too , as I deduce from this document - will open themselves up to inspection when we , supported by the votes of our constituents , force them to do so .
Not otherwise .
We should perhaps be guided by this thought when we deal with the reports before us , which we have to adopt in this house in the near future , relating to the monitoring of European policies .
We should not allow ourselves to be led astray by any chalumeau sounds - which even I as the rapporteur for the 1995 approval clearly followed , for in contrast to Mr Wynn I proposed approval at that time . Instead , we should make sure we fulfil to the letter the task given to us by our constituents .
Mr President , I must firstly say that I disagree with Mr Wynn , but I disagree with him on the only thing we could disagree on today : whether this debate is going to be boring or not .
I do not think it will be , because the fact that we all agree on this matter does not necessarily mean that the debate will be boring . This is shown by the fact that , although there are no amendments and we are all in agreement , if we look at the list of speakers we can see that not only are there speeches from all the groups , but , in fact , there are several speakers from every one of the groups .
And I believe this , Mr Wynn , proves we are all united in the belief that this matter is extremely important .
I would suggest that it is one of the most important topics , since we are talking about the budget and the budget is what allows us to implement all the Union 's policies .
We now find ourselves with the special provision - as you rightly said - whereby , although we are allowed in all policies to contribute to the budget , we are prevented from contributing to the budgetary procedure in spite of the fact that we are nevertheless asked for our commitment when the management of the budget is being approved or rejected .
So I believe Parliament cannot accept this role , since it is so significant .
Nor can we say , moreover , that this is an unimportant subject .
We know perfectly well that the sixth and seventh EDFs required more than ECU 18 billion .
This is an extremely significant amount and Parliament must place on record that it is not prepared to play the role it has been assigned .
Of course , I believe we must also explain that this does not mean we are against development cooperation .
This is certainly not true .
Nor are we against the Commission 's work .
I am saying once again that what we require is a more solid basis for this policy , within the budgetary framework of the Union .
Mr President , I too would like to compliment the speaker , Mr Wynn , and the Committee on Budgetary Control for their work on this subject and for their proposal , which I believe should be approved , to refuse to give Parliament 's opinion on the proposed financial regulations for the Eighth European Development Fund .
I firmly believe in cooperating towards the development of the EU and , for me , this is a positive and useful provocation and an act of political and institutional responsibility on the part of the European Parliament .
We are now in an inexplicable situation in the sense that it is difficult to explain it abroad , and substantially untenable , from both a logical and a political point of view .
This obviously relates to the characteristics of the EDF and the fact that it is not included in the budget .
I would like to remind you that , with regard to cooperation in development , the EDF 's inclusion in the budget was almost the only request made by the European Parliament to the Intergovernmental Conference , but was hardly mentioned .
This highlights the fact that Parliament 's consultation is purely optional on many measures and that , on implementing measures and even on negotiations on the Lomé Conventions , its prerogatives are simply shown to be a power of political influence - being able to give its opinion which , however , is never binding .
Consequently , in many cases , Parliament does not have any influence on the definition of significant aspects of the Convention itself and subsequently , above all , on its management .
By way of example , the proposed regulation on which we will not be giving an opinion does not provide for any Parliamentary role , even in the procedure for justifying the budget , even when this concerns the resources of the EDF managed by the European Investment Bank , which comprise an ever greater part of the EDF itself .
Who is asking Parliament not to give this opinion today ?
Obviously , those more concerned with the outcome of the cooperation policies and the institutional and managerial correctness of the measures taken by the Community institutions .
Rather than legal , the problem is therefore a political one .
Our opinion is therefore all the more important as we are dealing with the debate on what to do after the year 2000 - that is , after the Fourth Lomé Convention .
We obviously have a problem , and despite the fact that the Lomé Convention has been and continues to be a unique means of exceptional importance today , the fact that Parliament has been unable to exercise its role on control and on the definition of managerial means to the full is obviously a problem , and has certainly limited its scope and impact .
Mr President , I would like firstly to echo the thanks to Mr Wynn , particularly as regards his point that we should give a clear signal here .
The budgetization of the European Development Fund is a permanent topic in the Committee on Development and Cooperation , and we also know that we have the Commission on our side there too .
The disappointment over the fact that it has not gone further in the negotiations in Amsterdam has just been expressed by Mr Vecchi .
Gradually we are perhaps making a little progress , for only recently the German Bundestag made the cross-party decision to move closer to this budgetization of the EDF , particularly with respect to an effective monitoring system .
I am beginning to find it somewhat amusing that precisely those institutions which deprive us of budgetization , on the one hand complain that it would above all be a question of inadequate monitoring , but on the other hand do not supervise the use of European development funds with the care which we really want .
Seen from that point of view , I think this criticism collapses somewhat , because a more effective monitoring system than the one we can offer through Parliament and the Committee for Budgetary Control , which covers the entire field and does not restrict itself merely to the section which might at times be part of a national budget - in other words a better system - is therefore scarcely conceivable .
So I do not understand why the Council and our governments do not make more effective use of this instrument .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation had also stated in its argument that the draft before us really offers no improvement with regard to monitoring , and that is broadly unsatisfactory .
We have already underlined this here .
I can only repeat it again , loud and clear .
Mr President , I would like to concern myself primarily with what Mrs Wemheuer said in her very nice speech to Mr Wynn , in which she emphasized that there are also human aspects to housekeeping .
Occasionally , as an emigrant from the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , I take part in sections of the Committee on Budgetary Control - unfortunately much too rarely , because our committees always meet at the same time , which is something I very much regret .
I can only say that I have experienced in the Budgetary Control Committee just how highly this work is valued , and that there is a human element there .
However , I would like to take issue with Mrs Wemheuer on one point .
She said this Friday sitting is somewhat less important .
No , look around , Mrs Wemheuer , and you can see that at least the quality is here .
The fact that there are spaces here and there is of no interest .
I am happy that we are finally deciding to send out a signal .
If you go out and talk to people , you see a growing suspicion of what our Community , our Union , is doing with the taxpayers ' money .
I , too , share this suspicion , for why would someone refuse to accept our monitoring if they had nothing to hide ?
The Council should be told .
I thank Mr Bosch , who raised this question earlier .
In that context I would say that this rejection is a clear signal sent by us to those gentlemen up there in the Council , and a policy which is correct , and we should of course ensure that it is made well known .
There is no doubt at all , this is a sign that the administration of the Fund is not working as it ought to .
Moreover , we should in no way give these unilateral Council decisions a dubious democratic legitimization , for the Council is the most undemocratic element in our Community .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the finance regulation for the eighth European Development Fund is a question of a document in which the implementation rules ( that is , the financial order , the management of resources , the implementation measures and organs which carry them out , as well as the checking and the statement of accounts ) are fixed as an internal agreement between the Commission and the Member States .
The financial regulation is adopted , as you know and as was carried out here , with a qualified majority when the agreement comes into force .
According to the internal agreement , the European Investment Bank and the Court of Auditors give a non-binding opinion on the draft of the text drawn up by the Commission .
On the other hand Parliament 's opinion is facultative , since the EDF , as we have frequently stressed , is not part of the budget plan , and yet it was called for as early as the draft stage of the financial regulation for the seventh EDF .
The Commission fully understands your great dissatisfaction here in Parliament over the continuing failure to include the EDF in the budget plan .
The Commission has in fact already taken initiatives of its own accord in this respect in the past .
Nevertheless it does regret Mr Wynn 's proposal , supported by the Committee on Budgetary Control , by which Parliament will refuse to adopt a position on the draft financial regulation for the eighth EDF as submitted by the Commission .
However , that does not mean that I would not like personally to express my admiration for Mr Wynn .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
The EDF should be incorporated into the EU 's ordinary budget work where Parliament also has insight and influence .
I have voted for the report , but more constructive efforts are needed than refusing to give an opinion on EDF legislation .
Community cereals trade
The next item is the report ( A4-0021 / 98 ) by Mr Giansily , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Court of Auditors ' Special Report No 5 / 97 on management of the Community cereals trade involving export refunds , special import arrangements and regional aid schemes , together with the Commission 's replies ( C4-0351 / 97 ) .
Mr President , since for good reason he cannot be present today , Mr Giansily has asked me to draw your attention to his text , which he wrote in his capacity as rapporteur .
I thank the House for accepting this rule whereby , as Chair of the Committee , I represent the rapporteur .
The Court of Auditors ' Special Report on management of the Community cereals trade with regard to export refunds , special import arrangements and regional aid schemes has been the subject of numerous statements in recent years , at the centre of which were the three main parts of this report .
First there is the Community cereals trade , for which export refunds are guaranteed - an area in which the Court 's monitoring has brought to light several problems which impair the effect of the rules .
The first problem , raised by both the Court of Auditors and the Commission , concerns the quality of the data submitted to the Commission .
It has been shown in fact that some national disbursing offices do not list the individual amounts refunded for the export of cereal products under the individual KN-codes .
This has probably contributed to the fact that a status quo has been created which does not favour a proper functioning of the system .
For it was shown that the flat-rate conversion coefficients had remained unchanged for 24 years before they were reduced to 1.37 % in 1991 .
In the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control , the failure to correct the coefficients may have led to considerable additional costs , which is why in future care should be taken that these coefficients are checked at regular intervals .
A similar problem was also discovered in the case of export refunds for barley malt .
Here the implementation of the relevant regulation in France and the United Kingdom was unsatisfactory .
The Committee on Budgetary Control therefore calls upon the Commission to recall sums which were improperly paid because of a failure to check the origin of malt exports , and to clarify the regulation which fixes the export refunds for mixed fodder .
As far as the quality of physical inspection of cereal exports is concerned , there is a clear lack of coordination in the monitoring of multinational companies by the competent national authorities .
The Commission is requested to take measures to eliminate these defects as quickly as possible , and to inform Parliament of the results achieved .
Secondly , the Court of Auditors ' Special Report is concerned with special arrangements for the import of maize and sorghum to Spain and Portugal .
It will be recalled that after the entry of Spain and Portugal into the Community an agreement was made between them and the United States in order to guarantee the annual import of two million tonnes of maize and 300 000 tonnes of sorghum to Spain , and 500 000 tonnes of maize to Portugal .
The Spanish authorities - according to the rapporteur - impeded the proper implementation of the regulation by submitting inaccurate import data to the Commission , and this submission , moreover , was late in arriving . Meanwhile , Portugal bought maize directly on the world market and then sold it at intervention prices on the Portuguese market .
These practices led to considerable additional costs for the Community 's budget .
The Committee on Budgetary Control demands that care be taken when the regulation is implemented in future , so that no additional costs for the budget of the European Union are incurred .
Finally , the third aspect of the report concerns the supply of cereals under the POSEIMA scheme .
This applies primarily to Madeira and the Azores , and the relevant comments of the Court of Auditors reveal a whole series of operational failures and weaknesses , which a rapid check of the programme might confirm .
In this sad business it must also be mentioned ( as emphasized by Mr Engwirda , member of the Court of Auditors , in a letter to myself as Chair of the Committee on Budgetary Control ) that it is not possible to recall the excess amounts paid , since the profits improperly made by the importers are due to a mistake by the Commission .
So there needs to be a reform of the POSEIMA Programme on the basis of the comments from the Court of Auditors , in which , of course , the requirements of distribution between the islands are taken into account .
Mr President , I have a worry about my own mental health ( since this topic was mentioned this morning ) when I can get excited by something that says " Special Report 5 / 97 of the Court of Auditors on the management of the Community 's cereals trade involving export refunds , special import arrangements and regional aid scheme together with the Commission 's replies ' .
But it is one of those reports which are worth reading .
It is succinct and to the point .
The Court of Auditors have done a really good job in highlighting the problems that we have in this area , as Mrs Theato has stated .
However , it is not as good as previous special reports on the very same issue .
The one that caught everyone 's attention was when we were giving extra export refunds for exports from Germany , and ships were coming with grain into Germany , unloading , reloading the same grain , going away and getting monies for it .
That showed the total folly of the system , but the flaws persist .
Here we have export refunds from the period 1991-1994 totalling over ECU 11 billion .
That amount was actually more than the total spent on training , social policies , research and development , and anti-poverty programmes .
These monies were going through that scheme with a number of mistakes as well as a number of unsatisfactory practices .
There are two points I want to highlight .
Firstly , on the POSEIMA schemes where we had monies going to the Azores .
When you read the report it is absolutely incredible how such monies could be spent in that way .
Flaws and defects in the programme were revealed which would warrant it being overhauled .
I am sure the Commission would agree with that .
One can only endorse the Court 's finding that with the current system , factors irrelevant to the special requirements of the POSEIMA scheme will dictate aid levels . It is absolutely unbelievable that we could have been paying money out in the way we did under those conditions .
I now wish to dwell on the area which covers comitology , an area in which I have quite an interest .
This ECU 11 billion was actually managed by a management committee over which Parliament has no control , no right of scrutiny and about which we have great difficulty in obtaining information .
Not too long ago , when the price of cereals actually reached record highs on the world market , the management committee stopped export refunds .
Fine , but we were never consulted or asked whether it was the right thing to do .
After all , it is only a couple of billion ECU !
During the couple of months when it was suspended , that money would have served to finance the rural development which Commissioner Fischler is trying to promote , and to reconvert our spending in CAP .
When the refunds returned , once again Parliament was not consulted .
No consultation , no information , just a fait accompli .
I do not think this is the right way for Parliament to operate when it comes to agriculture , but I know I am digressing on that .
The Commissioner may ask what that has to do with this report ?
It has a lot to do with the report .
It is about the way the management committees operate .
I have to laugh that the opinion from our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development says that Parliament is not in a position to monitor the activities of the management committees .
If that is the case , it shows the inadequacy of the present system .
We have 79 agricultural management committees .
That was the figure given when I did the budget .
In 1994 alone , the management committees took 4 , 679 acts .
That is a lot of legislation and money .
The report is calling for transparency , and that is exactly what we should be doing .
I am pretty sure the Commissioner would support that approach .
We have to change our method of operating .
We have to change the way we spend our money in agriculture - away from export refunds , away from this comitology structure which deals with these large amounts of money .
We need a system that is more transparent , with fewer loopholes , fewer shortcomings .
I honestly think that the next special report should be a darned sight better than the previous ones .
Commissioner Fischler will , of course , have a lot to say about that and how that comes about .
He knows that he will have the support of this Parliament when he tries to bring about those changes because they are essential .
Mr President , I am somebody who generally supports the Common Agricultural Policy , so I hate to admit this in front of Terry Wynn , but I agree with some of the points he makes about the complications of the policy which have led to so many opportunities for fraud .
That is one of the things about the proposals for reform .
The aid that we pay out will be better targeted , will find its way to the farmers , the farms and the rural areas where it is supposed to go , and there will be fewer opportunities for abuse . Less will go to middlemen and traders , who by comparison with the farmers we hope to assist , have a great capacity to cream off vast amounts of money in some of these areas .
The direct aid will solve a lot of the problems we are talking about .
Insofar as the POSEIMA programme is concerned , we have to admit that you could not think of a more complicated or indirect or inefficient way to aid islands or remote regions , because in the first place there is no guarantee whatsoever that this money is going to the aid of the people who need it or for whom it was intended .
Again , the subsidies can be creamed off by people in the middle as well as creating immense opportunities for irregular practices .
The only question I have about the Giansily report is paragraph 5 , which talks about importing products without any cost to the European budget or disruption to European markets .
Of course , as long as these products are cheaper on world markets than they are in the European Union and as long as we have surpluses , there is no possibility that anybody can comply with that order , because it will obviously mean cheaper cereals from outside .
The one area where I have a slight disagreement with Terry Wynn is over the whole question of export refunds , where I think he went a little bit astray .
Because this is an automatic mechanism , and if we have surpluses in the Community and a policy designed to get them out of the Community to sell them to markets where prices are lower , then it is obvious from day to day and month to month as world markets change that we need an order to get these surpluses out of the Union .
We need to employ a flexible system , and the subsidies we pay will go up and down .
Similarly when prices on the world markets are higher than they are in the European Union , as has happened thankfully recently , we save ourselves that cost and the money is retained in the budget and we can use it for something else .
As long as we have surpluses this system will be necessary .
I agree that the sooner we can get to a system away from all these complicated measures to assist the regions , the better , just like in the case of the structural funds .
We have made such complicated regulations that I do not believe they are helpful to the regions they are intended for , and they create immense opportunities for the sort of abuses that have been identified here and which we hope will be corrected .


Mr President , it is a pity Mr Giansily cannot be present , otherwise I would have been able to congratulate him , but I would like to congratulate Mr Fischler who I expect has given up his Friday morning especially to hear the debate on this report .
I am also a supporter of the Common Agricultural Policy , but I am convinced that when there are rules they have to be implemented properly .
I believe this Parliament has a special role in this area , and this is really all Parliament can do .
I think the most surprising thing about this report is that while everything in the world is changing , and everything in the agricultural policy is changing , a number of things have remained constant .
For flour made from cereal the coefficient has not been amended for 24 years , and for malt which is made from barley , the coefficient has not been amended for 18 years !
How is this possible ?
How has it been possible for the committee which decided on these things , and for the representatives of the Member States making up this committee , to have been able to calculate their own advantage from it for so long ?
What conclusions is the Commission drawing from this ?
Another of the things I found unusual in the report from the Court of Auditors is that it states clearly that not one Member State has the ability to exercise the necessary physical control on implementation restitutions .
This strikes me as a serious observation .
Billions of ECUs are spent on this , and then the Court of Auditors makes the observation that not one Member State is able to check this .
What is the Commission doing with this knowledge ?
I want to make one last point . When Spain and Portugal joined , special arrangements were created - to ease the transition , I take it .
It has now become clear that these arrangements are very disadvantageous to the European budget .
I wonder whether they are advantageous to Spain and Portugal .
Could that be looked at again ?
To conclude , Mr President , what measures is the Commission going to take on the basis of these conclusions ?
What will the reclamation of the wrongfully paid out sums be ?
One of these days we will be discussing payment for the 1993 budget .
This one here goes up to the year 1994 , if I understand correctly .
To what extent is the Commission charging the Member States for their errors ?
Are the extra tariffs used , which have been introduced at the insistence of Parliament ?
For instance 25 % , when it has been occurring for so many years .
Does the Commission intend to do this ?
Furthermore , what is the need for special arrangements for Spain and Portugal when , if I have understood correctly , they have served absolutely no purpose , at least not during the past ten years ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , it is our view that some aspects of the motion for a resolution in Mr Giansily 's report are unbalanced .
The explanatory statement contains certain considerations regarding the possibility of Portugal and Spain importing given quantities of maize from the world market , but which are not reflected on an equal footing nor in an appropriate manner in the motion for a resolution .
The fact that one of the two Member States belatedly submits data that is not only late but also inaccurate is mentioned nowhere in the political resolution .
Meanwhile , the other Member State is required to exercise the right to import without any consequent adjustment of the Community budget and , ultimately , without affecting Community production , when such a requirement is not even justified , in that this right was created precisely to bolster the processing industry of the Member State in question .
This reference in the political resolution is all the more unjustified in that it appears at a time when it is already known that the Portuguese Government has decided to substitute direct importation , to which it would however have continued to be entitled by means of a public competition .
Extensive references are made to the supply of cereals under POSEIMA .
As we have repeatedly stated , and not just in connection with cereals , the Court of Auditors ' report confirms that the impact of subsidies to the end-user lacks clarity ( since there is no clear definition of who or what the end-user is ) . The extent of the effect on the end-user is not readily identifiable ( on the basis merely of the accounts of importing companies ) and , finally , the monitoring system introduced by the regional authorities is not satisfactory .
We are waiting to see what measures will be implemented by the regions to change this situation and to render the system of subsidies transparent , as well as to ensure that the overall allocation of funds to the recipients for whom it was intended can be monitored .
The report also discusses the fact that the dispersed nature of islands considerably raises delivery costs , as does the absence of appropriate port infrastructures . It further states , correctly , that the level of subsidies must be stipulated in specific provisions in POSEI based on the difficulties to which the regions are subject and not on the fluctuating world prices of cereals ( the drop in which has considerably reduced the level of subsidies , while the difficulties with which they must contend remain unchanged ) .
In this context , we naturally support the request for a reform of the POSEIMA programme regarding the supply of cereals , and urge that a fair mechanism for fixing cereal import subsidies should be introduced , and that inter-island transport costs should be clearly specified and quantified , as part of a series of amendments which should go hand-in-hand with the necessary allocation of the respective additional funding .
This is the only way in which we can give substance to the formal recognition of the ultraperiferal status recently enshrined in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Mr President , the Court of Auditors ' Special Report contains several observations which are both interesting and startling .
One of these , as several speakers have already mentioned , is that the flat-rate processing coefficients have not been changed for a full 24 years .
How is this possible ?
The Commission 's reply leaves this question unanswered and suggests a serious omission on the part of the Commission .
This omission has doubtless led to substantial additional costs for the EU through the years , which is more than regrettable .
During the years 1991-1994 , export refunds for cereals amounted to ECU 11 billion , a substantial sum .
The Court of Auditors ' observations have revealed several serious flaws and defects which mean that the system does not work satisfactorily .
The same is true in the area of exported cereals .
These flaws ( it may even be a matter of out-and-out fraud within the sector ) are encouraged so that payments of these export refunds become incorrect , which in turn leads to increased additional costs for the EU .
It is absolutely essential that the Commission does something about this fact .
Flawed control systems are also found in other areas , such as the much criticized POSEIMA scheme .
As far as the malt sector is concerned , where the Court of Auditors has taken up the unsatisfactory application of the rules in France and the UK , the Green Group supports the rapporteur 's call for the Commission to demand the return of the amounts which were unduly paid .
In addition , I assume the Commission is going to change the rules in order to prevent a similar problem occurring in future .
Finally , I would just like to draw the attention of my Swedish colleagues to the fact that there is a mistake in the report in paragraph 1 , where it says in the Swedish version that Parliament regrets ( beklagar ) the flat-rate processing coefficients . It should actually say that Parliament deplores ( beklagar djupt ) , which is a further sharpening of the text .
Mr President , the Court of Auditors ' report analyses a number of aspects of the importation and exportation of cereals , including the implementation of the export refunds mechanism in terms of administrative management and fraud .
European agricultural producers have rightly emphasized the problems caused by special import systems for maize and sorghum in Spain and Portugal .
In fact , these systems were established at the time of accession by those countries to the European Union and are still in force , and have even been consolidated within the framework of the GATT agreements .
Two million tonnes of maize and 300 000 tonnes of sorghum imported each year by Spain and 500 000 tonnes of maize imported by Portugal , mainly from the United States , are affected by the measure .
As the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has pointed out , it is necessary to prevent these imports from causing serious problems within the Community market , due to irregular commercialization .
For example , it was observed recently that maize imported by Portugal under this system was being sold at a lower price than Community maize .
These distortions cause cost price differentials for food processing manufacturers and can therefore lead to the relocation of food processing companies .
Therefore , these zero-rated import quotas associated with the accession of Spain and Portugal , which the Commission has allowed to become institutionalized within the framework of GATT , not only benefit the United States to the detriment of European producers , but also cause distortions due to non-compliance with the rules of competition within the single market .
Finally , I would like to highlight another real problem : the difficulties experienced by some operators when exporting their cereals .
Paradoxically , in recent years the Commission has imposed European export taxes on cereals , although we subsidize farmers for obligatory fallowing .
This year , at the beginning of the season , when world cereal prices were high , the Commission only granted export contracts in homeopathic doses .
Since then , the market has fallen and the European Union is going to lose market shares because of the limitation of the volume of refunds .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , neither farmers nor manufacturers understand the logic of this , and I must admit that I myself do not find it very easy to follow .
Mr President , for the EU taxpayer much of what this report contains must be really hard to swallow .
The simple fact that with astronomical amounts of refunds , like ECU 11 million from 1991 to 1994 , the quality of data submitted still leaves much to be desired , is a revelation that really must not be described as a problem but rather as a scandal !
The problems of the Common Agricultural Policy , with all its weaknesses and susceptibility to improprieties of all kinds , are highlighted once again .
It is shocking that additional costs of ECU 9.3 million were incurred because Portugal buys large quantities of maize on the world market and then sells it on the Portuguese market at intervention prices , thereby giving the imported maize a considerable price advantage over that produced in the Community .
Equally shocking is the fact that the conversion coefficients pertaining to the level of export refunds were not changed in the period from 1967 to 1991 , and the fact that the export refunds for cereals are paid even though the Member States are not in a position to carry out physical checks .
This contradicts the relevant regulations and proposals of the European Union .
This report once again makes clear how necessary it is to reform the Common Agricultural Policy in terms of ecologization and renationalization , and above all to ensure that these drastically deplorable abuses are eliminated .
Mr President , it is an undeniable fact that there has been malpractice in the area of grain export subsidies in the Union area .
This is one of the cankers in our agricultural policy , quite apart from cases of malpractice in the meat trade .
It is , for example , quite unbelievable that free market grain and intervention grain could have been stored together .
As Mr Giansily 's report suggests , we should look at the maize quotas for Spain and Portugal .
It is obvious that imported maize is , at least in Portugal , being mixed with EU maize at considerable profit .
The fault in the system does not end there but also crops up in Agenda 2000 negotiations .
We obviously try to eliminate the possibility of malpractice there by making the cultivation of maize more profitable in the European Union area .
When it is a matter of zero-sum games being played with agriculture in the EU or a spiralling dive to fund enlargement , we pass the problem of maize quotas in Agenda 2000 talks on to Finnish dairy farmers .
It will not do .
We cannot make our farmers pay for other people 's abuse , Mr Fischler .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Special Report No 5 , for the year 1997 , from the European Court of Auditors deals with three particular problems .
Firstly it considers the cereals trade and especially the question of guaranteed export refunds ; secondly it deals with the import of maize and sorghum to Spain and Portugal ; thirdly it concerns the supply of cereals under the POSEIMA programme .
The Commission welcomes the Court of Auditors ' report and also the rapporteur 's proposed resolution , on which you will vote today .
Even though the Commission does not share the Court of Auditors ' opinion on all points , the report will nevertheless be of very valuable assistance to us in our efforts to improve the arrangements for the management of the cereals market , not least the improvement of monitoring .
I think Parliament is justified in complaining about the fact that the flat-rate coefficients for the conversion of export refunds for processed products were not changed for 24 years .
The Commission , however , places value on the statement that during this period it several times requested and suggested changes , but that this was on each occasion rejected by the Member States .
Only when we updated the coefficients in 1991 did matters improve somewhat .
In any case , it can be pointed out in the European Union 's defence that our coefficients are stricter than those of our trading partners and competitors .
In connection with the export refunds for malt and mixed fodder , the Court of Auditors indicated some differences and difficulties in the interpretation of regulations .
In the Commission 's view , these terms are intrinsically quite unambiguous .
The problems which arose in two Member States with regard to the origin of exported malt have been solved in the meantime .
As the Commission states in its response to the Special Report , the financial consequences are drawn in the context of the procedure for closing the accounts , which are necessary because of inadequate supervision of the applications for export refunds .
The difficulties in the interpretation of the combined nomenclature for mixed fodder are being checked at the moment by the Commission 's officials .
We think that it will soon be possible to find a satisfactory solution .
The Court of Auditors ' findings in relation to physical inspection of exported cereals to a large extent concur with those of the Commission .
I am pleased to be able to tell Parliament today that the committee on trading procedures is currently working on a consolidation of the basic refunds order , that is Order 3665 / 87 .
This should mean , as suggested by the Court of Auditors , that the rules governing the guarantee of export refunds are phrased considerably more strictly .
The notice of export must in future be handed in at the point at which the goods are actually loaded .
As regards inspection of the exports made by international firms , the Commission has in my view already given the Member States very clear instructions .
We shall however pursue this matter even further .
Finally , I would like to mention the fact that by the time we have presented proposals for the reform of the whole cereals sector , most of these rules will really be obsolete , because we would then , de facto , have to claim for hardly any export refunds for the export of cereals .
However , the Court of Auditors also criticizes the special rule for the direct sale of maize on the world market for import to Portugal .
The fact that part of these imports were arranged by the Portuguese interventions office is the result of a compromise reached in the Council in December 1993 .
I would not conceal from you the fact that the Commission was aware from the outset that this rule would lead to distortions .
Because of this , and because of the Court of Auditors ' comments , this regulation was not renewed in 1997 .
The rules for supplying regions on the extreme periphery under the POSEIMA programme are by their very nature difficult to implement .
Nevertheless , the Commission regards them as necessary .
It has therefore carefully noted the comments and recommendations from the Court of Auditors on the aid programme for supplying the Azores and Madeira with cereals .
The aim will be to develop the programme further and very much more precisely , to adapt it to the needs of these actual regions .
The Commission is striving to make progress here , within the parameters stipulated in the corresponding Council orders .
The Commission is of course keeping to the September 1996 agreement between Parliament and the Commission on the comitology process , addressed in point 7 of the resolution .
Certainly , the administrative committees sometimes work with very short deadlines .
But the agendas and reports on the committee meetings always go automatically to Parliament , and in the meantime the reports of the meetings can also be called up on the Internet and are thus made accessible to a very wide public .
Finally , I would like to inform you that the report you requested from Parliament on the consequences of the Court of Auditors ' findings will be with you shortly so that it can be included in Parliament 's formal acceptance of the statement of accounts .
In conclusion , please allow me to say that this Special Report and its concerns are in my view a good example of how the Community bodies , namely the Court of Auditors , the Parliament and the Commission , can cooperate here in order to be able greatly to improve the implementation of various EU policies .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Before the vote on Amendment No 6
Mr President , I did vote , but somebody has removed my card .
I did not look , and I have no idea where my card has got to .
My colleague can confirm this .
I always sit here .
I did vote .
Firstly , I must remind you once again that votes on Friday are free .
So you have no cause for concern .
Secondly , the House will note that you have voted and , thirdly , I would like to know which way you are voting .
So would you like to tell us how you are voting ?
In favour ?
Thank you .
Mr President , for one thing I would just like to say that Mrs Mann is now experiencing something which has also happened to me , namely that on Friday the card was stolen .
Also , I would like to respond to your comment by saying that Mrs Mann is certainly not sitting here because of the money .
Mr Posselt , the House knows , because you have repeated it many times , that your card has been the target of wrongful removal .
We hope you have recovered your voting card because I see you are ready to vote .
You must be more careful now and look after it well , since you have seen that your card is obviously especially valuable .
Mr President , it is just very specifically on what you have said , because you are the second Vice-President this morning who has referred to the different system .
Mr Martin said that the roll-call votes on Friday did not count and you also have made a distinction .
I wish you would make it very clear to the President and the Vice-Presidents that these votes count : they are very important indeed .
Thank you , Mr McGowan , but if you had listened to me you would have heard that I did not say these votes do not count .
I said the opposite , and you know I am always here every Friday to give them the value they deserve .
Mr President , on the same lines , I was going to say that all of us here have heard what you say , but there is a group of Europeans above , who are quite young in fact , for whom I think you would need to clarify exactly what you wanted to say .
Well , ladies and gentlemen , it means that on Fridays the votes have exactly the same importance as they do on any other day of the week .
I thank Mr Fabra Vallés for asking me to explain this , and I am happy to do so .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
The rapporteur takes up much of the criticism which the Court of Auditors has directed against administrations in the above-mentioned matter .
I think , however , that criticism could also have been taken up against the Spanish authorities ( concerning the late reporting of the import of maize and sorghum ) and against the management committees ( concerning the lack of information about their activities ) .
However , I freely concede that this is an observation and not a major criticism .
Mr President , we now have unanimous acceptance of a report in respect of which there were no amendments .
We have spent seven minutes voting on this minor matter - this does not relate to the contents but to the number of amendments .
I must say that this week it has been unbearable how we have had to proceed during the votes , with constant points of order in between .
I have intentionally not registered during these interruptions to the order of business in order not to delay any further .
However , in my capacity as one of the committee chairmen , who are of course responsible here for getting these resolutions through the House punctually , I must request most urgently that a tolerable solution is found in the Presidium now , as quickly as possible and certainly by the next plenary session , in order to eliminate these intolerable delays during the votes .
Mr President , I would like to repeat the comment I made last night .
As you rightly say , votes are as important on Friday as they are on Thursday .
Yesterday evening , I pointed out that the bell announcing the votes was not working .
The same thing happened this morning .
The situation is even more serious because on Friday mornings the votes are extremely disjointed .
May I ask you , Mr President , to take measures to ensure that the bell announcing the votes is working , otherwise voting is likely to be seriously disrupted .
It would be a great shame if we could not hear anything when it is time to vote except mobile phones ringing .
I would firstly like to say to you , Mrs Theato , that , luckily , Friday mornings are quiet and relaxed .
So we can even slightly prolong the votes at times , because , as I say , Fridays are quiet , relaxed days with a pleasant atmosphere .
I would also like to ask you to congratulate Mr Giansily on the favourable vote his report received , since it was voted for unanimously by the House .
Participation of Poland and the Slovak Republic in Community training , youth and education programmes
The next item is the report ( A4-0057 / 98 ) by Mrs Leperre-Verrier , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on
I.the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the Community position within the Association Council on the participation of Poland in Community programmes in the fields of training , youth and education ( COM ( 97 ) 0422 - C4-0628 / 97-97 / 0224 ( CNS ) ) ; II.the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the Community position within the Association Council on the participation of the Slovak Republic in Community programmes in the fields of training , youth and education ( COM ( 97 ) 0422 - C4-0629 / 97-97 / 0224 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the involvement of the central and eastern European countries in the education and youth programme is well under way .
The proposal submitted to us by the Commission today is a perfect example of this , and we should be pleased to see Poland and the Slovak Republic join the ranks of the countries taking part in the Socrates , Leonardo and Youth for Europe programmes .
Last July we gave the go-ahead for the involvement of Hungary , the Czech Republic and Romania .
They were able to take advantage of the programmes during the 1997 financial year .
It is now the turn of Poland and the Slovak Republic .
I should like to say a few words about the origin of this decision .
Further to the signature during 1996 of additional protocols with a number of CEECs , the Association Councils defined the method for these countries to participate in Community programmes .
They decided to make education , training and youth the first link in the chain of actions undertaken .
Other agreements should be signed at a later date in the areas of culture , the environment and health .
This aim of this policy , defined at the Dublin Summit , is in particular to familiarize applicant countries with Community policies and procedures .
So we cannot fail to be pleased that cooperation with regard to education and youth has been selected as a priority .
It is true that these are essential for bringing people together and for the creation of European citizenship .
Furthermore , exchanges in this field have been taking place for many years , and the three programmes in question were already able to support actions involving CEECs .
Similarly , the Tempus programme set up in 1990 within the framework of Phare and Tacis has established the foundation of cooperation between universities .
It is obvious that this process has been reinforced by the adoption of Agenda 2000 and the decisions of the Luxembourg Summit , which have brought these pre-accession procedures into the operational phase .
In this respect , we can see that there is synergy not contradiction between the actions recommended in Agenda 2000 and the procedure adopted by the Association Councils .
Furthermore , the choice of countries involved is in full compliance with the wish expressed by this House to avoid discrimination between applicant countries .
So although not selected amongst the first countries , it has been possible for Romania yesterday and now the Slovak Republic to be amongst the associated countries .
Under the terms of this agreement , Poland and the Slovak Republic can take part in all the actions falling within the scope of these three programmes .
Furthermore , these two countries will be involved in the monitoring of their participation in these programmes , and will be invited to coordination meetings .
However , they are responsible for setting up the national structures and mechanisms required for their participation .
On a financial level , the complement to these countries ' contributions which must be provided by the European Union has been included in the 1997 budget .
This expenditure must be made without fail before 31 March , which explains the urgency of this debate .
In addition , Poland has been offered the opportunity of using up to a maximum 10 % of its Phare allocation .
Note that the financial contribution of the Member States must cover the grants and aid given to their participants , and that it is obvious that the cumulative amount of grants and aid received must not exceed the financial contribution paid .
Ladies and gentlemen , a participation agreement is therefore signed between partners , not an aid contract .
This is an extremely important point , because the CEECs have sometimes felt themselves to be like poor relations in their relationship with the European Union , and that at least is how it appears in the evaluation of the Tempus programme .
It would therefore be a good thing to avoid that problem today .
Although there are no major obstacles to the participation of Poland and the Slovak Republic in these programmes , and although - as we have emphasized - this process represents a major political step forward , some questions remain .
The Leonardo , Socrates and Youth for Europe programmes , voted for under the codecision procedure , were set up during 1995 .
They are now almost coming to an end and because of this must be evaluated and redefined .
We must be aware that these three programmes operate in synergy with other European Union actions in the field of education , training and youth .
Article 126 of the Maastricht Treaty has given the European Union competence in this respect , and however limited , they are proof of a real determination to take action .
So it can be stated that young people and their employment has become one of the main concerns of the European Union , and we can only regret the lack of accompanying measures as far as the signatory countries are concerned .
Also , the problem of resources must be mentioned .
Certainly the budget of the Socrates programme has been substantially increased thanks to the tenacity and efficiency of our colleague , Doris Pack , whom we should once again congratulate on her activities , but there is now a real demand for the education and youth programmes , to which it would be a pity not to respond .
Secondly , there is a need to ask questions about the CEECs ' needs with regard to education and training .
Poland , like the Slovak Republic , cannot escape the need to adapt its educational system , not only in relation to the European Union , but also in the context of globalization and the development of the new technologies we are seeing today .
These three programmes can provide answers and not inconsiderable help , but the nature of their activities is multi-directional , which means they do not have an obligation to respond to these objectives .
Now the enlargement procedure , and its corollaries - the principles of free movement and mutual recognition of diplomas - presuppose real progress in education .
Furthermore , the Commission itself has emphasized this in the opinions it has issued on these two countries ' applications for accession .
With regard to Poland , the Commission has highlighted that country 's spectacular progress with regard to education , whilst observing that efforts still have to be made .
In fact , we must recognize that Poland has allocated 16 % of its budget - that is 6.2 % of its GDP - to education , and aims to considerably increase the number of young people receiving secondary and university education , so that 20 % of 20-24 year olds in particular , can receive higher education .
The Slovak Republic is developing a less aggressive strategy as only 3.2 % of its budget is allocated to education , that is approximately 1.5 % of its GDP .
As well as the need to increase the number of secondary-school pupils and students here too , considerable efforts must be made to give minorities the same educational opportunities , and I am thinking of the Hungarian minority , in particular .
That is why , in order to evaluate how involvement in our education and training programmes can help these countries to modernize their educational systems , I have recommended the creation of a specific steering committee .
I know that the Commission is not really in favour of such a measure .
However , I have to say , Mr Commissioner , that the answers I have received have not been entirely convincing , with regard to the refusal to set up an evaluation structure , and I must say I regret it .
In fact , the enlargement process means that many bridges have to be crossed .
Socrates , Leonardo , Youth for Europe are all steps in the right direction but , ladies and gentlemen , we still have a long way to go .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when we decide to include Poland and the Slovak Republic in the Youth and Training Programme of the European Union , this is an important step .
But this step is also a logical result if we want to go further down the road which we took with the decision to enlarge the European Union eastwards .
Why ?
A politically stable and peaceful Europe is the goal we have in our sights when we open our Community to the states of the former Eastern Bloc .
We hope to achieve this goal by helping the future Member States strengthen their democratic structures and reinforce their economic power .
But how can we achieve this ?
Only by learning from each other ; by exchanging experiences , knowledge , ideas and concepts ; and by trusting each other .
The more citizens of the Union are involved in this process of growing together , the more successful it will be .
The younger the people are who take part in this process , the more deeply a feeling of belonging together can take root in their hearts , and the less susceptible the future Community will be to breaking up .
The Leonardo , Socrates , and Youth for Europe programmes seek to prepare the ground for such a development .
They help people to cross linguistic barriers , and encourage the transfer of training and the exchange of students , employees and young people in Europe .
They work towards helping young people in existing and future Member States learn to conceive democratic values as worthy of protection .
The Slovak Republic is not a member of the circle of countries which will initiate the eastwards expansion by their entry .
The judgement that democratic culture in that country must make further progress has led to the postponement of its entry into the Community .
The estimation , however , that the population of the Slovak Republic is open to further democratic development of its political system has led to our desire to see the participation of that people in our programmes .
In July last year , the European Parliament had already decided to include the Czech Republic , Hungary and Romania in the programmes .
The Slovak Republic and Poland had to wait , since we first had to see whether we got additional Socrates resources .
We have achieved this and so I am pleased today that after Hungary , the Czech Republic and Romania , the Slovak Republic and Poland will come into our programmes .
Thank you , Mrs Leperre-Verrier , for your fine contribution .
Mr President , the involvement of Poland and the Slovak Republic in a joint action on training , youth and education , as proposed in the report by Mrs Leperre-Verrier , is a good thing .
It is another small step on the historic road which will be taken with the European Conference at the end of March to make countries in central and eastern Europe full partners .
In reality this is also a useful method to familiarize the candidate countries with the various policy areas and procedures within the Union .
The choice of education , training and youth is a good one to start with and to gain experience , and the role of Commissioner van den Broek in this choice is to be applauded , because those who have youth have the future .
A good basis for future cooperation with these countries can be found in the shared financial support for the relevant programmes , as well as the Phare programme .
I can therefore be satisfied with the fact that the total sum of subsidies and other financial support will amount to no more than the financial contribution .
It keeps matters neat , does not arouse excessive expectations , and can be monitored .
But to my mind it is clear that the substance of this initiative far exceeds the financial limitations as far as the significance of the initiative is concerned .
Poland and the Slovak Republic , like other countries in central and eastern Europe , will have problems adjusting their education systems , not only in relation to the Union , but also in the context of the new information technologies .
On that front , the Member States often have barriers to overcome too .
As a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , I wanted to express my appreciation for the initiative , as the way the programmes is tackled offers a contribution to rapprochement between the Member States and the countries in central and eastern Europe .
This is a strategic political goal which serves stability and peace in Europe .
This is ultimately what our work here is meant to do .
Mr President , I think this is one of the European Parliament 's most important tasks : to strengthen the cooperation between the professions , youth , countries and people .
So it is a good thing .
Language training is a part of this process .
It is important that consideration is given to the languages which exist in the EU today , but at the same time people should ensure that dialogue is developed with the central and eastern European languages , and that they get the same opportunities to develop as the current EU languages .
As far as influence is concerned , I think both Poland and the Slovak Republic should be included from the start and should help decide the shaping of the programme .
This is important because it is in fact an agreement which is being made between the EU and these countries , and means that these agreements will be financed approximately equally by the two countries and the EU .
We should see this within the framework of the partnership between the Commission , the Slovak Republic and Poland .
The programmes concerned here are mainly Leonardo , Socrates , Youth for Europe , Tempus and Phare .
They should be implemented regardless of what happens with the negotiations - that is , however quickly or slowly they progress .
However , I have an important point to add : namely , I think it needs to be very clear that the programme should not only be about a one-sided adaptation to the EU 's institutions , to our approach , our level of training and our training requirements , but it should be a versatile , mutual exchange between the EU and the countries which have now applied for membership .
Only then will these programmes be good .
So the EU should not appear as some kind of big brother , but should always recognize that this is a dialogue between independent countries which have reached an agreement .
Under these conditions this will be good , and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party supports this proposal .
Mr President , Community training and education programmes are of the utmost importance .
I therefore welcome this report on Poland and the Slovak Republic .
If you want to contribute to increased youth exchange over national borders and contribute to young people learning more about other cultures , traditions and countries , these programmes are a good start .
The Green Group is therefore going to support this report .
Personally , however , I have two observations to make .
Firstly , I do not think the Youth for Europe programme should be included in this agreement .
It is not an educational or training programme , but rather a one-sided propaganda organization .
That is the case in Sweden .
So I think it should not be included as a part of the agreement .
Secondly , I think that in a spirit of solidarity the EU should pay for the larger share of the costs of these agreements , because the part of Europe in which we find ourselves is very well-off compared with both Poland and the Slovak Republic , where there are shortages of many things .
If we are serious about support for central and eastern Europe , we should also pay for the main costs in this politically important area .
Mr President , we vote in favour of this report , although I regard it as unnecessary automatically to attach the label of eastwards expansion to every sensible measure concerning our eastern neighbours .
I consider it important to emphasize that it is a matter of an agreement on participation between partners , and not a treaty on guaranteeing aid .
From my own experience I know that Austria 's neighbouring country , the Slovak Republic , is especially very unhappy to be treated as a recipient of aid .
I am genuinely pleased that the rapporteur also deals in her statement with the very worrying situation of children in these countries .
It is particularly the children there who represent the population sector most at risk .
The UNICEF Report discussed last year by the European Parliament put this very forcefully and provided proof .
Socrates and Youth for Europe should therefore be used very specifically to improve the prospects and quality of life of children .
The most intensive cooperation between the educational institutions and the improvement of training systems will certainly contribute to the realization of the enormous intellectual and educational potential of Poland and the Slovak Republic , and ultimately of the citizens of the European Union .
Mr President , I also thank Mrs Leperre-Verrier for her excellent report .
My group welcomes this report and the gradual opening of the programmes to the countries of central and eastern Europe prior to the entry of these countries .
Most of all , this represents another real door being flung wide open for young people to gain new experiences .
However , these programmes also offer the opportunity to exchange experiences in education and careers and to initiate an innovative dialogue , for these countries have something to offer us too .
So the principle of " Learn Your Neighbour 's Language ' does not just apply to the countries of western Europe , but it must also apply to our eastern neighbours .
This money is very well spent . The transfer of knowledge and experience takes place nowhere more effectively than through personal experience and residence in the other country , and I very much hope that personal meetings eliminate prejudices which unfortunately exist today or are being preserved as in the olden days .
I could imagine that educational cooperation will one day lead to common teaching materials - perhaps even to a common European history book .
Mr President , I would very much like to join in the dance of those who are thanking Mrs Leperre-Verrier for the report and the work which she has done here .
One must indeed point out that this report belongs in a greater context .
Everything started with a report by Mr Posselt who at the time said that these reports must be extended to all the central and eastern European countries .
This is also worth mentioning , and very important .
We need only imagine the terribly short time available to these countries of central and eastern Europe , who were held back for so many decades under a Communist yoke , for making their short dash to catch up . They are doing it in a really great way , inspiring us with enthusiasm .
One of the great philosophers of our century , the Dalai Lama , was once asked how he came to terms with the fact that there was still so much destruction and annihilation in the world - especially in his own country . " At the moment we cannot do anything about it ' , he said .
Really he is a very positive person indeed , and all his listeners were astonished .
Then he looked up and said , " Yes , but there is a possibility : we must win over the young people , for he who wins over the young people , to him will also belong the future . ' The same applies to this report .
This report turns to the young people - in this case in Poland and the Slovak Republic , previously ( in fact last year ) in Romania , Hungary and the Czech Republic . If we win over the young people in these countries then the future of Europe belongs to them , which is what we want for them .
It is our task to show and suggest to these young people our European values , granted to us by 50 years of peace which have provided us with great prosperity , a great epoch , so that they can accept them of their own free will .
This report helps this to be achieved .
Mr President , I also wish to thank Mrs Leperre-Verrier for putting together this balanced report .
The European Union education and youth programmes are crucially important channels for improving European integration at the level of the people and bringing eastern and western Europe together .
The experience that individual citizens , students and people doing research derive from multi-cultural colleges throughout Europe is far more valuable than any of the diverse proposals for projects from the Commission with the name of Citizens ' Europe .
It is vital to stress that the problems of cooperation in education between the present EU Member States and the applicant countries will not be solved merely by increasing funding .
Although , for example , the Socrates programme funding has been increased for the next round of funding , the money will certainly not be enough even for the needs of the internal programmes of the present Member States .
So the greatest challenge rests with the applicant countries .
They themselves must be able to modernize and adapt their educational systems and colleges so that they can guarantee the quality of their exchange programmes regarding course content , administration and the external aspect .
Practice has shown that facilities for foreigners studying in many eastern European countries are still very borderline .
To take just one example , I am afraid I can cite the University of Tartu in Estonia , where Finns studying there have already taken the university authorities to court right in the middle of term over massive fee increases .
Funding foreign students has no part in the exchange programmes .
Countries preparing for EU membership have to grasp this notion .
The exchange programmes rely on reciprocity , which cannot in all reason be based on decisions made in court .
There is therefore much scope for improvement .
Mr President , Karl Habsburg-Lothringen kindly mentioned that I am , as it were , the grandfather of this report , because I had the honour at that time of presenting here in Parliament the supplementary protocols relating to the association agreements .
I believe the report on which we are voting today is a significant step forward .
Firstly , it deals with the cultural and linguistic diversity in present-day Europe and in the future EU .
I am very grateful that the regional and minority languages , the Slavonic languages and Hungarian are given appropriate dignity in this report .
Secondly I am happy that this report is a step towards greater partnership .
We have grown accustomed to a certain arrogant paternalism vis-a-vis the candidates for entry in central and eastern Europe and it is the amendments which were put forward today which bear witness to a great spirit of partnership .
Quite simply , we are seeing here the future Member States .
In this connection I would like to take issue with Mr Lukas , for I am of the opinion that he should campaign energetically in his own country for eastwards enlargement .
Thirdly , I would like to say that in this report we are considering two countries which are particularly important to us : Poland and the Slovak Republic , which are closely linked together by their great histories and culture .
The Slovak Republic is in fact in danger of being isolated .
I have spoken with the President of the Slovak Rectors ' Conference , Professor Stern , who fears that because of the politics in his country which we have justly criticized , the people themselves are isolated , the educational institutions are isolated , and the students , young scientists and specialist workers are isolated .
We must work against this .
We should place a financial emphasis on the Slovak Republic , for none of the associated states requires our support as urgently as the Slovak Republic , which is a profoundly central European country .
That is why I welcome this report and the emphasis it places on Poland and the Slovak Republic .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , research , infrastructure and education are the bases for success for an eco-social market economy , for success , for employment .
So I welcome these programmes .
We members of the eastwards enlargement delegations did in fact have some very intensive discussions in the last week in Strasbourg with Commissioner van den Broek , and we made it clear that we particularly welcome the importance of this European agreement to include the central and eastern European states .
Of course , this applies especially to cooperation in the realm of education .
I would also like to emphasize , like the previous speaker Mr Posselt , that this is of very special significance for the aspect of integration , particularly from the time when the political situation in that country makes entry possible .
It is a well-known fact that the deadline for applications for the office of President expires today at 4 p.m. and the President is likely to be elected on 5 March .
It is interesting that President Kovac has applied , and that he will also arrange the referendum decided by the Constitutional Court .
So at the moment a very interesting development is unfolding in the Slovak Republic .
Precisely for that reason , we must do everything we can to give valuable assistance for this rapprochement .
Of course , many adaptations can be made from the outset .
Immediate integration into the Community 's programmes should also be an expression of a strengthened introductory strategy .
The treaties of association with those countries which wish to join must be strengthened immediately , particularly with regard to the Slovak Republic .
The fact that we commence with cooperation in the fields of education and youth is not only to be welcomed but also well thought out .
I agree with the rapporteur : a common future in a common house called Europe can only be constructed in cooperation with young people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all sincere thanks to the rapporteur Mrs Leperre-Verrier , and sincere thanks also to the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media for their cooperative attitude and extremely rapid procedure in this matter .
On the eve of the opening of negotiations for entry , the Governments and people of the central and eastern European countries and the Member States displayed a perceptibly heightened degree of sensitivity and receptiveness towards this matter .
As we have recently seen from the Luxembourg conclusions , participation in these programmes offers the central and eastern European countries the possibility of becoming familiar with the policies and instruments of the Community , not only on a political and administrative level but also on a much-quoted basis .
Many students , teachers , young people , professors and freelance workers will thus have an opportunity to make connections , via networks with their colleagues in the Member States .
Such exchange is really extremely important for the consolidation of democracy , which is of special significance , particularly in the case of the Slovak Republic .
The concrete fulfilment of the promise made so long ago regarding participation in these programmes is highly valued amongst the Governments and the future promoters of projects .
Moreover , participation in Community programmes in general but particularly in the spheres of general and professional education will contribute significantly to the institutional structures in the applicant countries .
The central and eastern European countries accord participation in these programmes a high priority . They include an appropriate level of resources in their education budgets , and make them available .
Also , in the strengthened introductory strategies special emphasis is placed on the opening up of these Community programmes .
The European Parliament inspired the opening up of Community programmes for these countries , even before the European Council decided this in 1993 .
It also supported the conclusion of supplementary protocols for the European agreements .
It is now called upon to permit the rapid passage of Association Council resolutions , and thereby allow the selection of the first projects on which partners from these two applicant countries can cooperate even before the summer .
As far as the last amendment is concerned , I would like to say that we completely agree that there should be a follow-up in relation to participation in these programmes .
But this should take place within the existing structures , particularly because this is the only way we can guarantee that we remain coherent and that we treat all central and eastern European countries equally .
I would like once again to thank sincerely the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , and the rapporteur for her work and flexibility , and above all for the fact that we have come so quickly to the first reading of this report , and that this furthermore has operated so smoothly .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .

Mr President , I am sorry , I have no wish to hold things up , but I see from repeated readings of Amendments Nos 3 and 8 - the text is the same for both countries- that a slight error has crept in .
It says there that some of these languages already enjoy the status of official languages within the EU and it mentions , for example , Slovene in Carinthia , Styria and Italy .
That is unfortunately not true .
I would therefore request as an oral amendment that the following is written in instead : " also enjoy the status of an officially recognized regional language within the EU , for example Slovene in Austria and Italy ' . In other words , not Carinthia and Styria but Austria and Italy , because the Slovene minority is not recognized in Styria , though it is in Carinthia .
The expression " officially recognized regional language ' is correct , but not " official language . '
Thank you very much , Mr Posselt .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to know Mrs Leperre-Verrier 's opinion .
Can you tell us what you think of this oral amendment ?
Mr President , I would like to say that I am in complete agreement with the proposal which has just been made , which is of course in the form of an oral amendment , as the deadline for tabling amendments has now elapsed .
Is anyone opposed to this oral amendment ?
No .
( During successive votes , Parliament adopted the two legislative resolutions )
We think the message in the report is very positive .
We regret , however , that the Council is not allocating sufficient resources .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have completed the agenda . I would like to express our sincere thanks to Parliament 's services , the ushers , the interpreters and the Bur